Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-7]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1601(d) [53 P.S. § 66601(d)] of the Second Class
Township Code, the codification of a complete body of legislation for the
Township of West Hanover, County of Dauphin, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters, articles
and sections by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters
1 through 195, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as a single ordinance of the Township of West
Hanover, which shall be known and is hereby designated as the "Code of the
Township of West Hanover," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of
the prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued
in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by
the Board of Supervisors of the Township of West Hanover, and it is the
intention of said Board of Supervisors that each such provision contained
within the Code is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said
Code. Only such provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this
Code shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3
below, and only new or changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below,
shall be deemed to be enacted from the effective date of this Code, as
provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of legislation not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the Township of West Hanover and in force on the date of the
adoption of this Code and not contained in the Code are hereby repealed as
of the effective date given in § 1-15 below, except as hereinafter provided,
including the 1986 Code.
§ 1-4. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 11-17-1999.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the township prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the township or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to e effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the township.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the township or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the township or other instruments or evidence of
the township's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the township.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
§ 1-4 WEST HANOVER CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation; new
provisions.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the township or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the township.
S. Legislation regarding wells; specifically, Ord. No. 1988-7 and all
amendments thereto.
T. Ordinance Nos. 1993-8 and 1995-11, which could not be located for
inclusion in the Code book.
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances and resolutions of the township for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances and resolutions. It is the
intention of the Board of Supervisors that all such changes be adopted
as part of the Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had
been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, changes and revisions of a substantive
nature, as set forth in Schedule A attached hereto and made a part
hereof, are hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions included
in the Code. These changes are enacted to bring provisions into
conformity with the desired policies of the Board of Supervisors, and it
is the intent of the Board of Supervisors that all such changes be
adopted as part of the Code as if the legislation so changed have been
previously formally amended to read as such. All such changes and
revisions shall be deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of the
Code specified in § 1-15.1
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Filing of copies of Code.
Three copies of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the Township Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copies
shall be certified to by the Township Secretary, as provided by law, and such
certified copies shall remain on file in the office of the Township Secretary,
C. Nomenclature. Throughout the Code:
(1) References to the "Building Inspector," "Codes Enforcement
Officer," "Codes Officer" and "Code Enforcement Officer" are
revised to read "Code Enforcement Officer or his designee."
(2) References to the "Department of Environmental Resources" are
revised to read "Department of Environmental Protection" or
"Department of Conservation and Natural Resources," whichever is
appropriate.
(3) References to the "Department of Community Affairs" are revised
to read "Department of Community and Economic Development."
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-6B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments or additions will be replaced with the
following wording: "amended (added) 7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-7." A complete
description of all changes is on file in the township offices.
§ 1-6 WEST HANOVER CODE § 1-9
1:6
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while
said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of
the Board of Supervisors to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be
incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be
understood and intended to include such changes. Whenever such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the post-bound book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Township Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copies of the book
containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the Township
Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
legislation adopted by the Board of Supervisors subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which the Board of Supervisors shall adopt
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new legislation are printed as
supplements to said Code books, at which time such supplements shall be
inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Township Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction of the Code in a newspaper of
general circulation in the township. The enactment and application of this
ordinance, coupled with the publication of the notice of introduction, the
availability of copies of the Code for inspection by the public and the filing
of an attested copy of this ordinance with the county, as required by law,
shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the township
to be misrepresented thereby. Any person who violates or permits a
violation of this section of this ordinance, upon being found liable therefor
in a civil enforcement proceeding, shall pay a fine of not more than $600,
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the
township in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall be imposed
until the date of the determination of the violation by the District Justice
§ 1-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:7
and/or Court. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the
judgment, the township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the township are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Board of Supervisors that this
ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid
or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after July 17, 2000.
§ 1-13 WEST HANOVER CODE § 1-15
1:8
ARTICLE II
Terminology
[Adopted 7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-7]
§ 1-16. General definitions.
As used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS or BOARD — The duly elected governing body
of the Township of West Hanover.
MUNICIPAL or MUNICIPALITY — The Township of West Hanover, Dauphin
County, Pennsylvania.
PERSON — Includes a firm, partnership, corporation, association or other
organization acting as a group or unit, as well as an individual.
STATUTE — Legislation enacted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or
by the United States of America.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of West Hanover, Dauphin County,
Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP MANAGER — The Township Manager of the Township of West
Hanover.
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:9
Chapter 4
AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 158.
§ 1-16 WEST HANOVER CODE § 1-16
4:10
ARTICLE I
Township Authority
[Adopted 1-20-1986 as Ch. 1, Part 3, of the 1986 Code]
§ 4-1. Legislative intent.
West Hanover Township is a rapidly growing suburban, residential-oriented
township, and has experienced the modern-day governmental service
problems associated with such growth. In an effort to address such
governmental service problems and to create a vehicle whereby such
problems may be solved, it is deemed desirable to establish and organize
a body politic and corporate whose entire purpose shall be to address and
solve the governmental service problems identified in the "Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945" ("Act").2
§ 4-2. Creation of Authority.
There is hereby established and organized a body politic and corporate,
to commence lawful existence upon the issuance of a certificate of
incorporation by the Secretary of the Commonwealth, to be known as the
"West Hanover Township Authority."
§ 4-3. Powers.
The Authority shall have all powers vested generally in an authority,
pursuant to the Act, subject, nevertheless, to the following limitations:
§ 4-4. Membership; appointment; terms.
The members of the Authority shall be five in number, each of whom shall
be taxpayers in West Hanover Township and either be a resident of or
the owner of a business in West Hanover Township. Each member shall
be appointed by the West Hanover Township Board of Supervisors for a
term of five years; however, the appointment of the initial members shall be
for shorter terms of one, two, three, four and five years so that staggered
vacancies shall occur each year thereafter.
A. No plan of the Authority shall become effective, without prior approval
of the West Hanover Township Board of Supervisors, which shall involve
the making of business improvements or the providing of administrative
services.
B. By ordinance or ordinances, subsequently adopted, as provided in
Section 4(c) of the Act,3 the West Hanover Township Board of
Supervisors reserves the right to specify the project or projects to be
undertaken by the Authority.
2. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
3. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
§ 4-1 AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL § 4-5
4:11
§ 4-5. Funds.
The Authority shall devise its own plans of financial management and
funding of projects undertaken by it; however, until such funding plans
are completed, the West Hanover Township Board of Supervisors shall
make such appropriations as may be necessary to provide for the initial
planning and funding required of the Authority, subject, nevertheless, to the
requirement that the Authority shall reimburse West Hanover Township for
funds so advanced as funds thereafter become available to the Authority.
§ 4-6. Execution and filing of Articles of Incorporation.
The Chairman of the Board of Supervisors of West Hanover Township and
the Secretary of West Hanover Township are hereby authorized to execute
and file Articles of Incorporation for the West Hanover Township Authority
in the office of the Secretary of the Commonwealth in the proper form and
in the manner authorized by the Act and this article.
§ 4-5 WEST HANOVER CODE § 4-6
4:12
ARTICLE II
Water and Sewer Authority
[Adopted 3-19-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-2]
§ 4-7. Legislative intent.
The Board of Supervisors of West Hanover Township hereby signifies its
intent to organize an Authority in accordance with the terms of the
Municipality Authorities Act of 1945.4
§ 4-8. Creation of Authority.
There is hereby organized and established a body corporate and politic,
which shall be known as the "West Hanover Township Water and Sewer
Authority" ("the Authority," herein), and which shall commence its lawful
existence upon the issuance of a certificate of incorporation by the
Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 4-9. Projects to be undertaken by Authority.
§ 4-10. Membership; appointment; terms.
The powers of the Authority shall be exercised by a governing body ("the
Board," herein), which shall consist of five members, each of whom shall
be a taxpayer in, maintain a business in or be a citizen of West Hanover
Township. The terms of office of the members of the Board shall commence
on the date of appointment. One member shall serve for one year, one for
two years, one for three years, one for four years and one for five years
from the first Monday in January next succeeding the date of the Authority's
incorporation.
A. The Authority shall be for the purpose of acquiring, holding,
constructing, improving, maintaining, operating, owning or leasing,
either in the capacity of lessor or lessee, projects of the following kind
and character:
(1) Sewers, sewer systems or parts thereof.
(2) Sewage treatment works, including works for treating and
disposing of industrial waste.
(3) Waterworks, water supply works or water distribution systems.
B. The Board of Supervisors specifically reserves its right to specify, from
time to time by subsequent resolution or ordinance, the projects to be
undertaken by the Authority, and no projects shall be undertaken by
said Authority other than those so specified.
4. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
§ 4-7 AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL § 4-11
4:13
§ 4-11. Funds.
The Authority shall devise its own plans of fiscal management and funding
for the projects it undertakes. Until the Authority makes all necessary
funding arrangements, however, the Board of Supervisors shall make those
appropriations necessary to allow the Authority to proceed with its initial
planning, on the express condition that the Authority shall reimburse the
Board of Supervisors for all such appropriations as the Authority becomes
able to do so.
§ 4-12. Execution and filing of Articles of Incorporation.
The Chairman of the Board of Supervisors and the West Hanover Township
Secretary are hereby authorized to execute and file Articles of
Incorporation for the Authority, in the form and in the manner prescribed
by the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945,5 in the office of the Secretary
of the Commonwealth.
5. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
§ 4-11 WEST HANOVER CODE § 4-12
4:14
Chapter 8
BUILDING CODE BOARD OF APPEALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 78.
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 81.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 88.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 148.
§ 8-1. Creation and purpose.
The West Hanover Township Building Code Board of Appeals (hereafter
known as the "Board of Appeals") shall be designated under the West Shore
Council of Government's Building Code Board of Appeals Program and
shall function in accordance with and have powers and duties conferred
upon it by this chapter and the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code.
The Building Code Board of Appeals shall exist to hear and rule on all
appeals of the Building Code Official's determination on matters concerning
all buildings, structures and the general health, safety and welfare of the
community.
§ 8-2. Powers and duties.
A. The Building Code Board of Appeals shall hear and rule on appeals,
requests for variances and requests for extensions of time under the PA
Uniform Construction Code, as adopted and amended from time to time
by the West Hanover Township Board of Supervisors.
B. The Building Code Board of Appeals shall have exclusive jurisdiction to
hear and render final appeal adjudications in matters related to
determination of the Building Code Official in accordance with the
procedures outlined in the PA Uniform Construction Code, as amended
from time to time. Application for appeals heard by the Building Code
Board of Appeals shall be based on a claim that the true intent of the
Act or Uniform Construction Code has been incorrectly interpreted, the
provisions of the Act or Uniform Construction Code do not fully apply, or
an equivalent form of construction is to be used.
C. In accordance with the PA Uniform Construction Code, the Building
Code Board of Appeals shall not act upon appeals, requests for variance
or requests for extension of time relating to accessibility.
D. The Building Code Board of Appeals may jointly serve other
municipalities only upon approval by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors and upon mutual execution of an intermunicipal agreement
in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 2301 through 2315.
§ 4-12 BUILDING CODE BOARD OF APPEALS § 8-3
8:15
§ 8-3. Rules and procedures.
The Board of Appeals is authorized to establish its own rules and procedures
necessary to carry out its duties. However, the following procedures shall
apply to all appeals to the Building Code Board of Appeals:
§ 8-4. Stays of enforcement.
An appeal or request for variance or extension of time to a board of appeals
will automatically suspend an action to enforce an order to correct until
the matter is resolved. An action under UCC § 403.84 (relating to unsafe
building, structure or equipment) may not be stayed. The Building Official
shall take immediate action in accordance with the final decision of the
Building Code Board of Appeals.
§ 8-5. When effective.
The Secretary of West Hanover Township shall certify to the adoption of this
chapter and cause the same to be published as required by law; and this
chapter shall take full force and effect immediately upon final passage and
approval.
Chapter 15
ENVIRONMENTAL ADVISORY COUNCIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 52.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 108.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 139.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
173.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 15-1. Creation and purpose.
There is hereby created the West Hanover Township Environmental
Advisory Council ("Environmental Advisory Council," herein), which shall
function in accordance with and have the powers and duties conferred
upon it by this chapter. The Environmental Advisory Council shall exist
to advise the Board of Supervisors, the West Hanover Township Planning
Commission, the West Hanover Township Authority and the West Hanover
Township Parks and Recreation Board on matters concerning the
A. An owner or owner's agent may seek a variance or extension of time or
appeal of the Building Code Official's decision by filing a petition with
the Building Code Official or other person designated by the Building
Code Board of Appeals on a form(s) provided by the municipality or the
West Shore Council of Government Building Code Board of Appeals
program procedures.
§ 8-3 WEST HANOVER CODE § 15-1
15:16
protection, conservation, management, promotion and use of natural
resources located within West Hanover Township.
§ 15-2. Composition and membership; terms; compensation.
[Amended 6-3-1991 by Ord. No. 1991-2; 2-6-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-3]
The Environmental Advisory Council shall consist of seven residents of
West Hanover Township, all of whom shall be appointed by the Board of
Supervisors. Members shall serve for a term of three years, except that, of
the seven members initially appointed to the Council, two shall serve for
a term of one year and two shall serve for a term of two years. Whenever
possible, one member shall also be a member of the Planning Commission.
All terms shall expire on December 31 of the year the term expires, but
a Council member may stay in office until a successor is appointed. The
Board of Supervisors shall fill all vacancies occurring on the Council. The
Environmental Advisory Council shall elect its own Chairman and Secretary
and any other officers deemed necessary, to serve for a period of one year.
The Council shall also have power to adopt rules and regulations for the
conduct of all business within its jurisdiction. Members shall receive no
compensation for their services, but they shall be reimbursed for expenses
actually and necessarily incurred by them in the performance of their
duties.
§ 15-3. Powers and duties; annual report.
A. The Environmental Advisory Council shall have the power:
(1) To identify environmental problems within West Hanover Township
and to recommend plans and programs to the appropriate agency
of the township for the promotion and conservation of the natural
resources of, and the protection and improvement of the quality of
the environment within, West Hanover Township.
(2) To make recommendations as to the possible use of open land areas
situated within West Hanover Township.
(3) To promote a community environmental program for West Hanover
Township.
(4) To keep an index of all open areas within the township, whether
publicly or privately owned, including but not limited to flood-prone
areas, swamps, wetlands, woodlands, agricultural lands and other
unique natural areas, for the purpose of obtaining information on
the proper use of such areas.
(5) To advise the Board of Supervisors and the other agencies of West
Hanover Township with regard to environmental concerns related
to the acquisition of property, both real and personal, by gift,
purchase, grant, bequest, easement, devise or lease.
§ 15-1 ENVIRONMENTAL ADVISORY COUNCIL § 15-3
15:17
Chapter 19
FIRE COMPANY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Marshal — See Ch. 22.
Firemen's Relief Association — See Ch. 25.
Fire protection districts — See Ch. 105.
§ 19-1. Purpose and scope of authority.
In accordance with Section 1801 and 1803 of the Pennsylvania Second Class
Township Code,6 the purpose of Chapter 19 is to establish fire protection
in West Hanover Township; ensure basic oversight, control measures,
procedures and regulations governing conditions which could impede or
interfere with effective fire services in the Township; and to authorize
and permit activities for volunteer fire fighter personnel for workers'
compensation purposes. Notwithstanding anything contained in this
chapter to the contrary, neither the recognition of the fire company nor
the authorization or permission herein granted to the fire company shall be
construed as constituting the fire company as an agent, agency, department
or employee of West Hanover Township, except insofar as such effect is
provided under the provisions of the Pennsylvania Workers' Compensation
Act,7 or the Pennsylvania Political Subdivision Tort Claims Act.8
§ 19-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated below:
CAPITAL EXPENDITURE — An outlay of funds to acquire fixed assets or
additions to them, when an example of fixed assets may be major road
and highway repairs; road rebuilding projects; parking lot construction;
sidewalk and pedestrian paths; stormwater drainage and storm
management facilities; construction of public buildings and similar
permanent structures; major building improvement and infrastructure
systems in public buildings; the purchase of public land; the purchase of
major equipment; engineering or architectural studies and services related
(6) To undertake such environmental tasks as requested by the Board
of Supervisors.
B. The Environmental Advisory Council shall keep records of its meetings
and activities and shall make an annual report, in writing, to the Board
of Supervisors.
6. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 66801 and 66803.
7. Editor's Note: See 77 P.S. § 1 et seq.
8. Editor's Note: See 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8541 et seq.
§ 15-3 WEST HANOVER CODE § 19-2
19:18
to a public improvement; and all outlays financed by long-term debt. In West
Hanover Township a capital expenditure typically is an item that costs in
excess of $4,000 and has a useful life of multiple years.
FIRE BOARD — A group of appointed officials organized on a temporary
basis by the Board of Supervisors for the general purposes of appropriately
overseeing and coordinating the management of a fire company recognized
in Chapter 19, but has failed to comply with the requirements of Chapter 19
and has been found by the Board of Supervisors to be delinquent and unable
to provide adequate fire-protection services to the Township. Specific tasks
and duties of the Fire Board are established by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors, which may include but may not be limited to providing for the
improvement, advancement and development of the fire services within a
delinquent fire company and/or establish funding priorities and mechanisms
and to do any and all necessary business for the delinquent fire company to
provide adequate fire service in the Township.
FIRE COMPANY — Any organized fire company which responds in West
Hanover Township for the purpose of extinguishment of a fire or other
emergency involving protection of life and/or property or when its
assistance has been requested by the officer in charge of the incident.
FIRE COMPANY VEHICLES — Any motor vehicle controlled by a volunteer
fire company, the principal purposes of said vehicle being the fighting
of fires or supplying of related services including emergency services.
Essential fire company vehicles include those such as a Class A pumper or
rescue vehicle. All other vehicles are nonessential in nature.
MUTUAL AID — A formal or informal agreement by two or more fire
companies to agree to cooperatively provide upon request such aid, fire
protection and suppression personnel and to make available such
equipment or facilities as may be needed for the suppression of fires or
the duties and responsibilities associated with saving lives and property
within the jurisdictional areas of the requesting department; provided that
the personnel, equipment or facilities requested are not otherwise required
within a fire company's jurisdiction.
NFPA — National Fire Protection Association.
OFFICER IN CHARGE — The Fire Chief of the fire company or designee
in whose district the emergency occurs or, in his absence, the next ranking
officer following the chain of command established by the rules of the fire
company in whose district the emergency occurs.
VOLUNTEER FIRE COMPANIES — A fire company organized, recognized
and existing under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and
authorized to act within West Hanover Township.
VOLUNTEER FIRE FIGHTER — An active member of a volunteer fire
company who is a member in good standing of said volunteer company.
§ 19-2 FIRE COMPANY § 19-3
19:19
§ 19-3. Fire company recognized.
The West Hanover Township Fire Company #1 (hereafter "fire company")
organized and existing in the Township of West Hanover, Dauphin County,
Pennsylvania, is hereby designated as the officially recognized fire company
for the Township.
§ 19-4. Authorized duties and permitted activities of fire company.
Volunteer fire fighters in West Hanover Township, including any paid
firefighter who performs the services of a volunteer firefighter during offduty
hours, are deemed to be West Hanover Township employees only when
actively engaged in authorized duties as fire fighters; or while going to
or returning from a fire emergency call which the fire company attended,
including travel from and the direct return to a firefighter's home, place of
business or other place when he/she shall have been when call or alarm was
received. The authorized duties and activities listed in Chapter 19, § 19-4,
are the sole duties and activities authorized by the Board of Supervisors
of West Hanover Township to be performed by volunteer fire companies or
their members. Any other activities performed by volunteer fire companies
or their members shall be deemed as outside of the scope of the office or
duties of volunteer fire companies and undertaken at the sole risk of the
company and individual members, unless authorized in writing by the Board
of Supervisors. Authorized duties and activities are as follows:
A. The fire company is hereby authorized to provide such services to the
Township as may be necessary for the protection of property and
persons situated therein, which include, by way of example and not of
limitation, the extinguishment and prevention of loss of life and
property from fire, motor vehicle accident, medical emergencies,
hazardous materials incidents and other dangerous situations.
B. The fire company is permitted to provide nonemergency and public
service functions to the Township, such as, by way of example and not of
limitation, removing water from property after storms and assisting in
the removal, abatement and prevention of damage or injury to persons
or property, whether through natural causes or man-made situations.
C. The fire company is permitted to conduct and participate in such
training activities and drills, either within or outside of the Township, as
may be deemed necessary by the officer of the fire company to maintain
proficiency in providing services.
D. The fire company is permitted to respond to calls and provide services
to municipalities outside of the Township with which it maintains
mutual response agreements.
E. The fire company is permitted to engage in inspections and tours of
private property in the Township, when invited, for fire prevention,
planning and training purposes, preplanning, public education
programs, testing of fire protection equipment or systems, open houses,
§ 19-3 WEST HANOVER CODE § 19-4
19:20
§ 19-5. Other activities of members.
In addition to actually participating in the activities of the fire company
as authorized in § 19-4 above, the members of the fire company are also
authorized by the Township to do the following:
(Reserved)
§ 19-6. Interference with fire-suppression forces.
§ 19-7. Control of equipment and funds.
and other fire prevention activities, when authorized by the Fire Chief
or his/her designee.
F. The fire company may conduct scheduled special work details at fire
stations related to maintenance activities and recruitment programs.
G. Engage in fund-raising activities for the fire company when authorized
by an officer or officers of the fire company and attend parades and
similar civic activities when authorized by the Board of Supervisors.
A. Interference with volunteer fire company operations. In accordance
with Pennsylvania Title 18 and this chapter, it shall be unlawful to
interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to interfere with,
obstruct or restrict the mobility of, or block the path of travel of any
volunteer fire company emergency vehicle in any way or to interfere
with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to interfere with, obstruct or
hamper any volunteer fire company operation.
B. Compliance with orders. A person shall not willfully fail or refuse to
comply with any lawful order or direction of the officer in charge or
designee to interfere with the compliance attempts of another
individual.
C. Vehicles crossing fire hose. A vehicle shall not be driven or propelled
over any unprotected fire hose of a fire company when laid down on any
street, alleyway, private drive or any other vehicular roadway without
the consent of the officer in charge or designee of said operation.
D. Unlawful boarding or tampering with fire company emergency
equipment. A person shall not, without proper authorization from the
officer in charge or designee of said fire company emergency
equipment, cling to, attach himself to, climb upon or into, board or
swing upon any fire company emergency vehicle, whether the same is
in motion or at rest, sound the siren, horn, bell or other soundproducing
device thereon or manipulate or tamper with or attempt to
manipulate or tamper with any levers, valves, switches, starting device,
brakes, pumps or any equipment or protective clothing on or a part of
any fire company emergency vehicle.
§ 19-4 FIRE COMPANY § 19-7
19:21
§ 19-8. Annual financial reporting; fire company reporting,
appropriations and disbursements.
A. All appropriations made by West Hanover Township to or for the use of
the fire company, whether of money or property, and all equipment
purchased by the fire company by use of such appropriations, or
purchased by West Hanover Township for use by the fire company, shall
be deemed to be and shall continue to be the property of West Hanover
Township.
B. None of the fire apparatus or capital equipment owned by the fire
company or by West Hanover Township shall be permanently removed
or sold without the consent of the Board of Supervisors of West Hanover
Township; and, except for the conduct of activities authorized or
permitted in § 19-4, none of the fire-fighting apparatus or equipment
shall be temporarily removed from the Township without the prior
approval of the Board of Supervisors.
C. No capital expenditures shall be made by the fire company, which shall
require it's borrowing of money or the pledge of its credit without the
prior approval of the Board of Supervisors.
D. On or prior to November 1, each year the fire company shall submit to
the Board of Supervisors of West Hanover Township its proposed
budget of revenues and expenses for the forthcoming fiscal year for
review and approval by the Board of Supervisors.
A. Required financial reporting and Township appropriations. In
accordance with Section 1803 of the Pennsylvania Second Class
Township Code9 and as required herein, all fire companies recognized
in § 19-3 shall annually submit to the Board of Supervisors a report of
use of appropriated moneys for each completed year of operation
before any further payments are made to the fire company for the
current year in such sum(s) that in the opinion of said Board may be
necessary in support of fire company facilities and training in
accordance with Section 1803(a) of the Pennsylvania Second Class
Township Code.
B. Disbursements. Appropriated funds derived from local taxes levied in
accordance with Section 1803(a) of the Pennsylvania Second Class
Township Code and appropriated to the Fire Tax Fund shall be
disbursed by the Board of Supervisors to a fire company employing
either of two methods:
(1) Requests for funds to be paid to vendors shall be made to the Board
of Supervisors at their regularly scheduled meetings. If approved
by the Board of Supervisors, the Township shall disburse cheek(s)
to the fire company written to vendor(s).
9. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 66803.
§ 19-7 WEST HANOVER CODE § 19-8
19:22
(2) Reimbursement for expenses paid to vendors by the fire company
shall occur after the Board of Supervisors has reviewed the list of
invoices paid and approved such prepaid expenses at its regular
scheduled meeting.
C. Other fire company regulations and reporting requirements. In
accordance with Section 1803(b) of the Pennsylvania Second Class
Township Code,10 the Board of Supervisor establishes the following
regulations and reporting requirements for fire companies serving the
Township. Compliance with the following standards by a fire company is
required to ensure the Board of Supervisors is able to monitor activities
and performance of the fire company and to meet fundamental fire
services performance expectations and maintain good working order, as
anticipated by the Board of Supervisors. Failure to comply with these
standards may cause the Board of Supervisors to initiate a notice of
delinquency of service in accordance with Chapter 19, § 19-10. The
requirements for fire companies are as follow:
(1) The fire company shall be recognized by the Township, as per
§ 19-3 in this chapter.
(2) A charter has been granted to such fire company by the proper
court under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(3) Such fire company shall own at least one motorized apparatus
which complies with today's minimum standards such as, but not
limited to current National Fire Protection Association (NFPA)
standards or as licensed by the Pennsylvania State Department of
Health.
(4) Such fire company shall have communications equipment capable
of receiving and transmitting on the frequencies designated by
West Hanover Township and/or the Dauphin County Emergency
Management Agency (EMA) as the fire and rescue band frequency
for the Township. The aforesaid communications system is
approved, if, required by law, federal and state permits, licenses
and/or approvals are obtained.
(5) All apparatus owned by such fire company shall meet the minimum
requirements as set forth in § 19-7 of this chapter.
(6) Such fire company shall have an alarm system that is deemed
adequate to alert its volunteer fire fighters.
(7) Such fire company either owns or leases within the boundaries of
the Township a suitable building of sufficient size to house fully
equipped, approved apparatus meeting the requirements set forth
in § 19-7 of this section.
10.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 66803(b).
§ 19-8 FIRE COMPANY § 19-8
19:23
(8) The officer in charge and all designated line officers of such fire
company are full-time residents of West Hanover Township or a
municipality contiguous thereto.
(9) All bylaws, and amendments thereto, of a fire company recognized
in § 19-3 of this chapter shall be provided to the Township and kept
current and on file with the Township Secretary. All amendments to
any bylaws shall be presented to the Township within 45 days of
adoption.
(10) Such fire company shall annually provide to the Township a
certification of insurance from its insurance carrier.
(11) Such fire company shall annually before August 31 of each year
provide to the Township a complete membership list that will
include the officer in charge and all designees or other ranked
officers/positions. The membership list will also include all active
volunteer fire fighters in good standing with the fire company and
who are qualified by training or other measures established by the
fire company to be engaged during a fire call and perform fireprotection
duties and activities authorized under § 19-4 of this
chapter. The membership list will also designate all qualified
apparatus drivers and summarize all training activities completed
by the members.
(12) Such fire company shall provide to the Township a listing of all fire
apparatus (vehicles) that carry hose, ladders and contain pumps
used in fire suppression in the Township. Such fire company shall
annually test all fire pumps in accordance with Section 1911,
Standard for Service Tests on Automotive Fire Department, of the
NFPA standards and provide a test report to the Township Board of
Supervisors indicating the date, time, duration and results of each
pump test. The fire pump testing schedule shall be established by
the Fire Chief to insure the equipment meets the intent of the
requirements of NFPA. At a minimum, pumping equipment testing
shall be scheduled and conducted within a twenty-four-month
testing period. The results of all pump tests shall he kept on record
and readily available for a period of five years. [Amended
5-1-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-6]
(13) Such fire company will provide a registered inventory of all ladders
owned by the fire company and used in fire suppression in the
Township. Such fire company shall annually test or cause to be
tested all ground ladders used in fire suppression in accordance
with NFPA 1932 standards and provide a report to the Township
Board of Supervisors indicating the date, time, duration and results
of each ladder test. The ladder testing schedule shall be established
by the Fire Chief to insure the ladder meets the intent of the
requirements of NFPA. At a minimum, ladder testing shall be
scheduled and conducted within a twenty-four-month testing
period. The results of all ladder tests shall be kept on record and
§ 19-8 WEST HANOVER CODE § 19-8
19:24
§ 19-9. Election of officers.
The members of the fire company are further authorized to elect from their
membership such officers as may be provided in the bylaws of the fire
company.
§ 19-10. Delinquency of fire service.
readily available for a period of five years. [Amended 5-1-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-6]
(14) Such fire company shall annually test or cause to be tested all fire
hoses used in fire suppression in accordance with Section 1962,
Standards for Testing of Fire Hose, of the NFPA standards and
provide a report to the Township Board of Supervisors indicating
the date, time, duration and results of each hose test. The fire hose
testing schedule shall be established by the Fire Chief to insure the
equipment meets the intent of the requirements of NFPA. At a
minimum, fire hose testing shall be scheduled and conducted
within a twenty-four-month testing period. The results of all hose
tests shall be kept on record and readily available for a period of
five years. [Amended 5-1-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-6]
(15) Such fire company shall, at a minimum, provide activity reports
and/or incident reports to the Board of Supervisors on regular
quarterly basis illustrating the number of calls, type of calls and
number of fire fighters responding and similar information in a
standard presentation format. At the end of each year standard
activity report summary will be provided to the Board of
Supervisors for review.
D. Other financial reporting. In order to maintain an understanding of the
fire company's financial needs, the fire company shall annually submit a
report of its financial condition for the calendar year and an adopted
budget for the fire company.
A. The West Hanover Township Board of Supervisors provides for fire
protection in West Hanover Township and requires that a fire company
recognized under § 19-3 of this chapter operate and be managed in
accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
Chapter 19 of the Township Code, the fire company's bylaws, and the
standards of fire protection of the NFPA. Failure to adhere to these
expectations and requirements or failure to do what law or duty
requires constitutes a delinquency of service. Should the Township
Board of Supervisors believe that for any reason the fire company is in
noncompliance and not provide adequate fire protection to the
Township, the Board of Supervisors shall direct the Township Manager,
Fire Marshal and/or other designee to investigate and examine the
reasons for noncompliance using the following process:
§ 19-8 FIRE COMPANY § 19-10
19:25
(1) The Township Manager and/or Fire Marshal and/or other designee
will contact the fire company's Chief Administrative Official, in
writing, and indicate the findings by the Township of
noncompliance in a noncompliance notification letter.
(2) Within the noncompliance notification letter, the Township
Manager, Fire Marshal or other designee will coordinate with the
fire company's Chief Administrative Official the date(s), times and
place to hold a meeting to discuss the findings, service concerns
and/or compliance concerns and deficiencies with the Chief
Administrative Officer, the Fire Company Liaison Committee or
other duly acknowledged representatives of the fire company.
(3) Within 10 days following the meeting with the fire company's Chief
Administrative Office, Liaison Committee or duly appointed
representatives, the Township Manager, Fire Marshal and/or other
designee will present, in writing, to the Board of Supervisors all
findings and the current disposition of all findings as a result of the
meeting. A copy of the findings and disposition comments will also
be forwarded to the fire company.
(4) Following receipt by the fire company of the findings summary
letter, the fire company will have 15 days to contact the Township
Manager and schedule a presentation for the next Board of
Supervisors meeting for the purpose of discussing the findings and
the disposition of the findings and responding to the compliance
issues.
(5) If the fire company adequately addresses the noncompliance
findings and agrees to any corrective actions or measures approved
by the Board of Supervisors related to the findings and the
disposition of the findings, the fire company shall be deemed to be
in compliance. Upon appropriate motion and approval by the Board
of Supervisors, the Township Manager, Fire Marshal and/or other
designee will provide written notification of compliance.
(6) If noncompliance is sustained, the Board of Supervisors by majority
motion may issue a notice of delinquency of service and initiate the
delinquency of service process outlined in § 19-10B and other
actions provided in § 19-10. The Board of Supervisors may also to
ensure public safety is maintained in the Township.
B. Delinquency of service. In the event that a fire company established to
provide fire protection or other emergency services and recognized in
§ 19-3 by West Hanover Township, or any successor organization, shall
at any time after the establishment of this chapter fail to maintain the
fire-protection service with a reasonable level of working order, in
accordance with established standards, guidelines and agreements to
operate and manage in accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, Chapter 19 of the Township Code, the fire company's
§ 19-10 WEST HANOVER CODE § 19-10
19:26
bylaws, and NFPA, the Board may serve written notice of delinquency
of service upon the fire company and its officers stating:
(1) The manner in which the fire company has failed to maintain public
fire-protection service in a reasonable condition and issues related
to noncompliance and delinquency of service.
(2) A demand that such deficiencies, issues of noncompliance and
delinquency of service related to this chapter and the fire
protection of West Hanover Township be corrected within 30 days.
(3) A schedule for presenting to the Board of Supervisors an
explanation for such deficiencies, issues of noncompliance and
delinquency of service related to this chapter and the fire
protection of West Hanover Township.
(4) The date and places of public hearing, which shall be held within 45
days of the notice.
C. Public hearing for delinquency of service. At such a hearing, the Board
of Supervisors may amend the terms of the original notice of
delinquency of service concerning the deficiencies and may give an
extension of time within which the fire company shall correct them. If
the deficiencies or any modifications thereof were not corrected within
30 days of the notice of delinquencies referred to above or within any
agreed-upon extension of time, the Township Board of Supervisors may
intervene in the operation of the fire company through a resolution
establishing a Fire Board in accordance with the provision of this
chapter.
D. Formation of the Fire Board. If after the public hearing for delinquency
of service, the Board of Supervisors determines that delinquencies exist
and that a fire company is not performing effectively and providing
adequate fire-protection services, the Board of Supervisors may form a
Fire Board as follows:
(1) The Fire Board shall be established by resolution passed by the
Board of Supervisors and shall be maintained for an initial period of
one year. The Fire Board shall be established and have authority
over all functions of fire-protection service currently maintained by
the delinquent fire company including, but not limited to, the
administration, collection of revenues, payment of charges,
organization of officers and similar administrative and operational
functions. The Fire Board will provide direct guidance and
direction over the delinquent fire company in addressing all
operational problems that have contributed in whole or in part to
the delinquency of service. If a Fire Board is established by
resolution, the delinquent fire company shall be subject to the
jurisdiction and control of the Fire Board and shall at all times
conform to any and all rules and regulations adopted by said Board,
anything in the constitution and bylaws of any fire company to the
contrary notwithstanding.
§ 19-10 FIRE COMPANY § 19-10
19:27
(2) Rights of the fire company. Establishment of the Fire Board shall
not constitute a taking or disbandment of the fire company, nor vest
in the Township any rights above those provided for by the
Pennsylvania Second Class Township Code and other relevant laws
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(3) Duties and responsibilities. The specific duties and mission of the
Fire Board shall be established in detail by a resolution passed by
the Board of Supervisors. At a minimum, the Fire Board shall
accomplish the following:
(a) The Fire Board shall retain fire company operability and shall
maintain such minimum standards of operation of the fire
company as the Township Board of Supervisors may prescribe
and shall develop plans and make suggestions for improving
such standards and shall report such plans and suggestions to
the Township Board of Supervisors.
(b) Authority. The Fire Board shall have the authority to remove,
appoint or affirm all fire company officers, ancillary boards and
committee members to serve in various capacities as specified
in the fire company bylaws.
(c) The Fire Board shall have approval authority over all fire
company financial expenditures and administrative matters.
(d) The Fire Board shall appoint its own clerk(s) or administrative
officers from the membership of the fire company to implement
day-to-day tasks of the fire company and who shall serve at the
pleasure of the Fire Board.
(e) The Fire Board shall determine the tasks to be performed and
the powers entitled to the officer in charge and administrative
officers during the period of delinquency.
(f) Organization of the Fire Board. The Fire Board shall consist of
five members with each Fire Board member having staggered
terms from one to five years. Thereafter a new member shall be
appointed by the Board of Supervisors each year for a term of
five years, or until a successor is appointed and qualified, with
no more than two members being reappointed or replaced
during any future calendar year. The organizational
procedures will continue to remain in effect until the Board of
Supervisors deems the delinquency of service to be corrected.
E. Correction of delinquency; burden of proof. Before the expiration of one
year from the determination of delinquency and formation of the Fire
Board, the Township shall, upon its initiative or upon request of a fire
company representative, call a public meeting upon notice to the fire
company. At the public hearing, the fire company shall be provided with
an opportunity to show cause as to why the Fire Board shall not, at the
option of the Township, continue for a succeeding year. If the Board of
§ 19-10 WEST HANOVER CODE § 19-10
19:28
§ 19-11. Municipal liability.
§ 19-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this Chapter 19, § 19-6
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding
$1,000. Each day that a violation continues beyond the date fixed for
compliance shall constitute a separate offense. It is further provided that,
upon judgment against any person by summary conviction, or by
proceedings by summons on default of payment of the fine or penalty
imposed and the costs, the defendant may be sentenced and committed to
the county prison for a period not exceeding 30 days.
Supervisors shall determine that the fire company is capable to resume
service and to maintain compliance with the laws of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, Chapter 19 of the Township Code, the fire company's
bylaws, and NFPA or other deficiencies, the Township Board of
Supervisors shall by resolution cease to maintain the formation of the
Fire Board at the end of said year, or a date to be mutually determined
by the fire company and the Township which is suitable for the effective
transition. If the Board shall determine, at the recommendation of
the Fire Board, that the fire company is still delinquent, the Board
of Supervisors shall, at its discretion, continue to reaffirm the Fire
Board for a next succeeding year and, subject to a similar hearing and
determination, in each year thereafter in accordance with this section.
F. Any and all costs to the Township incurred as a result of administering
and operating the fire company (e.g., mailing expenses, staff time,
travel) and any additional penalties or fees set by the Township shall be
paid by fire company or Fire Board.
A. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter or by action of the West
Hanover Township Board of Supervisors, no fire company recognized in
§ 19-3 of this chapter or its officers, members, representatives, agents,
servants or employees shall have the power or authority, either actual,
apparent or implied, to contractually bind or create contractual liability
on the part of West Hanover Township or any other municipal entity.
B. It is recognized that a fire company, as specified in § 19-3, when
engaged in activities and duties specified in § 19-4, is a governmental
agency and that its officers, members, representatives, agents, servants
or employees are included within the provisions of the Political
Subdivision Immunity Act, 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8541 et seq., and, as such,
said West Hanover Township fire company, its officers, members,
representatives, agents, servants and employees are entitled to
immunity from tort liability under the Pennsylvania Political Subdivision
Tort Claims Act and to all rights and privileges as provided in said act.
§ 19-10 FIRE COMPANY § 19-13
19:29
§ 19-13. Saving clause.
Nothing in this chapter hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit
or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability
incurred, or any cause of action acquired or existing, nor shall any just or
legal right or remedy or any character be lost, impaired or affected by this
chapter.
Chapter 22
FIRE MARSHAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Company — See Ch. 19. Firemen's Relief Assoction — See Ch. 25.
§ 22-1. Office created.
The Office of Fire Marshal is hereby created in West Hanover Township.
§ 22-2. Appointment; compensation. [Amended 4-2-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-02]
The Fire Marshal shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors for a term
of four years ending December 31 but may stay in office until a successor is
appointed. Notwithstanding the aforesaid appointment for a specified term,
the Board of Supervisors of West Hanover Township shall have the right to
remove the Fire Marshal at its pleasure; and in such cases, vacancies shall
be filled in the same manner as the original appointment was made, for the
unexpired portion of the term. The Fire Marshal shall receive compensation
in the amount of $500 annually, which compensation may be modified by the
West Hanover Township Board of Supervisors by resolution at the annual
reorganizational meeting. Fire Marshal shall perform all duties and shall
have and exercise all powers generally prescribed by this chapter or by
ordinance of West Hanover Township.
A. Assistant Fire Marshal. From time to time, the Township Fire Marshal
may recommend the appointment of an Assistant Fire Marshal(s) who
shall serve to assist the Fire Marshal in the powers and duties
established in this chapter or by ordinance of West Hanover Township.
The Board of Supervisors of West Hanover Township shall appoint all
assistant Fire Marshals for a term of two years ending December 31 but
may stay in office until a successor is appointed. The Board of
Supervisors of West Hanover Township shall have the right to remove
any Assistant Fire Marshal at its pleasure, and in such cases, vacancies
shall be filled upon recommendation by the Fire Marshal and shall
serve for the unexpired portion of the term. Any Assistant Fire Marshal
shall receive compensation in the amount of $250 annually, which
§ 19-13 WEST HANOVER CODE § 22-2
19:30
§ 22-3. Powers and duties.
The Fire Marshal shall have the power and shall be required to coordinate
the following duties in accordance to the specifications herewith, and shall
do so in a manner in coordination with the Township Manager, Code Official
(AHJ) and appropriate code officials, and not inconsistent with the IFC
codes and NFPA standards adopted by West Hanover Township Board of
Supervisors:
compensation may be modified by the West Hanover Township Board of
Supervisors by resolution at the annual reorganizational meeting.
A. Prepare written correspondence, newsletter articles and similar
publications to Township residents to communicate fire protection and
fire prevention practices that reflect applicable IFC codes and NFPA
standards and are appropriate for the intended audience.
B. Identify and investigate requests (or service or complaints related to
fire safety given a reported situation or unsafe conditions during
Township inspection activities, and seek voluntary compliance or
mediated settlement of these issues with the subject property owner/
representative in a timely manner. Identify and record information and
evidence of fire safety noncompliance for use in other appropriate
levels of enforcement and procedures.
C. As may be necessary, investigate, or cause to be investigated, all fires,
explosions and other similar incidents for the purpose of determining
reason for the incident, possible code violations, and future preventive
measures. In suspicious fire and related incidents, the Fire Marshal
may engage the Pennsylvania State Fire Marshal or other appropriate
law enforcement entities to investigate the matter.
D. As may be necessary, provide review comments on subdivision land
development and building plans submitted for new multifamily or
nonresidential construction in conjunction with the Township's SALDO
plan review and the building permit review procedures of the Code
Administrator.
E. Coordinate the issuance of Township burn permits in accordance with
the requirements and procedures set forth in Chapter 85 of the
Township Code of Ordinances, as amended.
F. Under certain dry weather conditions, monitor and issue official "burn
bans" in the Township in accordance with general accepted principles
for establishing burning bans and as specified by the Dauphin County
EMA, PEMA or other sources.
G. As may he necessary, testify at legal proceedings, given the findings of a
field inspection or a complaint and consult with legal council (if
required for common pleas court) so that all information is presented
accurately and the inspector's/Marshal's demeanor is appropriate for
the proceeding.
§ 22-2 FIRE COMPANY § 22-3
19:31
H. Prepare, coordinate and conduct fire safety inspections independently
and/or with the Township Code Official in accordance with a community
inspection program/schedule to be performed on a timely or random
basis throughout all multifamily or nonresidential structures within the
Township. Coordinate the preparation of inspection checklists for given
field observations and policies for inspections within the community
inspection program/schedule in coordination or conjunction with
inspection activity of the Township Code Official and as permitted in
§ 22-3I.
I. Inspections. The Fire Marshal may conduct the following inspections of
new and existing structures and properties for construction, fire
protection, and exposures.
(1) Means of egress for emergency exit. Inspect means of egress
elements, given observations made during a field inspection of an
existing building.
(2) Fire suppression systems. Determine the operational readiness of
existing fixed fire suppression systems, given test documentation
and field observations, so that the system(s) is in an operational
state.
(3) Fire detection systems. Determine the operational readiness of
existing fire detection and alarm systems, given test documentation
and field observations, so that the systems are in an operational
state, maintenance is documented.
(4) Fire extinguishers. Determine the operational readiness of existing
portable fire extinguishers, given field observations and test
documentation, so that the equipment is in an operational state,
maintenance is documented, and all deficiencies are identified and
documented.
(5) Fire hazards. Identify hazardous conditions involving equipment,
processes, and operations, given field observations so.that the
equipment, processes, or operations are conducted and maintained
in accordance with the IFC and the applicable NFPA standards and
all deficiencies are identified, documented, and reported.
(6) Structure emergency readiness and planning. Assess that
emergency planning and preparedness measures are in place and
have been practiced, given field observations, copies of emergency
plans, and records of exercises, so that plans are prepared and
exercises have been performed in accordance with the IFC and
applicable NFPA standards.
(7) Emergency access to site. Inspect emergency access for a site,
given field observations, so that the required access for emergency
responders is maintained or so that deficiencies are identified,
documented, and corrected.
§ 22-3 WEST HANOVER CODE § 22-3
19:32
§ 22-4. Interference with Fire Marshal unlawful.
No person shall in any way obstruct or prevent or attempt to obstruct
or prevent the Fire Marshal in the discharge of his duties, by denying or
attempting to deny him access to any premises owned or occupied by such
person, either failing or refusing correct information requested by him in
the investigation into the cause, origin or circumstances of any fire.
§ 22-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine not
exceeding $1,000, and costs of prosecution. It is further provided that, upon
judgment against any person by summary conviction, or by proceedings by
summons on default of the payment of the fine or penalty imposed and the
costs, the defendant may be sentenced and committed to the county prison
for a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 22-6. Saving clause.
Nothing in this chapter or in the code hereby adopted shall be construed to
affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired,
or liability incurred, or any cause of action acquired or existing, nor shall
(8) Lock boxes. Assess the installation and adequacy of lock boxes
required by the Township for all structures with remote fire
detection systems.
J. Fire drills. Coordinate scheduling and conduct of emergency drills for
all schools and assemblies in conjunction with the jurisdiction of the
assembly as well as the jurisdiction of the Township, given field
observations, so that the drills and emergency procedures are in
compliance with the IFC and applicable NFPA standards. All
deficiencies are documented, identified and reported in accordance
with the policies of the jurisdiction.
K. Act as a liaison for the Board of Supervisors and Township Manager to
the West Hanover Township Fire Company related to Township fire
prevention, fire safety concerns and related fire protection services.
L. Coordinate, prepare and present a Fire Marshal report on at a
semiannual basis to the Board of Supervisors outlining the status of the
community inspection program, duties and responsibilities
accomplished throughout the year, and other records of activity,
expenditures and similar information.
M. Attend Township meetings when requested by the Board of Supervisors
or Township Manager from time to time.
N. Participate as required in public relations events and training of
Township residents on fire safety techniques and strategies.
§ 22-3 FIRE COMPANY § 22-6
19:33
any just or legal right or remedy or any character be lost, impaired or
affected by this article.
Chapter 25
FIREMEN'S RELIEF ASSOCIATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Company — See Ch. 19. Fire Marshal — See Ch. 22.
§ 25-1. Recognition of Firemen's Relief Association.
§ 25-2. Certification to Auditor General.
The Board of Supervisors shall annually certify to the Auditor General of
the commonwealth the name of the active association and the percentage of
service they contribute to the protection of the Township of West Hanover.
Such certification shall be on forms prescribed by the Auditor General.
§ 25-3. Annual appropriation.
There is annually appropriated from the township treasury all such sums
of money that may hereafter be paid into the township treasury by the
Treasurer of the State of Pennsylvania on account of taxes paid on
premiums of foreign fire insurance companies in pursuance of 1984 Act
of December 18, No. 205, § 701 et seq.,11 as hereafter amended,
supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General Assembly of
Pennsylvania. Such moneys received by the Township Treasurer from the
State Treasurer shall be distributed to the duly recognized association
within 60 days of receipt. The funds shall be distributed on the basis of the
percentage of service established in the certification to the Auditor General
and with other provisions of the Act.
Chapter 33
A. The following association is hereby recognized as actively engaged in
providing fire protection and/or emergency services in the Township of
West Hanover: the Firemen's Relief Association of the Township of West
Hanover. The above-named Association has been formed for the benefit
of its members and their families in case of death, sickness, temporary
or permanent disability or accident suffered in the line of duty.
B. The above-named Association of the township is designated the proper
association to receive such funds as are due and payable to the
Township Treasurer by the Treasurer of the State of Pennsylvania from
the tax on premiums from foreign fire insurance companies.
11.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.701 et seq.
§ 22-6 WEST HANOVER CODE § 25-3
25:34
LOCAL GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT TRUST
§ 33-1. Participation in trust.
This governmental unit shall join with other local governmental units in
accordance with the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act12 by becoming a
settlor of the Pennsylvania Local Government Investment Trust ("the trust")
and entering into the Declaration of Trust, which is adopted by reference
with the same effect as if it had been set out verbatim in this section and a
copy of which shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting at which this
chapter was adopted.
§ 33-2. Authorization to purchase shares.
This governmental unit is authorized to purchase shares in the trust from
time to time with available funds, and to redeem some or all of those shares
from time to time as funds are needed for other purposes. These actions are
to be taken by the officers designated for this purpose, pursuant to general
or specific instructions by the governing body of this governmental unit.
§ 33-3. Custody of funds.
The trustees of the trust are designated as having official custody of this
governmental unit's funds which are invested by the purchase of shares in
the trust.
§ 33-4. Findings and determinations.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act,13 the following
matters are specifically found and determined:
A. The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the Declaration of
Trust referred to in § 33-1;
B. This governmental unit's participation in the trust shall be terminable
at any time by ordinance/resolution;
C. The Declaration of Trust and the purchase of its shares are for the
purpose of investing this governmental unit's funds in obligations which
are otherwise legal investments, as part of a pooled arrangement with
other local governmental units, thereby achieving economic and other
advantages of pooled investments;
D. It is not necessary to finance the agreement authorized herein from
funds of this governmental unit except through the purchase of shares
in the trust;
E. The trust shall be managed by a Board of Trustees as set forth in the
Declaration of Trust and the bylaws provided for therein; and
12.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
13.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 25-3 LOCAL GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT TRUST § 33-4
33:35
Chapter 44
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
F. Shares may be repurchased and redeemed from time to time as this
governmental unit may determine to be necessary or appropriate to
meet its cash investment requirements.
§ 33-4 WEST HANOVER CODE § 33-4
33:36
ARTICLE I
Compensation of Board of Supervisors
[Adopted 1-20-1986 as Ch. 1, Part 1, of the 1986 Code]
§ 44-1. Compensation. [Amended 7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-7;
11-4-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08]
Each Supervisor of West Hanover Township, elected or appointed to office,
shall receive compensation for his or her services as a Supervisor in the
annual amount of $2,500.
§ 44-2. Payment schedule.
The compensation set forth in § 44-1 shall be paid to the Supervisors
entitled thereto in quarterly installments.14
14.Editor's Note: Former Section 103, Compensation prior to November 5, 1985, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-7.
§ 44-1 LOCAL GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT TRUST § 44-2
33:37

ARTICLE II
Township Manager
[Adopted 1-20-1986 as Ch. 1, Part 2, of the 1986 Code]
§ 44-3. Creation of office.
Pursuant to the authority of Section 599.1 of Article V of the Second Class
Township Code,15 the office of Township Manager is hereby created by the
Township of West Hanover.
§ 44-4. Appointment and removal.
The Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term by a majority of
all members of the Board of Supervisors. The Manager shall serve at the
pleasure of the Board of Supervisors and may be removed at any time by
a majority vote of all of its members. At least 30 days before such removal
is to become effective, the Board of Supervisors shall furnish the Manager
with a written statement setting forth its intention to remove the Manager.
§ 44-5. Qualifications; residency.
The Manager shall be an adult, competent and qualified to perform the
duties of the Office of Manager and need not be a resident of West Hanover
Township at the time of appointment if he or she, at that time, resides within
a twenty-mile radius of West Hanover Township; otherwise, the Manager
shall be required to become a resident of West Hanover Township within 12
months following appointment. In addition, any Manager who shall change
his or her residence after appointment shall, in all events, be required to
become a resident of West Hanover Township.
§ 44-6. Bond.
Before entering upon his or her duties, the Manager shall give a bond to
West Hanover Township, with a bonding company as surety, to be approved
by the Board of Supervisors in the sum of $2,500, conditioned upon the
faithful performance of his or her duties, the premium for said bond to be
paid by West Hanover Township. The Board of Supervisors, in its discretion,
may authorize the inclusion of the Manager in the Blanket Bond for various
township officers and employees rather than requiring that the Manager
obtain a separate bond.
§ 44-7. Compensation.
The Township Manager shall receive such compensation for his or her
services as the Board of Supervisors shall, by resolution, from time to time
prescribe.
15.Editor's Note: Former Section 599.1 of Article V of the Second Class Township Code was
repealed 11-9-1995 by P.L. 350, No. 60, § 1. See now 53 P.S. § 66301.
§ 44-3 LOCAL GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT TRUST § 44-8
33:39
§ 44-8. Powers and duties.
The Manager shall carry on the business of West Hanover Township under
the direction of the Board of Supervisors, and his or her powers and duties
shall relate to the general management of all business of West Hanover
Township not expressly by statute imposed or conferred upon other officials
of West Hanover Township. Subject to recall by ordinance of West Hanover
Township, the powers and duties of the Township Manager shall include the
following:
A. The Manager shall hire, with the consent of the Board of Supervisors,
and, when necessary for the good of the administration of township
business, shall suspend or discharge an employee under his or her
supervision. Any suspension or discharge shall be reported to the Board
of Supervisors at its next scheduled meeting.
B. The Manager shall prepare and submit to the Board of Supervisors,
before the close of each fiscal year, a budget for the next fiscal year,
together with an explanatory budget message.
C. The Manager shall be responsible for the administration of the budget
after its adoption by the Board of Supervisors.
D. The Manager shall, in conjunction with the preparation of the yearly
budget, develop long-ranged fiscal plans for West Hanover Township,
such plans to be presented annually to the Board of Supervisors for its
review.
E. The Manager shall hold such other offices of responsibility as the Board
of Supervisors may from time to time direct by resolution.
F. The Manager shall attend all meetings of the Board of Supervisors,
including workshop meetings, and shall accompany the Board of
Supervisors upon its regular road inspections, and the Manager shall
have the right to take part in discussions of the Board of Supervisors.
The Manager shall receive notice of all special meetings of the Board of
Supervisors.
G. The Manager shall prepare the agenda for each meeting of the Board of
Supervisors and supply facts and materials pertinent thereto.
H. The Manager shall keep the Board of Supervisors informed as to the
conduct of township affairs; shall submit periodic reports, at least
monthly, on the condition of township finances, as well as such other
reports as the Board of Supervisors may request from time to time; and
shall make such recommendations to the Board of Supervisors as he or
she deems advisable.
I. The Manager shall submit to the Board of Supervisors, as soon as
possible after the close of each fiscal year, a complete report on the
finances and the administrative activities of the township for the
preceding year.
§ 44-8 WEST HANOVER CODE § 44-8
33:40
J. The Manager shall have general administrative supervision of all
appointed officials of West Hanover Township and shall see that the
provisions of all franchises, leases, permits and privileges granted by
West Hanover Township are faithfully observed.
K. The Manager shall supervise the performance and faithful execution of
all contracts let by West Hanover Township.
L. The Manager shall see that all money owed by West Hanover Township
is promptly paid and that proper proceedings are promptly taken for
the security and collection of all of the claims of or debts due to West
Hanover Township.
M. The Manager shall be the Purchasing Officer of West Hanover Township
and he or she shall purchase, in accordance with the provisions of the
Second Class Township Code,16 all supplies and equipment for the
agencies, boards, commissions and other offices of West Hanover
Township. The Manager shall keep an account of all purchases and
shall, from time to time or when directed by the Board of Supervisors,
make a full written report thereof. The Manager shall also issue rules
and regulations, subject to the prior approval of the Board of
Supervisors, governing the procurement of all municipal supplies and
equipment.
N. All complaints regarding township services shall be referred to the
office of the Manager. The Manager shall investigate and dispose of
such complaints and shall make regular report thereon to the Board of
Supervisors.
16.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 44-8 LOCAL GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT TRUST § 44-8
33:41
Chapter 48
PARK AND RECREATION BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 139.
§ 48-1. Creation; membership. [Amended 3-5-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-417]
There is hereby created a Park and Recreation Board in and for West
Hanover Township. The Board shall consist of five persons to be appointed
by the Board of Supervisors for such terms as shall permit no more than two
terms to expire in any one calendar year.
§ 48-2. Appointments; terms of office; removal.
The members of the Board shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors
for terms of five years, in such order that at least one member's term
shall expire annually. The aforesaid appointments for a specified term
notwithstanding, a Board member may stay in office until a successor
qualifies or is appointed, or the Board of Supervisors may remove any
member of the Board, at the pleasure of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 48-3. Service without pay; vacancies.
The members of the Board shall serve without pay, and vacancies in such
Board, occurring otherwise than by expiration of a term, shall be filled by
the Board of Supervisors for the unexpired term in the same manner as
original appointment.
§ 48-4. Election of officers; adoption of regulations.
The Park and Recreation Board shall elect its own Chairman and Secretary
and any other officers deemed necessary, to serve for a period of one year.
The Board shall also have power to adopt rules and regulations for the
conduct of all business within their jurisdiction.
§ 48-5. Powers and duties.
The Park and Recreation Board shall advise the Township Manager and
Board of Supervisors on how to maintain and equip parks; develop, maintain
and operate park and recreation facilities; develop a program of recreation
activities and services designed to meet the various leisure time interests
of all residents; evaluate programs, facilities, services and relationships
periodically to assure that the township's goals and objectives are being
17.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of January 1, 2008.
§ 44-8 WEST HANOVER CODE § 48-5
48:42
achieved; and advise and assist in the development and acquisition of
adequate financial support for park and recreation facilities and programs.
It shall also be the duty of the Park and Recreation Board to submit an
annual report to the Board of Supervisors which provides an analysis and
summary of township recreation areas, facilities, leadership and programs,
and to render assistance to the Township Manager and/or the Board of
Supervisors in implementing the township's recreational programs and park
and recreation master plan.
§ 48-6. Initial appointments and terms.
The initial appointments and terms of members to the Park and Recreation
Board shall be made in the following manner and for the following periods
of service:
Chapter 52
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
173.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 52-1. Creation of Commission.
A West Hanover Township Planning Commission, to be composed of seven
members, appointed as provided by law (53 P.S. § 10202), is hereby created
in and for the Township of West Hanover, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
A. One member shall be appointed to a term which shall expire December
31, 1996.
B. One member shall be appointed to a term which shall expire December
31, 1995.
C. Two members shall be appointed to a term which shall expire December
31, 1994.
D. Two members shall be appointed to a term which shall expire December
31, 1993.
E. One member shall be appointed to a term which shall expire December
31, 1992.
§ 48-5 PLANNING COMMISSION § 52-2
52:43
§ 52-2. Appointments; terms of office.18
All members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Board of
Supervisors. The term of each member shall be for four years, or until a
successor is appointed and qualified, with no more than two members being
reappointed or replaced during any future calendar year.
§ 52-3. Annual report.
The Commission shall keep a full record of its business and shall annually
submit a written report by March 1 of each year of its activities to the Board
of Supervisors.
§ 52-4. Powers and duties.
A. The West Hanover Township Planning Commission shall, at the request
of the Board of Supervisors, have the power and shall be required to:
(1) Prepare the Comprehensive Plan for the development of the
township and present it for the consideration of the Board of
Supervisors.
(2) Maintain and keep on file records of its actions. All records and files
of the Planning Commission shall be in the possession of the
township.
B. The Planning Commission, at the request of the Board of Supervisors,
may:
(1) Make recommendations to the Board of Supervisors concerning the
adoption or amendment of an Official Map.
(2) Prepare and present to the Board of Supervisors a zoning
ordinance, and make recommendations to the Board on proposed
amendments to it as set forth in this chapter.
(3) Prepare, recommend and administer subdivision and land
development and planned residential development regulations.
(4) Prepare and present to the Board of Supervisors a building code
and a housing code and make recommendations concerning
proposed amendments thereto.
(5) Do such other acts or make such studies as may be necessary to
fulfill the duties and obligations imposed by this chapter.
(6) Prepare and present to the Board of Supervisors a water survey,
which shall be consistent with the State Water Plan and any
applicable water resources plan adopted by a river basin
commission. The water survey shall be conducted in consultation
with any public water supplier in the area to be surveyed.
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 52-2 WEST HANOVER CODE § 52-4
52:44
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 67
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 139.
(7) Promote public interest in and understanding of the
Comprehensive Plan and planning.
(8) Make recommendations to governmental, civic and private
agencies and individuals as to the effectiveness of the proposals of
such agencies and individuals.
(9) Hold public hearings and meetings.
(10) Present testimony before any board.
(11) Require from other township commissions such available
information as relates to the work of the Planning Commission.
(12) In the performance of its functions, enter upon any land to make
examinations and surveys with the consent of the owner.
(13) Prepare and present to the Board of Supervisors a study regarding
the feasibility and practicability of using renewable energy sources
in specific areas within the township.
(14) Review the zoning ordinance, subdivision and land development
ordinance, Official Map, provisions for planned residential
development and such other ordinances and regulations governing
the development of land no less frequently than it reviews the
Comprehensive Plan.
§ 52-4 PLANNING COMMISSION § 52-4
52:45

ARTICLE I
Livestock at Large
[Adopted 1-20-1986 as Ch. 2, Part 2, of the 1986 Code; amended in
its entirety 8-4-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-4]
§ 67-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms willhave the meanings indicated:
LIVESTOCK — Horses, stallions, colts, geldings, mares, sheep, rams, bulls,
bullocks, steers, heifers, cows, calves, mules, jacks, jennets, burros, goats,
kids, swine, fowl, including chickens, deer, llamas, alpacas, ratites (e.g.,
ostriches, emus, rheas), and other similar animals.[Amended 10-16-2018
by Ord. No. 2017-06]
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of livestock, shall include
every person having a right of property in such livestock, and every person
who keeps or harbors such livestock or has in his/her care, and every person
who permits such livestock to remain on or about any premises occupied by
him/her.
§ 67-2. Livestock at large prohibited.
§ 67-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000. It is further provided that, upon judgement against any person
by summery conviction, or by proceedings by summons on default of the
payment of the fine or penalty imposed and the costs, the defendant may be
sentenced and committed to the county prison for a period not exceeding
30 days.
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any livestock to permit such
livestock to run at large either upon the public streets or highways of
West Hanover Township, upon the private property of any other person
in West Hanover Township or upon any property in West Hanover
Township not belonging to or in the possession of the owner of such
livestock or to persons under whose supervision or control such
livestock are being kept.
B. The provisions herein shall apply to all livestock found running at large,
irrespective of payment for or issuance of any license, now or hereafter
required, in respect to the livestock involved.
§ 67-1 PLANNING COMMISSION § 67-3
52:47

ARTICLE II
Animals and Domesticated Pets
[Adopted 2-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-2; amended in its entirety
8-4-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-4]
§ 67-4. Definitions. [Amended 9-17-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-18]
As used in this article, the following terms have the meanings indicated,
unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
ANIMAL — Any dog, cat or domestic animal, or any wild life domesticated
or any household pet.[Amended 10-16-2018 by Ord. No. 2017-06]
DOMESTICATED PETS — Dogs and cats kept under the control of their
owner, and other animals which can be legally bought and sold in the
Commonwealth. Feeding and providing rudimentary shelter of and by itself
does not constitute ownership of an animal.[Amended 4-6-2009 by Ord.
No. 2008-07]
OWNER — Any person having a right of property in any dog, cat, pet or
other livestock or having custody of any dog, cat or domesticated pet.
RUNNING AT LARGE — Being upon any public highway, street, alley, park
or any other public land, or upon property of another person other than the
owner, and not being accompanied by and under the control of the owner or
any other person having custody of said dog, cat or domestic pet.
§ 67-5. Unlawful to allow animals to run at large.
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog, cat or other domestic pet
to permit such pet to run at large either upon the public streets or
highways of the Township, upon the private property of any other
person or upon any property not belonging to or in the possession of the
owner of such animals or to persons under whose supervision or control
such animals are being kept. [Amended 9-17-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-18; 4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2008-07]
B. The keeper of every such animal shall confine the same in an enclosure
sufficient to prevent such animal from running at large. Such
enclosures shall be of a size conducive to good sanitary practices. As an
alternative, the owner's property may be fenced in such that such
animals cannot run free onto other property or public highway, alley,
street, park or any other public land.
C. Every keeper of any pet shall keep all feed in a rat-proof and fly-tight
box, container, or receptacle.
D. If any pet is kept in a dwelling owned or occupied by it's owner, said
owner shall be limited to the number of such pets to insure that no
public nuisance is created or maintained and no threat to the health of
persons living there or elsewhere is created.
§ 67-4 PLANNING COMMISSION § 67-5
52:49
§ 67-6. Licensed animals not exempt from regulations.
The provisions of this article shall apply to all dogs, cats and other animals
in the nature of pets found running at large in violation of § 67-5,
irrespective of payment of any license in respect to the animal involved.
§ 67-7. Animals disturbing peace. [Amended 4-6-2009 by Ord. No.
2008-07]
No person shall allow any dog, cat or other domestic pet owned by him/her
or under his/her control, or any nondomesticated animal confined on that
person's premises, to make any loud or harsh noise or disturbance which
would interfere with or deprive the peace, quiet, rest or sleep of any person
within the Township.
§ 67-8. Enforcement.
The animal control officer, as designated by the Township, shall enforce
the PA Act of 1982, P.L, 784, No. 225, Dog Law Act of 1982 within the
Township.19 The Code Official or his designee shall also enforce the above
enforcement.
§ 67-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000. It is further provided that, upon judgement against any person
by summary conviction, or by proceedings by summons on default of the
payment of the fine or penalty imposed and the costs, the defendant may be
sentenced and committed to the county prison for a period not exceeding
30 days.
E. Any violation of this article that would also violate any state law shall be
prosecuted under the state law and not this article.
F. Voiding animal excrement. No person having control, possession, or
custody of any animal or the owner of an animal over which no person
exercises possession, custody or control shall allow or permit any dog,
cat or other domestic pet to void excrement on any public or private
property other than the property of the owner of such pet. It is a
violation of this article if any person having control, possession, or
custody of any animal or the owner of an animal over which no person
exercises possession, custody or control shall not immediately remove
and properly dispose of voided excrement from any pet on any public or
private property or the property of the owner of such dog, cat or other
domestic pet. [Amended 4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2008-07]
19.Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq.
§ 67-5 WEST HANOVER CODE § 67-9
52:50
Chapter 75
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 148.
§ 75-1. Purpose.
This chapter is passed for the protection of the health, safety and general
welfare of the property of and the inhabitants of West Hanover Township.
§ 75-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGRICULTURAL AREA — That property of an individual, firm, partnership
or corporation which is actively used or devoted to agricultural pursuits,
without regard to the zoning district in which said property is located.
WEEDS — All useless, uncultivated plants and vegetation, brush or
equivalent wild or undesirable growth.
§ 75-3. Restrictions on weed growth.
No weeds shall be permitted to grow to a height in excess of 12 inches
on any premises or property within the Township of West Hanover and,
regardless of height, no weeds growing on said premises or property shall
be permitted to go to seed. This prohibition shall not be applicable to
premises or property which constitute an agricultural area.
§ 75-4. Responsibilities of owner.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner of record of any premises or
property within West Hanover Township to comply with the requirements
and prohibitions set forth in this chapter. If the owner or owners of record
of any such premises or property cannot be determined or cannot be found,
then the occupier of said premises or property shall be responsible for such
compliance. If such premises or property are not occupied, and if the owner
of record is not known or cannot be found, then the person or persons
shown as the owner or owners of the premises or property as reflected
in the records of the office of Tax Assessment of Dauphin County shall be
responsible for compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 75-5. Notification of violations; removal by township.
Upon discovery of a violation of the terms of this chapter, the Code
Enforcement Officer or his designee shall, at his election, personally notify,
§ 67-9 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 75-5
75:51
or by regular mail notify, any such owner of premises or property within
West Hanover Township of his or their violation of this chapter and shall
require the removal, mowing or destruction of the weeds within 10 days
from the date of notification. Failure to comply with the terms of such
notification, and continued maintenance of weeds in violation of this
chapter, shall constitute a nuisance and, after the expiration of 10 days from
the date of notice, West Hanover Township may cause the removal, mowing
or destruction of the weeds constituting said nuisance and may collect the
costs thereof, together with a penalty of 10% of such costs in the manner
provided by law for the collection of municipal liens, or may maintain an
action of assumpsit to recover the same, or may seek relief by an action in
equity.
§ 75-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-1-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-4]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $1,000. Every day that a violation of this chapter continues shall
constitute a separate offense. It is further provided that, upon judgment
against any person by summary conviction, or by proceedings by summons
on default of the payment of the fine or penalty imposed and the costs,
the defendant may be sentenced and committed to the county prison for a
period not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 78
(RESERVED)
Chapter 81
BUILDINGS, DANGEROUS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 78.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 148.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
173.
§ 81-1. Definitions.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
BUILDING — An independent structure having a roof supported by
columns or walls resting on its own foundation and includes dwelling,
garage, barn, stable, shed, greenhouse, mobile home, plant, factory,
warehouse, school or similar structure.
§ 75-5 WEST HANOVER CODE § 81-1
78:52
DANGEROUS BUILDING — All buildings or structures which have any
or all of the following defects shall be deemed dangerous buildings:
DWELLING — Any building which is wholly or partly used or intended
to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a
dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are
used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants.
EXTERMINATION — Control and elimination of insects, rodents or
other pests by eliminating their harborage places; removing or making
inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; poisoning, spraying,
Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members
list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing
through the center of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its
base.
(1)
Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show damage or
deterioration to 33% of the supporting member or members, or
damage or deterioration to 50% of the nonsupporting enclosing or
outside walls or covering.
(2)
Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors
or roofs or in which the same are overloaded, or which have
insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used.
(3)
Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so
as to be dangerous to life, safety or the general health and welfare
of the occupants or the public.
(4)
Those which are so damaged, dilapidated, decayed, unsafe,
unsanitary, vermin-infested or which so utterly fail to provide the
amenities essential to decent living that they are unfit for human
habitation, or are likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to
work injury to the health, safety or general welfare of those living
therein.
(5)
Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they
may fall and injure property or members of the public.
(6)
Those which lack illumination, ventilation or sanitation facilities or
because of another condition are unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous
to the health, safety or general welfare of the occupants or the
public.
(7)
Those which, because of their location, are unsanitary or otherwise
dangerous to the health or safety of the occupants or the public.
(8)
Those existing in violation of any provision of Chapter 78, Building
Construction, Article I, Building Code, Chapter 103, Fire
Prevention, or other ordinances of the West Hanover Township.
(9)
§ 81-1 BUILDINGS, DANGEROUS § 81-1
81:53
§ 81-2. Dangerous buildings declared nuisances.
All dangerous buildings within the terms of § 81-1 of this chapter are
hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be repaired, vacated or
demolished as herein provided.
§ 81-3. Standards for repair, vacation or demolition.
The following standards shall be followed in substance by the Code
Enforcement Officer or his designee of the West Hanover Township in
ordering repair, vacation or demolition:
fumigating, trapping or by any other recognized and legal pest
elimination methods.
GARBAGE — Animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
INFESTATION — Presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects,
rodents or other pests.
OWNER — Person who, alone or jointly or severally with others:
PERSON — Any individual, firm, corporation, association or
partnership, or other legal entity.
PROPERTY — A piece, parcel, lot or tract of land.
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage, including residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and
other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood,
excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans,
metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust.
STRUCTURE — Any thing constructed or erected with a fixed or
ascertainable location on the ground or in water, whether or not affixed
to the ground or anchored in the water, including buildings, walls,
fences, platforms, docks, wharves, billboards, signs and walks.
Shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or
without accompanying actual possession thereof; or
(1)
Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling
unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or as executor, executrix,
administrator, administratrix or guardian of the estate of the owner.
Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound
to comply with the provisions of this chapter and with rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he
were the owner.
(2)
B. Whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling unit" or "premises" are used
in this chapter, they shall be construed as though they were followed by
the words "or any part thereof."
§ 81-1 WEST HANOVER CODE § 81-3
81:54
§ 81-4. Duties of enforcement officer.
A. If the dangerous building can reasonably be repaired so that it will no
longer exist in violation of the terms of this chapter, it shall be ordered
to be repaired.
B. If the dangerous building is in such condition as to make it dangerous to
the health, safety or general welfare of its occupants or the public and
is so placarded, it shall be ordered to be vacated within such length of
time, not exceeding 30 days, as is reasonable.
C. No dwelling or dwelling unit which has been placarded as unfit for
human habitation shall again be used for human habitation until written
approval is secured from, and such placard is removed by, the Code
Enforcement Officer or his designee. The Code Enforcement Officer or
his designee shall remove such placard whenever the defect or defects
upon which the placarding action were based have been eliminated.
D. If a dangerous building is 50% or more damaged or decayed, or
deteriorated from its original condition; if a dangerous building cannot
be repaired, so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this
chapter; or if a dangerous building is a fire hazard existing or erected in
violation of the terms of this chapter or any ordinance of the West
Hanover Township or statute of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, it
shall be ordered to be demolished, provided that the cost of repairs to
rectify or remove the conditions constituting the nuisance exceed 50%
of the market value of the building at the time demolition is proposed.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer or his designee shall inspect on a regular
basis dwellings, buildings and structures to determine whether any
conditions exist which render such premises dangerous buildings
within the terms of § 81-1 above.
B. Whenever an inspection discloses that a dwelling, building or structure
has become a public nuisance, the Code Enforcement Officer or his
designee shall issue a written notice to the person or persons
responsible therefor. The notice:
(1) Shall be in writing;
(2) Shall include a statement of the reasons it is being issued;
(3) Shall state a reasonable time to rectify the conditions constituting
the nuisance or to remove and demolish the dwelling, building or
structure;
(4) Shall be served upon the owner, or his agent, or the occupant, as
the case may require.
(a) Except in emergency cases and where the owner, occupant,
lessee or mortgagee is absent from the township, all notices
shall be deemed to be properly served upon the owner,
§ 81-3 BUILDINGS, DANGEROUS § 81-4
81:55
§ 81-5. Hearings.
occupant or other person having an interest in the dangerous
building if a copy thereof is served upon him personally or if a
copy thereof is posted in a conspicuous place in or about the
structure affected by the notice, or if he is served with such
notice by any other method authorized or required under the
laws of the Commonwealth.
(b) Except emergency cases, in all other cases where the owner,
occupant, lessee or mortgagee is absent from the West
Hanover Township, all notices or orders provided for herein
shall be sent by registered mail to the owner, occupant and all
other persons having an interest in said building, as shown by
the records of the County Recorder of Deeds, to the last known
address of each, and a copy of such notice shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the dangerous building to which it
relates. Such mailing and posting shall be deemed adequate
service.
(5) May contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with the rules
and regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
C. The enforcement officer shall appear at all hearings conducted by the
Code Enforcement Officer or his designee and testify as to the condition
of dangerous buildings.
A. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection
with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter may request and
shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Code Enforcement
Officer or his designee, provided that such person shall file with the
Code Enforcement Officer or his designee a written petition requesting
such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor
within 10 days after the day the notice was served. Upon receipt of such
petition, the Code Enforcement Officer or his designee shall set a time
and place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice
thereof. At such hearing the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to
be heard and to show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn.
The hearing shall be commenced not later than 20 days after the day on
which the petition was filed.
B. After such hearing the Code Enforcement Officer or his designee shall
sustain, modify or withdraw the notice. If the Code Enforcement Officer
or his designee sustains or modifies such notice, it shall be deemed to
be an order. Any notice served pursuant to this chapter shall
automatically become an order if a written petition for a hearing is not
filed with the Code Enforcement Officer or his designee within 10 days
after such notice is served.
§ 81-4 WEST HANOVER CODE § 81-5
81:56
§ 81-6. Removal of notice prohibited.
No person shall remove or deface the notice of dangerous building, except
as provided in § 81-3C.
§ 81-7. Emergency cases.
Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer or his designee finds that an
emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public
health, he may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the
existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as
is necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions
of this chapter, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to
whom such order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon
petition to the Code Enforcement Officer or his designee shall be afforded
a hearing as soon as possible. After such hearing, depending upon the
findings as to whether the provisions of this chapter have been complied
with, the Code Enforcement Officer or his designee shall continue such
order in effect, or modify or revoke it. The costs of such emergency repair,
vacation or demolition of such dangerous building shall be collected in the
same manner as provided herein for other cases.
§ 81-8. Abatement by township.
If the owner, occupant, mortgagee or lessee fails to comply with the order
of the Code Enforcement Officer or his designee within the time specified in
the notice issued by the Code Enforcement Officer or his designee, the Code
Enforcement Officer or his designee shall cause such building or structure
to be repaired, vacated or demolished as the facts may warrant, under the
standards hereinbefore provided. The West Hanover Township may collect
the cost of such repair, vacation or demolition, together with a penalty of
10% of such cost, in the manner provided by law.
§ 81-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-1-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-4]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $1,000. Each
day that a violation continues beyond the date fixed for compliance shall
constitute separate offense. It is further provided that, upon judgment
against any person by summary conviction, or by proceedings by summons
on default of the payment of the fine or penalty imposed and the costs,
the defendant may be sentenced and committed to the county prison for a
period not exceeding 30 days.
C. Any aggrieved party may appeal the final order to the Board of
Supervisors in accordance with the provisions of the Local Agency
Law.20
20.Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 105, § 551 et seq. and § 751 et seq.
§ 81-5 BUILDINGS, DANGEROUS § 81-9
81:57
Chapter 85
BURNING, OPEN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Company — See Ch. 19.
Fire Marshal — See Ch. 22.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 103.
§ 85-1. Purpose.
It is against public policy to permit uncontrolled and unrestricted outdoor
burning. The purpose of this chapter is to prevent needless public damage
to life and property because of public and private nuisances caused by
outdoor fires deliberately or carelessly set and maintained.
§ 85-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BURN BAN — An order or directive issued by the Township Fire Marshal
and/or any county or state agency having jurisdiction prohibiting outside
fires and burning during a time of drought or other emergency situation or
condition.
BURN PERMIT — A permit to kindle or maintain such open fires or other
fires. The permit shall be issued by the Township Fire Marshal upon
application thereof made to the Township. A burn permit is valid for a time
period as approved by the Fire Marshal.
CAMPFIRE — A fire lit to serve the following functions: light, warmth,
a beacon, an insect and/or apex predator deterrent, to cook, and for a
psychological sense of security. A campfire is a maximum of two feet in
diameter and two feet in height. Any fire larger than previously mentioned
shall be considered a bonfire and will require a special permit and possible
Fire Company involvement.
CHIMINEAS/FIRE POTS — An outdoor freestanding container made of
metal or clay designed to hold a fire. A chiminea is a front-loading fireplace
with a bulbous body and vertical smoke vent or chimney. Fire pots may not
have a chimney.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Fire Marshal of West Hanover Township,
the Assistant Fire Marshal, and the Code Enforcement Officer shall be
designated enforcement officers under this chapter.
FIRE RING — A construction or device used to contain campfires and
prevent them from spreading and turning into wildfires. Fire rings have no
bottom and are simply circles made of forged metal, stones, concrete, etc.,
which surround and contain a campfire.
§ 81-9 WEST HANOVER CODE § 85-2
81:58
GARBAGE — All putrescible animal and vegetable matter resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
INCINERATOR/NONCOMBUSTIBLE CONTAINER — A device specifically
designed for the destruction by burning of any combustible material.
LEAF WASTE/FOLIAGE — Foliage from trees, bushes and other plants,
garden residue, shrubbery and tree trimmings, but not including grass
clippings.
NUISANCE SMOKE — Solid particles and/or microdebris generated by
open or contained burning that interferes with the enjoyment, public health,
and use of property.
OPEN FIRE — Any fire not contained, including campfires.
PERSON — Any individual, or agent of a partnership, association,
corporation, department, bureau, agency or legal entity.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials specified by the Township
for separate collection in accordance with recycling regulations. Such
materials may include but not be limited to aluminum products, ferrous
containers, bimetal containers, glass containers, newspapers, magazines
and periodicals, office paper, plastic containers, foliage and yard wastes.
RED FLAG WARNING/FIRE WEATHER WARNING — A weather advisory
issued by the National Weather Service when the combination of dry fuels
and weather conditions support extreme fire danger. The criteria for these
warnings are low humidity (less than 30%) and high winds (greater than 20
mph).
REFUSE — Garbage, rubbish and trade waste.
RESPONSIBLE ADULT — An individual 18 years or older who is not under
the influence of drugs or alcohol or suffering from any other disability which
would impair his or her ability to property supervise a fire.
RUBBISH — Solids not considered to be highly flammable or explosive,
including but not limited to rags, old clothes, leather, rubber, carpets,
excelsior, ashes and furniture.
TRADE WASTE — All solid or liquid material or rubbish resulting from
construction, building operations or the prosecution of any business, trade
or industry, including, but not limited to, plastic products, cartons, paint,
grease, oil, and other petroleum products, chemicals, cinders and other
forms of solid or liquid waste materials.
§ 85-3. Fires on public property prohibited.
No person, firm, partnership or corporation shall set or maintain any fire
at any time upon any of the streets, sidewalks, alleys or public grounds in
West Hanover Township, or burn or cause to be burned thereon any paper,
garbage, refuse, debris, boxes, rubbish, foliage, weeds or other material or
substance of any kind, unless the person doing so shall be an employee of
West Hanover Township authorized to do so.
§ 85-2 BUILDINGS, DANGEROUS § 85-4
81:59
§ 85-4. Fires on private property restricted.
A. Open fires shall be permitted upon private property in West Hanover
Township under and subject to the following requirements:
(1) All open fires in West Hanover Township require a burn permit
issued by the West Hanover Township Fire Marshal.
(2) Open fires shall not exceed six feet in diameter and six feet in
height and must be 50 feet from any structure and 25 feet from any
property line.
(3) Campfires require a burn permit and shall not exceed two feet in
diameter and two feet in height and be a minimum of 25 feet from
property lines and structures, automobiles or any combustible
materials and are subject to all other provisions in this chapter.
B. Contained fires shall be permitted upon private property in West
Hanover Township and are subject to the following requirements:
(1) Contained fires in West Hanover Township Zoning Districts R1, R2,
R3, CH, IE, I, BE and NC shall require a burn permit burn permit
issued by the West Hanover Township Fire Marshal.
(2) Contained fires in West Hanover Township Zoning District C, FRA,
and RR, where the lot size is a minimum of one acre, do not require
a burn permit.
(3) No fire shall be set, started or maintained unless confined within a
noncombustible container designed or adopted to prevent the
escape of fire-starting sparks to nearby combustible materials or
substances.
(4) No fire shall be set, started or maintained in a noncombustible
container unless such container is located at least 50 feet from any
building, automobile, public roadway, garbage or waste container
or any other combustible material or substance, and 25 feet from
any property line.
(5) Cooking on an outdoor cooking appliance shall be allowed in all
zoning districts and is subject to all restrictions stated herein
except § 85-4B(2).
(6) Chimineas/fire pots are allowed so long as the manufacturer's
recommendations are followed and the use does not cause a hazard
to persons or property.
C. Any fires permitted under Subsections A and B above are also subject to
the following general requirements:
(1) All such fires must be attended at all times by a responsible adult
person.
§ 85-4 WEST HANOVER CODE § 85-4
81:60
(2) The burning of branches by the owner or agent of the property
upon which the burning occurs shall be permitted, so long as it
does not endanger any structure on said property or any other
person's property or structure and so long as none of the branches
exceeds a diameter of four inches and are the branches of the
property upon which the burning occurs.
(3) No fire shall be set, started, fed, permitted to burn or maintained:
(a) Where such fire may endanger any building or property, except
where such building or property is being used by the Fire
Company for training purposes.
(b) Between one hour prior to sunset and 7:00 a.m., with the
exception of campfires and outdoor cooking appliances.
(4) Unlawful substances. The following shall not be burned at any time
under any condition:
(a) Garbage.
(b) Animal substance.
(c) Any can that contains or did contain air or gas under pressure.
(d) Any chemical or substance which is a hazardous chemical or
hazardous substance or which, when burned, would create a
hazardous or offensive condition.
(e) Construction debris, by-products of manufacturing and
processing operations and wastes from commercial operations.
(f) Leaf waste/foliage.
(g) Grass clippings.
(5) Nothing herein shall be construed to permit or encourage the
burning of any substance determined by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or the United States Environmental Protection
Agency to be a hazardous substance, nor shall any fire be permitted
to burn by any persons if such burning is in violation of legislation
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the United States of
America or any of their legislative agencies.
D. Extinguishing unsafe fires.
(1) It is a violation of this chapter for any person to allow any fire to
burn under adverse weather conditions or unsupervised or
otherwise in an unsafe manner. Any such fire may be extinguished
by an official of the Fire Company or extinguished immediately
upon request of such official.
(2) It is a violation of this chapter for any person to allow a legal
contained or open fire to generate nuisance smoke as defined
§ 85-4 BUILDINGS, DANGEROUS § 85-4
81:61
§ 85-5. Permit required; application.
§ 85-6. Weather conditions; prohibition of all fires.
herein. Any such fire may be extinguished by an official of the Fire
Company unless extinguished immediately upon request of such
official.
(3) For any fire requiring a response by the Fire Company, the person
or agent shall pay charges to cover all incurred fire-suppression
costs in accordance with Chapter 19 of the Code of West Hanover
Township.
A. Any person, firm, partnership or corporation shall apply to the Fire
Marshal of West Hanover Township for a burn permit to set, start or
maintain a fire, except when a permit is not required per § 85-4B(2).
The burn permit application must be completed and submitted to the
Fire Marshal for approval.
B. The Fire Marshal of West Hanover Township shall consider said
application and shall notify the applicant within 15 days from the date
of the submission of the application whether or not a permit will be
granted and under what condition or conditions the permit will be
subject. The Fire Marshal may require as a condition that the applicant
have present necessary personnel of the West Hanover Township Fire
Company. In such cases, a condition of the issuance of the permit shall
be that the applicant pay any reasonable fees for service by the West
Hanover Township Fire Company.
A. During periods of drought or extended periods of time without rainfall,
no fire shall be set, started or maintained, nor shall any permit be
issued, during such period of time. The Fire Marshal of West Hanover
Township shall be responsible for determining when a period of drought
or period of inadequate rainfall exists under this section. Upon making
his determination, the Fire Marshal shall thereupon notify the West
Hanover Township Board of Supervisors or a designated official of said
Board, whereupon public notice that no fire shall be set shall be given
through the use of such public news media as the Board deems
reasonable.
B. Any directive or prohibition against outdoor burning issued by any
county or state agency having jurisdiction shall be considered
equivalent to any burn ban issued by the West Hanover Township Fire
Marshal as per the authority expressed in Chapter 22, Fire Marshal,
§ 22-3F.
C. Any day determined by the National Weather Service as a Red Flag Day
or a Fire Weather Warning Day.
§ 85-4 WEST HANOVER CODE § 85-7
81:62
§ 85-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $1,000. Every day that a violation of this chapter continues shall
constitute a separate offense. It is further provided that, upon judgment
against any person by summary conviction, or by proceedings by summons
on default of the payment of the fine or penalty imposed and the costs,
the defendant may be sentenced and committed to the county prison for a
period of not exceeding 30 days.
§ 85-8. Enforcement.
The Board of Supervisors shall appoint the Fire Marshal and the Assistant
Fire Marshal, who shall have the power to enforce the provisions of this
chapter, or in the absence of the Fire Marshal, an officer, designated by the
Fire Marshal.
§ 85-9. Municipal liability.
The Board of Supervisors, and its agents, officials and representatives, shall
not under any circumstances be liable or responsible for damages caused
to any person or property by reason of the issuance of any permit under
the provisions of this chapter, or by reason of the conduct of any burning
activity in compliance or noncompliance with the terms and provisions
hereof. The person, persons, company or companies responsible for any
such fire and the permit holder shall bear sole liability for any damages
caused as a result thereof.
Chapter 88
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Title 34 PA Department of Labor and
Industry — PA Uniform Construction Code.
Building Code Board of Appeals — See Ch. 8.
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 81.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 103.
Plumbing — See Ch. 144.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 148.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
173.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 88-1. Adoption of standards.
A. West Hanover Township has by resolution and this chapter elected to
administer and enforce the provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction
Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, and its regulations, as amended from time to
time.21
§ 85-7 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 88-1
88:63
§ 88-2. Additions, insertions and changes. [Amended 3-21-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-1]
B. The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pennsylvania Code,
Chapters 401 through 405, as amended from time to time, is hereby
adopted and incorporated herein by reference as the building code of
the Township of West Hanover, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
C. A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Township Secretary of the Township of West Hanover, being marked
and designated as "Uniform Construction Code," as enacted by the
State of Pennsylvania, be and is hereby adopted as the code of the
Township of West Hanover for establishing a uniform construction code;
imposing powers and duties on municipalities and the Department of
Labor and industry; providing for enforcement; imposing penalties; and
making repeals; referred to, adopted and made part herein as if fully set
out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any.
A. Administration. The following provisions address requirements and
procedures for the administration of Chapter 88.
(1) Section 403.43(g). Delete: "A permit may be valid for no more than
five years from its issue date." Insert: "A permit may be valid for no
more than one year from its issue date."
(2) (IBC) Section 105.1.1.1 and (IRC) Section R105.1.1.
Removal of debris. The contractor or owner shall remove all
debris and equipment from the site of work and leave the ground
clear of all materials, rubbish and debris, and in a clean and neat
condition, as each structure is completed.
(3) (IBC) Section 105.1.1.1.1 and (IRC) Section 105.2.3.1.
Application for permit; highway occupancy permit. No
building permit shall be issued for any property where the use of
the property or premises has changed, or for any property which
will require access to a state highway, until a highway occupancy
permit has been issued for said property. The application for a
building permit shall bear the following notation: "No building
permit will be issued for any lot or parcel where the use of the
building or premises has changed or which will require access to
a state highway, until authorized by a Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation (PENNDOT) highway occupancy permit pursuant
to Section 42022 of the act of June 1, 1945 (P.L. 1242, No. 428)
known as the "State Highway Law."
(4) (IBC) Section 105.1.1.1.2 and (IRC) Section 108.6.
21.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et seq.
22.Editor's Note: See 36 P.S. § 670-420.
§ 88-1 WEST HANOVER CODE § 88-2
88:64
Construction hours. Any construction activity that is required
to obtain a permit by (IBC) Section 105 and (IRC) Section 105 or
that involves exterior construction or commercial remodeling shall
be limited to the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Violation of this
section shall be subject to the penalties of Section 113.4.
(5) (IBC) Section 113.1.2 and (IRC) Section 113.1.2.
Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of
any dwelling unit or structure who has received a compliance
order upon whom a notice of violation has been served to sell,
transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of to another until
the provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation have
been complied with, or until such owner shall first furnish the
grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any
compliance order or notice of violation issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer and shall furnish to the Code Enforcement
Officer a signed and notarized statement to the grantee,
transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of
such compliance order or notice of violation and fully accepting
the responsibility without condition for making the correction or
repairs required by such compliance order or notice of violation.
(6) Third-party inspection registration requirements. In accordance
with PA Act 45 of 1999 (PA Uniform Construction Code), the
Township may enforce certain provisions of the UCC with the use of
qualified and registered third-party inspectors. The Township
Building Code Official will coordinate all inspection and
enforcement activities of third-party inspectors in West Hanover
Township. All UCC qualified third-party inspectors and inspection
firms shall execute and provide to the Township and Building Code
Official all documentation required by the inspection service
agreement for the inspection services being provided to the
Township. All respective inspectors working in West Hanover
Township shall be registered and certified as such by the PA
Department of Labor and Industry. Completion and submission of
the appropriate inspection service agreement shall constitute
licensure in West Hanover Township. No third-party inspector or
inspection firm shall conduct inspections in West Hanover
Township until the inspection service agreement is complete and
all required information has been provided to the Building Code
Official. Conducting inspections in West Hanover Township without
first completing the inspection service agreement and/or
adherence to the requirements of the agreement shall constitute a
violation of this section.
(7) (The CABO One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code, 1995) Section
R-111.1.
§ 88-2 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 88-2
88:65
§ 88-3. Duration of approved building permit.
A building permit, upon approval, may be valid for no more than one year
from its issue date.
Permit Required. Ordinary repairs are nonstructural repairs and
include alteration of or replacement of roofing and siding, erection
of a fence, or other nonstructural repairs for which a permit is not
required by the Building Official.
(8) Sewer lateral inspection and requirements. In accordance with PA
Act 45 of 1999 (PA Uniform Construction Code), the Township may
enforce certain provisions of the UCC with the use of qualified and
registered third-party inspectors. The Township assigns the
inspection responsibility for all sewer lateral inspections to the
West Hanover Township Water and Sewer Authority (hereinafter
referred to as Authority). The Township Building Code Official will
coordinate all sewer lateral inspection and enforcement activities
related to sewer lateral requirements of the UCC in accordance
with this chapter and in accordance with the following
administrative requirements:
(a) The Authority shall be responsible for the sewer lateral
inspections for laterals from the service main to the building
structure.
(b) The Authority shall have the responsibility of inspecting and/or
hiring a third-party inspection agency to conduct lateral
inspections. All inspectors, whether from Authority staff or a
third-party agency, shall be certified to conduct plumbing
inspections, as required by the PA Uniform Construction Code.
(c) The Authority will coordinate inspection activities and provide
the Township Building Code Official with a monthly report on
all sewer laterals that are inspected and approved by qualified
Authority inspectors or any third-party inspection agency.
(d) If the Authority utilizes a third-party agency to conduct sewer
lateral inspections, it will provide to the Building Code Official
with copies of any inspection services agreement. The
enforcement of the third-party inspection service contract
violations shall be conveyed to the Township Code Official by
the Authority for corrective action.
(e) All plumbing inspections shall be in accordance with the UCC
and the International Plumbing Code, current edition.
B. Technical Amendments to Chapter 88 and UCC. The following
provisions outline technical amends to the UCC as approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry in accordance with
Pennsylvania Act 45, as amended.
§ 88-2 WEST HANOVER CODE § 88-4
88:66
§ 88-4. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, or clause of this chapter is held, for any
reason, to be invalid, such decision or decisions shall not affect the validity
of the remaining portions of this chapter.
§ 88-5. Saving clause.
Nothing in this chapter or in the Uniform Construction Code hereby
adopted shall be construed to affect any suitor proceeding impending in
any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause of
action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance; nor shall any just or
legal right or remedy or any character be lost, impaired or affected by this
chapter.
§ 88-6. Violations and penalties.
§ 88-7. Effective date.
The Secretary of West Hanover Township shall certify to the adoption of this
chapter and cause the same to be published as required by law; and this
chapter shall take full force and effect on July 19, 2004, upon final passage
and approval, or upon approval notice for technical amendments of § 88-2B
as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry,
in accordance with the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code.
Chapter 92
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Transient retail business — See Ch. 182.
§ 92-1. Definitions and word usage.
A. Any individual, firm or corporation that violates any provision of this
chapter commits a summary offense and shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and costs. Each day
that a violation of this chapter continues shall be considered a separate
violation.
B. Disposition of penalties. The amount of the penalty shall be forwarded
to the entity with enforcement jurisdiction.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISORDERLY CONDUCT — A person shall be guilty of disorderly
conduct if, with a purpose to cause public danger, alarm, disorder,
§ 88-4 DISORDERLY CONDUCT § 92-1
92:67
§ 92-2. Applicability.
This chapter shall not apply to peaceful picketing, public speaking or other
lawful expressions of opinion not in contravention of other laws.
nuisance or if with the knowledge that such conduct is likely to create
such public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, such person shall
willfully:
Create a disturbance of the public order by an act of violence or by
any act likely to produce violence;
(1)
Engage in fighting or in violent, threatening or tumultuous
behavior;
(2)
(3) Make any unreasonable loud noise;
Address abusive language or threats to any person present which
creates a clear and present danger of violence;
(4)
Cause likelihood of harm or serious inconvenience by failing to
immediately obey a lawful order of dispersal by a police officer,
where three or more persons are committing acts of disorderly
conduct in the immediate vicinity;
(5)
Damage, befoul or disturb public property or property of another
so as to create a hazardous, unhealthy or physically offensive
condition; or
(6)
Commit a trespass on residential property or on public property.
"Trespass," for the purpose of this chapter, shall mean:
Entering upon, or refusing to immediately leave, any
residential property of another, either where such property
has been posted with NO TRESPASSING signs or where,
immediately prior to such entry or subsequent thereto, notice
is given by the owner or occupant, orally or in writing, that
such entry, or continued presence, is prohibited.
(a)
Entering upon, or refusing to immediately leave, any public
property in violation of regulations promulgated by the official
charged with the security, care or maintenance of the property
and approved by the governing body of the public agency
owning the property, where such regulations have been
conspicuously posted or where immediately prior to such entry,
or subsequent thereto, such regulations are made known by
the official charged with the security, care or maintenance of
the property, his agent or a police officer.
(b)
(7)
B. Whenever used in this chapter, unless a contrary intent is clearly
evident from its context, the term "person" shall include the singular
and the plural, and the masculine and the feminine.
§ 92-1 WEST HANOVER CODE § 92-3
92:68
§ 92-3. Disorderly conduct prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in disorderly conduct in the
Township of West Hanover contrary to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 92-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-1-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-4]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $25. It is further provided that, upon judgment against any
person by summary conviction, or by proceedings by summons on default of
the payment of the fine or penalty imposed and the costs, the defendant may
be sentenced and committed to the county prison for a period not exceeding
30 days.
Chapter 97
EMERGENCY SERVICES COST RECOVERY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire company — See Ch. 19.
Insurance — See Ch. 121, Art. I.
Local services tax — See Ch. 178, Art. I.
§ 92-3 DISORDERLY CONDUCT § 92-4
92:69

ARTICLE I
Reimbursement for Response Costs
[Adopted 10-1-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-1923]
§ 97-1. Purpose. [Amended 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-17]
The purpose of this article is to provide the authority, procedures and
requirements to seek collection and reimbursement for the reasonable costs
of responding to emergency incidents, either directly or in coordination
with the Dauphin County Emergency Management Agency (EMA), the
Township Emergency Management Coordinator EMC, West Hanover
Township Fire Company and/or any recognized fire company serving West
Hanover Township. Fire service calls, false alarms, nuisance alarms,
hazardous material incidents, environmental incidents, and safety and
rescue incidents coordinated via Dauphin County EMA and 911 responses,
and those that use hazardous material abatement equipment and materials,
are also eligible for reimbursement.
§ 97-2. Authority to recover emergency response costs. [Amended
9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-17]
The West Hanover Township Board of Supervisors by and through its
authority and relationship with the West Hanover Township Fire Company
and/or any recognized fire company as per Chapter 19, § 19-3, of the
Township Code of Ordinances hereby authorizes the recovery of real and
reasonable costs incurred by the volunteer emergency services organization
involving any hazardous material incident, environmental incident or safety
and rescue incident or operation, including, but not limited to, vehicular
accidents and fires, that occur in West Hanover Township.
§ 97-3. False and/or nuisance alarms. [Added 9-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-1724]
A. False and/or nuisance alarms are deemed to be a waste of time,
manpower, and equipment and create the potential for serious injury to
Fire Company personnel and other responding emergency personnel.
"False alarm" means the activation of any alarm system which results in
a response by the Fire Company and which is caused by the negligence
or intentional misuse of the alarm system by the owner, its employees,
agents or any other activation of an alarm system not caused by heat,
smoke or fire, exclusive of a nuisance alarm. "Nuisance alarm" means
the activation of any alarm system which results in a response by the
Fire Company, caused by mechanical failure, malfunction, improper
installation, lack of proper maintenance or any other response for
which the Fire Company is unable to determine the apparent cause of
23.Editor's Note: This ordinance was adopted as Ch. 77 but was renumbered to maintain the
alphabetical organization of the Code.
24.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former §§ 97-3 through
97-7 as §§ 97-4 through 97-8, respectively.
§ 97-1 DISORDERLY CONDUCT § 97-3
92:71
§ 97-4. Policy for billing.
§ 97-5. Procedure for billing.
the alarm activation. Alarm activations caused by earthquakes, severe
weather, or power outages are not considered false or nuisance alarms.
B. No fee shall be assessed for the first three false alarms or nuisance
alarms at the same premises responded to by the Fire Company during
any 12 consecutive months. Thereafter, the owner shall pay the
following fees for false alarms or nuisance alarms responded to by the
Fire Company at the same premises during any 12 consecutive months:
Number of False/Nuisance
Alarms
Service Fee per False/Nuisance
Alarm
First to third $0
Fourth $100
Fifth $200
Sixth and above Doubles each time
A. West Hanover Township recognizes the need to bill for volunteer fire,
rescue and hazmat services conducted within the Township to aid in the
provision of emergency services.
B. No person, firm, corporation requiring emergency services shall be
denied services due to lack of insurance or ability to pay.
C. Any applicable charges for volunteer emergency services rendered
shall be billed directly to the user of such services or user's insurance
company.
D. West Hanover Township, West Hanover Township Fire Company No. 1
and/or any recognized fire company may, either directly or through any
third-party billing agency with which it has contracted for billing and/or
collections for volunteer fire, rescue and hazmat services, make
arrangements with users of such services and/or their financially
responsible party for installment payments of bills.
A. The West Hanover Township Board of Supervisors, West Hanover
Township Fire Company No. 1 and/or any recognized fire company is
hereby authorized to enter into a contract with a third-party billing
agency and/or collection agency for performance of emergency, rescue
and hazmat services billing and/or collection services, provided that the
following standards for third-party billing contracts are met:
(1) The third-party billing service is to be provided at a rate not to
exceed 20% of fees collected or at an amount consistent with the
fair-market value for services rendered.
(2) Neither the billing agency nor any of its employees are subject to
exclusion from any user fee.
§ 97-3 WEST HANOVER CODE § 97-5
92:72
(3) The billing agency is bonded and/or insured in amounts satisfactory
to West Hanover Township.
B. The Township, West Hanover Township Fire Company No. 1 and/or any
recognized fire company may, in its discretion, bill additionally for
material and vehicle costs in the case of any major, extraordinary or
unique incidents, including, but not limited to, hazardous materials
spills, fire emergency and rescue incidents that destroy or severely
damage emergency services equipment.
C. User fees.
(1) Volunteer fire and rescue services shall initiate user fees for the
delivery of emergency services, supplies and equipment to the
scene of any hazardous material incident, environmental incident
or safety and rescue incident or operation, including vehicular
accidents and fires that occur on the roadways in West Hanover
Township. The rate of the user fee shall be that which is usual,
customary and reasonable in accordance with standard practice
and industry standards.
(2) Every person and/or utility that is provided with volunteer
emergency, rescue and hazmat services shall be billed a user fee in
accordance with this article.
(3) The user fee for volunteer emergency services rendered shall be
billed directly to the user of such services' insurance company. If
the insurance company is not known, the user of services shall be
billed directly, with instructions to forward the bill to his/her
insurance provider.
(4) Any and all amounts collected as a result of this article shall be
used for the replacement and maintenance of emergency services
materials and equipment.
(5) West Hanover Township may implement rules and/or regulations
and/or revoke or amend existing rules and/or regulations as may be
deemed necessary for the billing and/or collection of user fees
pursuant to this article.
D. Uncollectible accounts.
(1) The user fee is anticipated to be paid by the user's insurance
company. In the instance where the Township receives official
notification from the insurance carrier that it will not honor the
invoice, the Township, West Hanover Township Fire Company No.
1, and/or any recognized Fire Company is authorized to invoice the
Responsible Party directly and take any legal action necessary to
collect the fee(s), including negotiating a settlement.
(2) The Township, West Hanover Township Fire Company No. 1 and/or
any recognized Fire Company may, at its discretion, write off the
§ 97-5 DISORDERLY CONDUCT § 97-5
92:73
§ 97-6. Saving clause.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding
impending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any
cause of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby; nor
shall any just or legal right or remedy or any character be lost, impaired or
affected by this article.
§ 97-7. Repealer.
This article repeals West Hanover Township Resolution No. 1999-22, passed
on December 20, 1999.
§ 97-8. Date of effect.
The Secretary of West Hanover Township shall certify to the adoption of
this article and cause the same to be published as required by law; and this
article shall take full force and effect immediately upon final passage and
approval.
uncollected fee amounts as a bad debt, without prejudice to the
Responsible Party.
(3) Should the Township, West Hanover Township Fire Company No. 1,
and/or any recognized Fire Company determine that an insurance
carrier has remitted the fee to the Responsible Party involved and
that the party has failed to remit the fee, the Township, West
Hanover Township Fire Company No. 1, and/or any recognized Fire
Company are authorized to pursue all legal means and appropriate
action in order to collect the account.
§ 97-5 WEST HANOVER CODE § 97-8
92:74
Chapter 103
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Marshal — See Ch. 22.
Open burning — See Ch. 85.
Fire protection districts — See Ch. 105.
§ 103-1. Adoption of International Fire Code. [Amended 11-5-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-21]
§ 103-2. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
101.1 Title. Insert: "West Hanover Township."
Appendix B, Fire-Flow Requirements for Buildings [Added 5-3-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-11]
Appendix C, Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution [Added 5-3-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-11]
Appendix D, Fire Apparatus Access Roads [Added 5-3-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-11]
A. West Hanover Township has by resolution and by Chapter 8825 elected
to administer and enforce the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, and its regulations, as amended
from time to time.26
B. The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pennsylvania Code,
Chapters 401 through 405, as amended from time to time, is hereby
adopted and incorporated herein by reference as the Building Code of
the Township of West Hanover, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
C. A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Township Secretary of the Township of West Hanover, being marked
and designated as “Uniform Construction Code,” as enacted by the
State of Pennsylvania, be and is hereby adopted as the code of the
Township of West Hanover for establishing a uniform construction code;
uniform fire prevention code; imposing powers and duties on
municipalities and the Department of Labor and Industry; providing for
enforcement; imposing penalties; and making repeals; referred to,
adopted and made part herein as if fully set out in this chapter, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any.
25.Editor’s Note: See Ch. 88, Construction Codes, Uniform.
26.Editor’s Note: See 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et seq.
§ 97-8 DISORDERLY CONDUCT § 103-2
92:75
Appendix I, Fire Protection Systems-Noncompliant Conditions [Added
5-3-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-11]
Appendix J, Emergency Responder Radio Coverages [Added 5-3-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-11]
§ 103-3. Annual testing of firesafety systems in nonresidential
buildings. [Added 4-4-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-05]
§ 103-4. Annual reporting of testing of firesafety systems in
nonresidential buildings. [Added 4-4-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-05]
§ 103-4.1. Interference with Fire Department operations. [Added
5-15-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-04]
A. All fire alarm systems shall be tested annually in accordance with
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 72 (National Fire Alarm
and Signaling Code) as amended from time to time, all manufacturers'
recommendations, and the prevailing Uniform Construction Code
(UCC).
B. All water-based fire-protection systems shall be tested annually in
accordance with National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 25
(Inspection, Testing, and Maintenance of Water-Based Fire Protection
Systems) as amended from time to time, all manufacturers'
recommendations, and the prevailing Uniform Construction Code
(UCC).
C. All emergency illumination and exit signs shall be tested annually in
accordance with National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 101 (Life
Safety Code) as amended from time to time, all manufacturers'
recommendations and the prevailing Uniform Construction Code
(UCC).
D. All testing shall be documented and certified by an independent thirdparty
agency or contractor qualified to conduct such testing.
Certifications must be attached to testing documentation. (Appendix
A)27
A. The owner and/or operator of each and all nonresidential building(s)
shall provide certification of testing performed as specified in § 103-3.
B. Certification must be submitted by December 1 of each calendar year
for testing completed in that calendar year to the Township Codes
Official with the pass/fail record of such testing. (Appendix A)28
A. It shall be unlawful to silence, reset or interfere with a fire alarm
control panel, attempt to interfere with or conspire to interfere with the
correct actual reading of a fire alarm control panel before Fire
27.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
28.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 103-2 WEST HANOVER CODE § 103-4.1
92:76
§ 103-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $1,000. Each
day that a violation continues beyond the date fixed for compliance shall
constitute a separate offense. It is further provided that, upon judgment
against any person by summary conviction, or by proceedings by summons
on default of payment of the fine or penalty imposed and the costs, the
defendant may be sentenced and committed to the county prison for a
period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 103-6. Saving clause.
Nothing in this chapter or in the code hereby adopted shall be construed to
affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired
or liability incurred, or any cause of action acquired or existing, nor shall
any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or
affected by this chapter.
§ 103-7. When effective. [Added 5-3-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-11]
The Secretary of West Hanover Township shall certify to the adoption of this
Ord. No. 2010-11 and cause the same to be published as required by law,
and this Ord. No. 2010-11 shall take full force and effect immediately upon
final passage and approval.
Department emergency responders arrive, or to interfere with, attempt
to interfere with, or conspire to interfere with, obstruct or hamper
with any Fire Department operation during active alarm situations and
routine inspections.
B. Existing and new hotel/motel fire alarm control panels must be
equipped with the notice sticker furnished by the Township Fire
Marshal and installed by the Township Fire Marshal or his/her
approved designee: "Silencing and/or resetting of fire alarm panel must
be done by Fire Department personnel only. Resetting panel may result
in criminal charges."
C. It shall be the responsibility of the legal property owner to inform his/
her tenant of the requirements of this § 103-4.1, and the tenant must
inform all employees, including but not limited to supervisors and
managers, on duty of the requirements of this § 103-4.1. Failure to
comply with this section by any party will result in a violation of this
chapter and may result in criminal charges.
D. Violators are subject to penalties and fines per § 103-5 and may be
subject to criminal charges.
§ 103-4.1 DISORDERLY CONDUCT § 103-7
92:77
Chapter 105
FIRE PROTECTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 178.
§ 103-7 WEST HANOVER CODE § 103-7
92:78
ARTICLE I
Fire Protection District No. 1
[Adopted 12-16-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-15]
§ 105-1. Establishment of district; boundaries. [Amended 5-17-2004
by Ord. No. 2004-7]
There is hereby established the West Hanover Township Fire Protection
District No. 1, such district being that area of land located in West Hanover
Township, bounded on the south by South Hanover Township, on the east
by East Hanover Township, on the north by Middle Paxton Township and on
the west by Lower Paxton Township and Middle Paxton Township.
§ 105-2. Annual assessment imposed on benefitted properties.
[Amended 5-3-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-10]
For the purpose of providing for the payment of the costs and expenses
associated with the placing, replacing, operating, maintaining and repairing
of public fire hydrants, as well as the costs and expenses associated with
the continued provision of an adequate supply of water to the public fire
hydrants, there is hereby imposed upon the benefitted properties located
within Fire Protection District No. 1 an annual assessment.
§ 105-3. Identification of affected properties. [Amended 5-3-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-10]
The benefitted properties to which the annual assessment shall apply shall
be those properties which abut any street or portion of streets in Fire
Protection District No. 1 within which there is located a public fire hydrant,
and which are located within 780 feet of any such public fire hydrant, as
well as any properties, not abutting a street wherein is located a public fire
hydrant, which are located within 780 feet of any public fire hydrant.
§ 105-4. Assessment rate.29
The assessment levied hereunder shall be based upon that assessed value
established by Dauphin County for tax assessment purposes upon each
benefited property, which assessed value shall then be multiplied by an
equal and uniformly applied rate of millage established by resolution of the
West Hanover Township Board of Supervisors. For calendar year 1997, the
rate of millage shall be 0.32 mills ($0.32 upon each $1,000 of assessed
value). The rate of .32 mills shall continue in effect for each year hereafter,
unless changed by an annual resolution of the West Hanover Township
Board of Supervisors.
29.Editor's Note: Former § 105-4, Exceptions to assessment, was renumbered § 105-6. Former
§§ 105-5 and 105-6 were renumbered as §§ 105-4 and 105-5, respectively.
§ 105-1 DISORDERLY CONDUCT § 105-5
92:79
§ 105-5. Collection and deposit of assessment.
The annual assessment shall be collected by, and delinquent assessments
treated by, the West Hanover Township Tax Collector in the same manner
as real estate taxes, and the assessments collected, after deduction for
commissions, shall be remitted by the Tax Collector to the West Hanover
Township Treasurer. The Township Treasurer shall deposit all receipts for
fire protection services into a separate account, shall make payments
therefrom only upon a signed order of the Chairman of the West Hanover
Township Board of Supervisors, attested by the Township Secretary, and
shall make an annual report of the separate account to the auditors of West
Hanover Township.
§ 105-6. Exceptions to assessment. [Amended 5-3-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-10]
No assessment within Fire Protection District No. 1 shall, however, be
levied against any farm land or aviation field located therein, nor against
any property not located within 780 feet of any public fire hydrant, nor
against any property located within 780 feet of any fire hydrant for which
West Hanover Township does not bear responsibility for the costs of
maintenance, otherwise known as "private fire hydrants."
§ 105-7. Private fire hydrants. [Added 5-3-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-10]
For the purpose of providing proper operation, maintenance and repair of
private fire hydrants, the owner of the hydrant shall annually, by September
1 of each year, perform maintenance inspections and flow testing as
required by the current version of the International Fire Code Section 507,
Fire Protection Water Supplies.
A. Private fire hydrants (all types) shall be inspected by a contractor
qualified and approved by the Pennsylvania American Water Company
(PAWC) on an annual basis which will include a single hydrant flow test,
operational check, and maintenance. The contractor is required to
contact PAWC prior to testing to utilize a hydrant meter and notify of
the date of flow testing.
B. A written report on a form provided by West Hanover Township of the
annual inspection and testing shall be filed with West Hanover
Township, West Hanover Fire Company, and PAWC within 15 days of
said inspection and testing.
C. Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this article,
including failure to complete the annual inspection, testing, and
reporting shall, upon conviction therefor, be sentenced to pay a fine of
$100 per day per hydrant and costs of prosecution until the report is
received by the Township.
§ 105-5 WEST HANOVER CODE § 105-7
92:80
D. Failure to meet water flows specified in the current NFPA Standards
1231 and 291, as detailed on the written inspection report, will require
the owner to take corrective action immediately and reinspect and
retest within 10 days, or any extension thereof granted by the
Township. A follow-up written inspection report must be filed with West
Hanover Township, West Hanover Fire Company, and PAWC within 15
days of said inspection and testing.
E. If the owner of any private fire hydrant fails to remedy any deficiencies
within 10 days, or any extension thereof granted by the Township, the
Township, or its agent, may enter upon the property and remedy the
deficiencies. Costs of this remedial action shall be borne by the owner.
F. All private fire hydrants installed after the effective date of this Ord. No.
2010-10 shall meet the standards of the current International Fire Code
Section 507, Fire Protection Water Supplies, including all provisions of
§ 105-7 prior to the issuance of the first occupancy permit.
§ 105-7 DISORDERLY CONDUCT § 105-7
92:81
Chapter 106
FIREWORKS
§ 106-1. Display of fireworks.
It is the intent of this chapter to recognize the need for regulation of the
display of fireworks for residential and/or commercial displays to assure
the safety of the spectators, property owners, citizens, and visitors of West
Hanover Township.
§ 106-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings given to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
APA 87-1 — The American Pyrotechnics Association Standard 87-1:
Standard for Construction and Approval for Transportation of Fireworks,
Novelties, and Theatrical Pyrotechnics, 2001 edition, or any subsequent
edition.
CONSUMER FIREWORKS —
DISPLAY FIREWORKS — Large fireworks to be used solely by professional
pyrotechnicians and designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects
by combustion, deflagration or detonation. The term includes, but is not
limited to:
Any combustible or explosive composition or any substance or
combination of substances which is intended to produce visible or
audible effects by combustion, is suitable for use by the public, complies
with the construction, performance, composition and labeling
requirements promulgated by the Consumer Products Safety
Commission in 16 CFR (relating to commercial practices) or any
successor regulation and complies with the provisions for consumer
fireworks as defined in APA 87-1 or any successor standard, the sale,
possession and use of which shall be permitted throughout this
commonwealth.
A.
The term does not include devices as "ground and hand-held sparkling
devices," "novelties" or "toy caps" in APA 87-1 or any successor
standard, the sale, possession and use of which shall be permitted at all
times throughout this commonwealth.
B.
Salutes that contain more than two grains or 130 milligrams of
explosive materials;
A.
Aerial shells containing more than 60 grams of pyrotechnic
compositions; and
B.
Other display pieces that exceed the limits of explosive materials for
classification as consumer fireworks and are classified as fireworks
C.
§ 105-7 WEST HANOVER CODE § 106-2
92:82
MUNICIPALITY — City, borough, incorporated town or township.
NFPA 1124 — The National Fire Protection Association Standard 1124,
Code for the Manufacture, Transportation and Storage of Fireworks and
Pyrotechnic Articles, 2006 edition, or any subsequent edition.
OCCUPIED STRUCTURE — A structure, vehicle or place adapted for
overnight accommodation of persons or for conducting business, whether
or not a person is actually present.
OUTDOOR STORAGE UNIT — A consumer fireworks building, trailer,
semitrailer, metal shipping container or magazine meeting the
specifications of NFPA 1124.
PROXIMATE AUDIENCE — An audience closer to pyrotechnic devices than
permitted by NFPA 1123, Code for Fireworks Displays.
PYROTECHNIC DEVICE — Any device containing pyrotechnic materials
and capable of producing visual or audible effects by combustion,
deflagration, or detonation.
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE — A structure, other than a permanent facility
with fixed utility connections, which is in use or in place for a period of
20 consecutive calendar days or less and is dedicated to the storage and
sale of consumer fireworks and related items. The term includes temporary
retail sales stands, tents, canopies and membrane structures meeting the
specifications of NFPA 1124. The term shall not include a facility that is not
licensed to sell consumer fireworks under this chapter.
§ 106-3. Regulations and codes.
Fireworks storage, transportation, and displays are regulated through laws,
codes and standards within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, including:
§ 106-4. Township permit requirements.
UN0333, UN0334 or UN0335 under 49 CFR 172.101 (relating to
purpose and use of hazardous materials table).
A. International Building Code (IBC) - latest edition, as amended.
B. International Fire Code (IFC) - latest edition, as amended.
C. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 1123 - Code for Fireworks
Display - latest edition, as amended.
D. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 1126 - Use of Pyrotechnics
Before a Proximate Audience - latest edition, as amended.
E. Title 49 CFR, Federal Regulation for Transport.
F. Title 27 CFR 181, Commerce in Explosives.
G. NFPA 1124 - Code for the Manufacture, Transportation and Storage of
Fireworks and Pyrotechnic Articles, 2006 edition.
§ 106-2 DISORDERLY CONDUCT § 106-4
92:83
§ 106-5. Fire protection coverage.
A. All fireworks display operators shall be technicians licensed by the
State of Pennsylvania Fire Marshal's Office and shall submit proof of
same to the Township Zoning Officer.
B. Applicants shall submit a transient retail business permit application
per Chapter 182, Township Ordinance 2012-15.
C. Applicants shall submit a full site plan that identifies the full operation
on site (firing zone with all separation distances indicated, drop zone
with separation distances indicated, audience areas with separation
distances indicated, separation distance to all structures on site and
wood areas, etc.).
D. Submit affidavit letter from legal property owners granting permission
of fireworks display. (All parties must sign letter.)
E. Submit certificate of insurance as required by State Fire Marshal, with
additional insured "West Hanover Township rider."
F. Submit application 10 work days prior to the event; indicate time of
display.
G. Applicants must contact Pennsylvania State Police Troop H and put
them on notice of intended display activities for the record.
H. Applicants must contact the West Hanover Township Fire Marshal to
inform him of display activities for the record.
I. All approved permits shall be on site and made available to the West
Hanover Township Fire Marshal during event.
J. Applicants shall provide West Hanover Township with proof of a bond in
the amount of $100,000 and/or a public liability insurance policy in the
amount of $100,000.
K. Applicants shall submit a (MSDS) material safety data sheet for all
products being used during any operation within the jurisdiction of
West Hanover Township with their permit application.
A. The West Hanover Township Fire Marshal shall determine what, if any,
Fire Department resources will be required to stand by during the
event. The Township Fire Marshal shall make the final decision as to the
safety of the scene and grant or deny permission for the display to
proceed after evaluating the current site conditions at the proposed
time.
B. Applicants shall be responsible for reimbursing the West Hanover
Township Fire Company for fees determined by the Fire Marshal to
cover the cost of manpower, apparatus, fire, police and any other
accessories necessary to cover applicant fireworks display activities. All
§ 106-4 WEST HANOVER CODE § 106-5
92:84
§ 106-6. Hours of detonation.
No person shall detonate or discharge or cause to be detonated or
discharged or permit to be detonated or discharged on his property any
fireworks within West Hanover Township after the hour of 10:30 p.m. daily,
prevailing time.
§ 106-7. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 108
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 78.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 88.
Sewers — See Ch. 158.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
173.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 108-0. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,30 delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote the public health, safety, and the general welfare of
its citizenry. Therefore, the Board of Supervisors of West Hanover Township
does hereby order as follows.
§ 108-1. Scope.
fees must be paid to the Fire Company prior to permit issuance by the
Zoning Officer.
A. Penalty for violation. Any person who violates the provisions of this
chapter shall commit a civil violation punishable by a penalty of not less
than $100 and not more than $500. Each day such violation occurs or
continues shall constitute a separate violation, plus court costs.
B. Penalty for willful violation. Any person who violates the provisions of
this chapter after having been informed by the Zoning Officer or Fire
Marshal of West Hanover Township that a planned or anticipated
detonation or discharge of fireworks would violate this chapter shall be
fined $10,000, plus court costs.
A. The intent of this chapter is to:
30.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 106-5 DISORDERLY CONDUCT § 108-1
92:85
§ 108-2. Definitions.
(1) Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
(2) Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in
order to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
(3) Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
(4) Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its
governmental units, and its residents by preventing excessive
development in areas subject to flooding.
(5) Comply with federal and state floodplain management
requirements.
B. Applicability.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or
corporation to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any
construction or development anywhere within West Hanover
Township unless a permit has been obtained from the Floodplain
Administrator.
(2) A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing
buildings or structures.
C. Abrogation and greater restrictions. This chapter supersedes any other
conflicting provisions which may be in effect in identified floodplain
areas. However, any other ordinance provisions shall remain in full
force and effect to the extent that those provisions are more restrictive.
If there is any conflict between any of the provisions of this chapter, the
more restrictive provision shall apply.
D. Identification.
(1) The identified floodplain area shall be any areas of West Hanover
Township classified as special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) in the
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood
Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated August 2, 2012, and issued by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or the most
recent revision thereof, including all digital data developed as part
of the Flood Insurance Study.
(2) The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs and any subsequent revisions
and amendments are hereby adopted by West Hanover Township
and declared to be part of the chapter.
(3) Also see § 195-71A through D for additional classifications.
§ 108-1 WEST HANOVER CODE § 108-2
92:86
A. General. Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in
this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most
reasonable application.
B. Specific definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year (formerly called the "onehundred-
year flood").
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground
level on all sides.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or
walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons,
animals or property, including covered porches or bay windows and
chimneys.
COMPLETELY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain totally dry
during flooding; the structure is designed and constructed to prevent
the passage of water and water vapors.
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, reconstruction, renovation,
repair, extension, expansion, alteration or relocation of a building or
structure, including the placement of manufactured homes.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to the construction,
reconstruction, renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings
or other structures; the placement of manufactured homes; streets and
other paving; utilities; filling, grading, excavation; mining; dredging;
drilling operations; storage of equipment or materials; and the
subdivision of land.
ESSENTIALLY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain dry during
flooding, except for the passage of some water vapor or minor seepage;
the structure is substantially impermeable.
EXISTING USE — The use of a lot or structure at the time of the
enactment of this chapter.
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal
Insurance Administration (FIA) has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood
§ 108-2 DISORDERLY CONDUCT § 108-2
92:87
Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream,
river or watercourse, and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid
accumulation of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR — The person or persons appointed
by the Board of Supervisors to administer and enforce both Article
XV of Chapter 195 and Chapter 108, Floodplain Management. For this
chapter, this would be the Codes Administrator or his designee.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than one foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES — Any structure that is:
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT — The floodplain area
specifically identified in this chapter as being inundated by the base
or one-percent-annual-chance flood event (BFE). Included would be
districts identified as Floodway (FW), Flood-Fringe (FF) and General
Floodplain (FA).
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register; or
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; or
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation that have been certified by
either an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior or directly by the Secretary in states without
approved programs.
(4)
§ 108-2 WEST HANOVER CODE § 108-2
92:88
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest enclosed area (including basement) of a
structure. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
the parking of vehicles, building access or incidental storage, in an area
other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor,
provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure
in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this
chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for
use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term
"manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers,
recreational vehicles, and other similar vehicles on a site for greater
than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes, the term
"manufactured home" does not include park trailers, travel trailers,
recreational vehicles, and other similar vehicles.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured
home lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but
not including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof,
the removal of any structural beam or bearing support, or the removal
or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts
of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement of or relocation
of any standpipe, water supply, sewer drainage, drain leader, gas, soil,
waste, vent of similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other
work affecting public health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after March 17, 1980, and includes subsequent
improvements thereto.
OBSTRUCTION — Any wall, dam, wharf, embankment, levee, dike,
pile abutment, projection, excavation, channel, rectification, culvert,
building, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along,
across or projecting into any channel, watercourse or flood-prone area
which may impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of water
either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such
water or in places where the flow of the water might carry the same
downstream to the damage of life and property.
ONE-PERCENT-ANNUAL-CHANCE FLOOD EVENT (BFE) — A flood
that on average is likely to occur 1% of the time within a given year.
Otherwise known as a "base flood." This used to be referred to as a
"one-hundred-year flood."
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (for floodplain management ordinance only)
— A vehicle which is built on a single chassis, is not greater than 400
§ 108-2 DISORDERLY CONDUCT § 108-2
92:89
square feet at full expansion, is either self-propelled or towable by a
light-duty truck, is not designed for use as a permanent dwelling, but is
designed for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-percent-annual-chance
flood elevation plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding within any given
year. It is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, or AH.
SPECIAL PERMIT — A special approval which is required when such
development is totally or partially located in a designated portion of a
floodplain.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date a building permit is issued for
any new or modification to a structure, provided that the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. "Actual start" means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation,
or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. For the
purposes of this chapter, construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; the installation of
streets and/or walkways; excavation for a basement, footings, piers or
foundation or the erection of temporary forms; the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, "actual start of construction" means the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or
not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division, combination, or redivision of a lot, tract
or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or
other divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by a court for
distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot
development. The leasing of land for agricultural purposes into parcels
of more than 10 acres, not involving any new streets or easement of
access, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
§ 108-2 WEST HANOVER CODE § 108-2
92:90
§ 108-3. Permit application review; issuance.
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not include any project for improvement
of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the
local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary
to assure safe living conditions. This term also does not include any
alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration will not
preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building
code adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999, as
amended, applicable to new construction in all municipalities, whether
administered by the municipality, a third party, or the Department of
Labor and Industry. Applicable to residential and commercial buildings,
the Code adopted the International Residential Code (IRC) and the
International Building Code (IBC), by reference and as amended, as the
construction standard applicable with the state floodplain construction.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community's floodplain management
regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation
certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance
required in 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or
(e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
A. The Codes Administrator is hereby appointed to administer and enforce
this chapter and is referred to herein as the "Floodplain Administrator."
The Floodplain Administrator may 1) fulfill the duties and
responsibilities set forth in these regulations, 2) delegate duties and
responsibilities set forth in these regulations to qualified technical
personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and other employees, or 3) enter
into a written agreement or written contract with another agency or
private-sector entity to administer specific provisions of these
regulations. Administration of any part of these regulations by another
entity shall not relieve the community of its responsibilities pursuant to
the participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Program as set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44 CFR
59.22.
B. Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the Floodplain
Administrator shall review the application for permit to determine if all
other necessary governmental permits required by state and federal
laws have been obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act (Act 1966-537, as amended);31 the Pennsylvania
Dam Safety and Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended);32 the
31.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 108-2 DISORDERLY CONDUCT § 108-3
92:91
United States Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1334; and
the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended).33 No
permit shall be issued until this determination has been made.
C. During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable laws and ordinances. That
person shall make as many inspections during and upon completion of
the work as are necessary.
D. In addition to the permit during the construction period, a placard or
building permit card shall be displayed on the premises. This card shall
show the number of the permit and the date of issuance and be signed
by the Floodplain Administrator.
E. In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
F. In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Board of Supervisors for
whatever action it considers necessary.
G. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain all records associated with
the requirements of this chapter, including, but not limited to,
permitting, inspection and enforcement.
H. The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of the 34
Pa. Code and the 2009 International Building Code and 2009
International Residential Code or latest revisions thereof. A permit shall
be required before any construction or development is undertaken
within any area of West Hanover Township.
I. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to West
Hanover Township, based upon an estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the Floodplain Administrator and as
incorporated into the Township's Fee Resolution Schedule.
J. After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no
changes of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of
the plans, specifications or other documents submitted with the
application without the written consent or approval of the Floodplain
Administrator. Requests for any such change shall be in writing and
32.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
33.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 108-3 WEST HANOVER CODE § 108-3
92:92
§ 108-4. Encroachments, alterations or improvements.
§ 108-5. Application procedure and requirements.
In addition to the information and documentation ordinarily required for
building permits and before the start of construction, applicants shall also
include the following specific information along with any application for
construction or development within any floodplain district:
shall be submitted by the applicant to the Floodplain Administrator for
consideration.
A. No encroachments, alteration or improvements of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which may be
affected by such action have been notified by the municipality and until
all required permits or approvals have been first obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection, Bureau of Dams and
Waterway Management.
B. No encroachment, alterations or improvements of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity will
not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse in
any way.
C. In addition, the Federal Insurance Administration and the Pennsylvania
Department of Community and Economic Development, Bureau of
Community Planning, shall be notified by the municipality prior to any
alteration or relocation of any watercourse.
A. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain areas, applicants for building
permits shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail
and clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this chapter and all
other applicable codes and ordinances;
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, water
systems, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities, shall be designed,
constructed and/or located so as to minimize or eliminate flood
damage; and
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
(4) Structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement.
(5) Building materials shall be flood-resistant.
(6) Appropriate measures that minimize flood damage shall be used.
§ 108-3 DISORDERLY CONDUCT § 108-5
92:93
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
B. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
(1) A completed building permit application form, containing, but not
limited to, the following:
(a) The name and address of the applicant.
(b) The name and address of the owner of the land on which
proposed construction is to occur.
(c) The name and address of the contractor.
(d) Site location, including address.
(e) A listing of other permits required.
(f) A brief description of the proposed work and estimated cost,
including a breakout of flood-related cost and market value of
the building before the flood damage occurred where
appropriate.
(g) A site plan showing the exact size and location of the proposed
construction as well as any existing buildings or structures.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale and date.
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available.
(c) All property and lot lines, including dimensions and the size
expressed in acres or square feet.
(d) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and land development.
(e) The location of all existing streets, drives and other
accessways.
(f) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water, including
directions and velocities.
C. Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements,
drawn at suitable scale, showing the following:
§ 108-5 WEST HANOVER CODE § 108-5
92:94
(1) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building based
upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988.
(2) The elevation of the base flood.
(3) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a base flood.
(4) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures.
D. The following data and documentation:
(1) When any part of a proposed structure or a substantial
improvement to an existing structure is to be built below the
elevation of the base flood, the applicant must submit a document,
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, which
states that the proposed construction has been adequately
designed to withstand the base flood depths, pressures, velocities,
impact and uplift forces associated with the base flood elevation.
(a) Such statement shall include a description of the type and
extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
(b) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect
to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within a Special Floodplain Area, when combined
with all other existing and anticipated development, will not
increase the base flood elevation. [See also § 195-72B(1)(a).]
(2) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 108-10F, Storage, and § 108-12, Development which may
endanger human life, including:
(a) The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 108-10F and 108-12 which are
intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise be
maintained on site.
(b) A description of the safeguards incorporated into the design of
the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills of the
dangerous materials or substances listed in § 108-12 during a
base flood.
(3) The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental
Protection's Planning Module for Land Development.
(4) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the
requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection, to
implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation control.
§ 108-5 DISORDERLY CONDUCT § 108-5
92:95
E. An applicant for special permits shall provide five copies of the
following items:
(1) A written request including a completed building permit
application form.
(2) A small scale map showing the vicinity in which the proposed site is
located.
(3) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale and date.
(b) Topography based upon the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
of 1929, showing existing and proposed contours at intervals of
two feet.
(c) All property and lot lines, including dimensions, and the size of
the site expressed in acres or square feet.
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, other accessways
and parking areas, with information concerning widths,
pavement types and construction, and elevations.
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
buildings, structures and other public or private facilities,
including railroad tracks and facilities, and any other natural
and man-made features affecting, or affected by, the proposed
activity or development;
(f) The location of the floodplain boundary line, information and
spot elevations concerning the one-hundred-year-flood
elevations, and information concerning the flow of water,
including direction and velocities.
(g) The location of all proposed buildings, structures, utilities and
any other improvements.
(h) Any other information which the municipality considers
necessary for adequate review of the application.
F. Plan of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements,
clearly and legibly drawn at suitable scale, showing the following:
(1) Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings,
including floor plans, sections and exterior building elevations, as
appropriate.
(2) For any proposed building, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and, as required, the elevation of any other
floor.
§ 108-5 WEST HANOVER CODE § 108-5
92:96
(3) Complete information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other factors associated
with the one-hundred-year flood.
(4) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures.
(5) Cross-section drawings for all proposed streets, drives, other
accessways and parking areas, showing all rights-of-way and
pavement widths.
(6) Profile drawings for all proposed streets, drives and vehicular
accessways, existing and proposed grades.
(7) Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer
systems, water supply systems and any other utilities and facilities.
G. The following data and documentation:
(1) Certification from the applicant that the site upon which the
activity or development is proposed is an existing separate and
single parcel, owned by the applicant or the client he represents.
(2) Certification from a registered professional engineer, architect or
landscape architect that the proposed construction has been
adequately designed to protect against damage from the onehundred-
year flood.
(3) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, landscape architect or other qualified person, which
contains a complete and accurate description of the nature and
extent of pollution that might possibly occur from the development
during the course of a one-hundred-year flood, including a
statement concerning the effects such pollution may have on
human life.
(4) A statement certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect or landscape architect which contains a complete and
accurate description of the effects proposed development will have
on one-hundred-year-flood elevations and flows.
(5) A statement certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect or landscape architect which contains a complete and
accurate description of the kinds and amounts of any loose buoyant
materials or debris that may possibly exist or be located on the site
below the one-hundred-year-flood elevation and the effect such
materials and debris may have on one-hundred-year-flood
elevations and flows.
(6) The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental
Protection's Planning Module for Land Development.
§ 108-5 DISORDERLY CONDUCT § 108-5
92:97
§ 108-6. Review by County Conservation District.
A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed construction or
development in any floodplain district to be considered for approval shall
be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to the County Conservation
District, or any other agencies and/or individuals, for review and comment
prior to the issuance of a permit. The recommendations of the Conservation
District shall be considered by the Floodplain Administrator for possible
incorporation into the proposed plan.
§ 108-7. General technical provisions.
In order to prevent excessive damage to buildings and structures due to
flooding, the following provisions in §§ 108-8 through 108-10 shall apply to
all proposed construction or development occurring in any of the floodplain
districts identified in Chapter 195, Zoning, as amended.
§ 108-8. Residential structures.
§ 108-9. Nonresidential structures.
(7) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the
requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection to
implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation control.
(8) Any other applicable permits, such as but not limited to a permit for
any activity regulated by the Department of Environmental
Protection under Section 302 of Act 1978-166.
(9) An evacuation plan which fully explains the manner in which the
site will be safely evacuated before or during the course of a onehundred-
year flood.
H. Time extensions. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written
request is submitted by the applicant which sets forth sufficient and
reasonable cause for the Floodplain Administrator to approve such a
request.
A. Within the A, AO, AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, the lowest floor (including
basement) of any new construction of, or substantial improvement to,
residential structures shall be at least 1 1/2 feet above the base flood
elevation.
B. The design and construction standards and specifications contained in
the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the 2009
International Residential Code (IRC), or the most recent revisions
thereof, and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405, as
amended) shall be utilized.
A. Within the A, AO, AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, the lowest floor (including
basement) of any new construction of, or substantial improvement to,
nonresidential structures shall be at least 1 1/2 feet above the base
§ 108-5 WEST HANOVER CODE § 108-9
92:98
§ 108-10. General design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed to be undertaken within any identified floodplain
area:
flood elevation or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed by such structure shall remain either completely or essentially
dry during any flood up to that height, and has structural components
with the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and
effects of buoyancy.
B. Any non-residential structure, or part thereof, made watertight below
the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in accordance with
the W1 or W2 space classification standards contained in the
publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations" published by the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as amended March 1992) or with
some other equivalent standard. All plans and specifications for such
floodproofing shall be accompanied by a statement certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect which states that the
proposed design and methods of construction are in conformance with
the above-referenced standards.
C. The design and construction standards and specifications contained in
the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the 2009
International Residential Code (IRC), or the most recent revisions
thereof, and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405, as
amended) shall be utilized.
A. Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
(1) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line for all
points.
(2) Consist of soil or small rock materials only. Sanitary landfills shall
not be permitted.
(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring, or settling.
(4) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to and
approved by the Floodplain Administrator.
(5) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent
properties.
B. Drainage. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow
of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The system shall
ensure proper drainage along streets and provide positive drainage
away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to prevent the
discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
§ 108-9 DISORDERLY CONDUCT § 108-10
92:99
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water and sanitary sewer facilities and
systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within any
identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all state
and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it or
contamination from it during a flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA No.
348, Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages, and the
International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be used.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities, such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems, shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or, in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal or plant life, and
not listed in § 108-12, Development which may endanger human life,
shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation and/or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have the
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain, without causing structural
damage to the building.
§ 108-10 WEST HANOVER CODE § 108-10
92:100
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
(5) For all new construction and substantial improvements, fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding
shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces
on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters.
(6) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria. A minimum of two openings
having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided;
the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade; and openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. The term "fully enclosed space" also
includes crawl spaces.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of a marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant quality.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall be
finished with a marine or water-resistant paint or other finishing
material.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
one-hundred-year flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating
units and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus
shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
§ 108-10 DISORDERLY CONDUCT § 108-10
92:101
§ 108-11. Special provisions for certain development within
floodplain districts.
In addition to the provisions of §§ 108-7 through 108-10, technical
provisions, and all other applicable provisions of this chapter, the following
special provisions in §§ 108-12 through 108-15 shall apply to certain kinds
of proposed construction and development occurring in any of the floodplain
districts identified in Chapter 195, Zoning, as amended.
§ 108-12. Development which may endanger human life.
from the system into the floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be
made for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
N. The standards and specifications contained in 34 Pa. Code (Chapters
401 through 405), as amended, and not limited to the following
provisions, shall apply to the above and other sections and subsections
of this chapter, to the extent that they are more restrictive and/or
supplement the requirements of this chapter:
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition
thereof: Sections 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and
Appendix G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009, or the latest
edition thereof: Sections R104, R105, R109, R323, Appendix
AE101, Appendix E, and Appendix J.
O. Work on the proposed construction and/or development shall begin
within 180 days after the date of issuance of the permit and shall be
completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of the permit, or
the permit shall expire unless a time extension is requested in writing
by the developer showing cause and is granted by the Floodplain
Administrator. Construction and/or development shall be considered to
have started with the preparation of land, land clearing, grading, filling,
excavation of basement, footings, piers, or foundations, erection of
temporary forms, the installation of piling under proposed subsurface
footings, or the installation of sewer, gas and water pipes, or electrical
or other service lines from the street.
A. List of dangerous materials; prohibited structures.
(1) In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management
Act,34 and the regulations adopted by the Department of
Community and Economic Development as required by the Act, any
new or substantially improved structure which will be used for the
production or storage of any of the following dangerous materials
or substances; or will be used for any activity requiring the
34.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 108-10 WEST HANOVER CODE § 108-12
92:102
maintenance of a supply of more than 550 gallons, or other
comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous materials or
substances on the premises; or will involve the production, storage,
or use of any amount of radioactive substances shall be subject
to the provisions of this section, in addition to all other applicable
provisions. The following is a list of materials and substances that
are considered dangerous to human life:
Acetone
Ammonia
Benzene
Calcium carbide
Carbon disulfide
Celluloid
Chlorine
Hydrochloric acid
Hydrocyanic acid
Magnesium
Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen
Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.)
Phosphorus
Potassium
Sodium
Sulphur and sulphur products
Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides)
Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
(2) Within any Floodway Area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection A, above, shall be prohibited.
B. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or
substantially improved residential structure of the kind described in
§ 108-12A above shall be elevated to remain completely dry up to at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation.
C. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or
substantially improved nonresidential structure of the kind described in
§ 108-12A above shall be:
(1) Elevated or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up
to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation; and
(2) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity during
the course of a base flood.
§ 108-12 DISORDERLY CONDUCT § 108-12
92:103
§ 108-13. (Reserved)
§ 108-14. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
§ 108-15. Existing structures in floodplain districts.
Structures existing in any floodplain district prior to the enactment of
this chapter, but which are not in compliance with these provisions, any
continue to remain, subject to the following:
Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing
contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations" (U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972, as amended March 1992), or
with some other equivalent watertight standard.
A. Within any Floodway Area (FW), manufactured homes shall be
prohibited.
B. Within any Approximate Floodplain or Special Floodplain Area,
manufactured homes shall be prohibited within the area measured 50
feet from the edge of the Approximate or Special Floodplain Area.
C. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, all manufactured
homes, and any improvements thereto, shall be:
(1) Placed on a permanent foundation.
(2) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation.
(3) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
D. Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with
the manufacturer's installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 International
Residential Building Code or the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development's "Permanent Foundations for Manufactured
Housing," 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto, and 34 Pa. Code
Chapters 401 through 405 shall apply.
E. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 International Building Code and the 2009 International
Residential Code or the most recent revisions thereto and 34 Pa. Code,
as amended where appropriate and/or applicable to units where the
manufacturer's standards for anchoring cannot be provided or were not
established for the proposed unit's (units') installation.
A. Existing structures located in any Floodway District shall not be
expanded or enlarged, unless the effect of the proposed expansion or
§ 108-12 WEST HANOVER CODE § 108-15
92:104
§ 108-16. Variances.
enlargement on flood heights is fully offset by accompanying streams
improvements.
B. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any kind
to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or more of its
market value, shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
C. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any kind
to an existing structure, to an extent or amount less than 50% of its
market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest
extent possible.
A. General. If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter
would result in an exceptional hardship for the prospective builder,
developer, or landowner, the Township may, upon request, grant relief
from the strict application of the requirements.
B. Variance procedures and requirements. Requests for variances shall be
considered by the Township in accordance with § 195-199 and the
following:
(1) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use or activity within any Floodway Area that would cause any
increase in the one-hundred-year flood elevation.
(2) Except for a possible modification of the freeboard requirements
involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the other
requirements pertaining specifically to development regulated by
special permit (§ 108-13) or to development which may endanger
human life (§ 108-12).
(3) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(4) In granting any variance, the Township shall attach reasonable
conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in order to
protect the public health, safety and welfare and to achieve the
objectives of this chapter.
(5) Whenever a variance is granted, the Township shall notify the
applicant, in writing, that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(6) In reviewing any request for a variance, the Township shall
consider but not be limited to the following:
§ 108-15 DISORDERLY CONDUCT § 108-16
92:105
§ 108-17. Violations and penalties.
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(c) That the granting of the variance would not result in an
unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public
expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of
the public or conflict with any other applicable local or state
ordinance and regulations.
(7) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by the Township. In addition, a report shall be
included in the annual report to the Federal Insurance
Administration.
C. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-hundred-year flood.
A. Notice. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator determines that there
are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provision of this chapter or of any regulation adopted pursuant thereto,
the Floodplain Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation
as hereinafter provided. Such notices shall:
(1) Be in writing.
(2) Include the specific violation with a description of the requirements
which have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable
provisions of the chapter.
(3) Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the
performance of any act it requires.
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any
method authorized or required by the laws of this commonwealth.
(5) Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(6) Include the name of the owner of record and any other person
against whom the municipality intends to take action.
(7) Include the location of the violation.
§ 108-16 WEST HANOVER CODE § 108-17
92:106
(8) Include the date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(9) Include that the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to
the municipal Board of Supervisors within a prescribed period of
time in accordance with procedures set forth in the chapter and the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.35
(10) Include that the failure to comply with the notice within the time
specified, unless extended by an appeal to the Municipal Board of
Supervisors, constitutes a violation with sanctions clearly defined.
B. Penalties.
(1) Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the requirements
or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to comply with
any notice, order or direction of the Floodplain Administrator shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall pay a fine to
West Hanover Township of not more than $500 plus costs of
prosecution.
(2) In addition to the above penalties, all other actions are hereby
reserved, including an action in equity for the proper enforcement
of the chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation
of, or noncompliance with, this chapter shall not excuse the
violation or noncompliance, or permit it to continue, and all such
persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violation and
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development
initiated or any structure or building constructed, reconstructed,
enlarged, altered, or relocated in noncompliance with this chapter
may be declared by the Board of Supervisors to be a public
nuisance and abatable as such.
C. Appeals.
(1) Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of
this chapter may appeal to the West Hanover Township Board of
Supervisors. Such appeal must be filed in writing, within 30 days
after the decision, determination or action of the Floodplain
Administrator.
(2) Upon receipt of such appeal, the West Hanover Township Board of
Supervisors shall set a time and place, within no less than 10 and
not more than 30 days, for the purpose of considering the appeal.
Notice of the time and place at which the appeal will be considered
shall be given to all parties.
35.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 108-17 DISORDERLY CONDUCT § 108-17
92:107
§ 108-18. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of the chapter, which shall remain in
full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter are
hereby declared to be severable.
§ 108-19. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
Chapter 116
HAZARDOUS WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 165.
§ 116-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Hazardous Waste
Ordinance of West Hanover Township."
§ 116-2. Purposes.
The purposes of this chapter are as follows:
(3) Any person aggrieved by any decision of West Hanover Township
may seek relief by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of the
commonwealth, including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain
Management Act.36
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as
ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not
imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas or that land uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of West Hanover
Township or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
36.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 108-17 WEST HANOVER CODE § 116-2
116:108
§ 116-3. Statutory authority.
This chapter is adopted and enacted pursuant to the authority granted to
the township by the Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in
the following enacted statutes:
§ 116-4. Definitions.
The following definitions shall be applicable to this chapter:
DEP — The Department of Environmental Protection of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS WASTES — A solid, liquid or gaseous waste or
a combination of solid, liquid or gaseous wastes which, because of the
quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics,
may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an
A. To promote, protect and facilitate the public health, safety and general
welfare of all township citizens by preventing the discharge of
potentially hazardous contaminants.
B. To prohibit the discharge off site of all hazardous and toxic wastes
within West Hanover Township (hereinafter "township").
C. To preserve the fragile environmental qualities of all land and waters
within the township.
D. To establish a local ordinance in accordance with Chapter 1 of the
Pennsylvania Hazardous Waste Facilities Plan (Adopted July 15, 1986,
by the Environmental Quality Board of the Department of
Environmental Protection).
A. The sections of the Second Class Township Code authorizing the
township to enact ordinances dealing with the protection of the health
of township residents, refuse materials, nuisances and public safety,
codified in Volume 53 of Purdon's Consolidated Statutes of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, at §§ 65729, 65708,37 6571238 and
65747,39 as amended.
B. The applicable provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code dealing with zoning ordinances codified at Volume 53 of Purdon's
Consolidated Statutes of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania at
§§ 10601 and 10603, as amended.
C. The applicable provisions of the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management
Act, codified at Volume 35 of Purdon's Consolidated Statutes of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania at § 6018.101 et seq, as amended.40
37.Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. §§ 67101 through 67107.
38.Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. § 66529.
39.Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. § 66527.
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 116-2 HAZARDOUS WASTE § 116-4
116:109
increase in serious irreversible illness or incapacitating reversible illness;
or pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the
environment when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed of or
otherwise managed. This definition is intended to include but not be limited
to those toxic or hazardous wastes as identified in:
§ 116-5. Legislative policy.41
The Board of Supervisors of West Hanover Township recognizes that legal
control of waste disposal has been delegated to the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) pursuant to 35 P.S.
§ 6018.101 et seq. It is not the intention of the township to abrogate such
authority granted to the DEP. However, it is the intention of the township
to impose additional or complementary requirements to meet the needs of
the public safety and the public health of all residents of West Hanover
Township.
§ 116-6. Discharge of toxic or hazardous wastes prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to dump, discharge or to place in or upon the ground
or waters located within West Hanover Township, Dauphin County,
Pennsylvania, any quantity of toxic or hazardous wastes.
§ 116-7. Storage of toxic or hazardous wastes.
It shall be unlawful for any person to provide temporary or permanent
storage for toxic or hazardous wastes, as defined in this chapter, at any
place or on any property or street within West Hanover Township until all
of the state and federal regulations have been met. This shall include the
certificate of public necessity for all new sites, which requires four factors
for consideration:
40 CFR, Part 261, Identification and Listing of Hazardous Waste, as
amended, (published in the Federal Register, Vol. 45, No. 98, Monday,
May 19, 1980) as may be amended; and
A.
Chapter 75, Sections 75.261 to 75.267, of Title 25, DEP Rules and
Regulations, Subchapter C, as may be amended from time to time.
B.
A. The extent to which the facility is in conformance with the Pennsylvania
Hazardous Waste Facilities Plan;
B. The impact of the proposed facility on adjacent populated areas
through which wastes are transported to such facility;
C. The impact on the borough, township, town or city in which the facility
is to be located in terms of health, safety, cost and consistency with
local planning; and
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 116-4 WEST HANOVER CODE § 116-7
116:110
§ 116-8. Specific limitations on storage of hazardous waste.
§ 116-9. Protection of citizens; public hearings.
D. The extent to which the proposed facility has been the subject of a
public participation program in which citizens have had a meaningful
opportunity to participate in evaluation of alternate sites or
technologies, development of siting criteria, socioeconomic assessment
and all other phases of the site selection process.
A. The waste facility shall be completely surrounded by a ten-foot-high
Cyclone security fencing with locked gates; have adequate lighting to
illuminate fully the entirety of said storage area; be limited to not more
than 10,000 gallons of stored liquid or 5,000 pounds of stored solids, all
within a transportable vehicle or self-propelled vehicle; and such
vehicle shall not remain upon the property or premises where stored for
a period greater than 24 hours.
B. Any vehicle containing toxic or hazardous wastes, while temporarily
stored, shall be located within and be completely surrounded by an
earth berm, fully lined with an impervious liner throughout, having a
containment capacity of not less than 15,000 gallons. All earth surfaces
within such containment area shall be made totally impervious to
infiltration by water or any other liquid.
C. The owner of any property who permits the permanent or temporary
storage of toxic or hazardous wastes thereon shall, personally or
through his agent, manager or other authorized employee, cause to be
displayed a prominent sign or placard identifying the prohibitions of
this section to members of the transient public and shall require
members of the transient public to utilize the required containment
area for the permanent or temporary storage of the toxic or hazardous
wastes.
D. The owner of any property upon which there shall be permanently or
temporarily stored any toxic or hazardous waste, whether or not such
storage shall be in compliance with the terms of this chapter, shall be
responsible for the cleanup and removal of any such toxic or hazardous
waste which may be discharged, accidentally or otherwise, upon the
property of the owner. If the owner of the property upon which the
discharge of toxic or hazardous waste occurs shall fail to clean up and
remove such wastes within a reasonable period of time, thereby
resulting in a potential danger to the health and safety of the residents
of West Hanover Township, the cleanup and removal of such toxic or
hazardous wastes may be performed by Emergency Management
Personnel of West Hanover Township, or by personnel engaged by the
Emergency Management Officer and, in such event, the owner of the
property upon which such discharge occurred shall be responsible to
pay for or make reimbursement for the cost incurred in the cleanup and
removal of the toxic or hazardous wastes.
§ 116-7 HAZARDOUS WASTE § 116-9
116:111
§ 116-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-1-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-4]
For any and every violation of the provisions of this chapter, the owner,
general agent or contractor for the premises where such violation has been
committed, or shall exist, and the lessee or tenant of premises where such
violation has been committed, or shall exist, and the owner, general agent,
contractor, lessee or tenant of any premises in which part such violation has
been committed or shall exist, or any other person who knowingly commits,
takes part or assists in any such violation, or who maintains premises in
which any such violation shall exist, shall be liable, upon conviction thereof,
to a penalty not to exceed $1,000 for each and every offense, and whenever
such person shall have been notified by the Code Enforcement Officer or
his designee by certified letter or by service of summons in a prosecution
that he is committing such violation of this chapter, each day that he shall
continue such violation after such notification shall constitute a separate
offense punishable by a like fine or penalty. It is further provided that, upon
judgment against any person by summary conviction, or by proceedings by
summons on default of the payment of the fine or penalty imposed and the
costs, the defendant may be sentenced and committed to the county prison
for a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 116-11. Enforcement.
The Board of Supervisors of West Hanover Township is hereby authorized
to institute any proceedings in any court of equity or court of law in order
to enforce the provisions of this chapter or to secure reimbursement or
payment of any costs required herein to be paid by any person.
A. It is the purview of the Board of Supervisors to protect its citizens by
holding public hearings to educate them on the impact of any siting or
other development within West Hanover Township that relates to this
chapter. Therefore, a minimum of two public hearings are to be held
concerning matters related to this chapter; the first, by the Planning
Commission, within one month of receiving written information on a
new siting or development as relates herein. A report of Findings of
Fact and Recommendation to the Board of Supervisors shall be
presented by the Planning Commission within 30 days following the
first hearing.
B. The second public hearing shall be held by the Board of Supervisors to
consider any recommendations to the DEP or action on a land
development/subdivision plat.
§ 116-9 WEST HANOVER CODE § 116-11
116:112
Chapter 121
INSURANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 81.
§ 116-11 INSURANCE § 116-11
121:113

ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance Claims
[Adopted 9-5-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-9]
§ 121-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
REMOVING, REPAIRING or SECURING — Shall not include the
reconstruction or rehabilitation of a fire-damaged structure, but shall be
limited to such acts or costs of removal thereof, repair thereto or securing
thereof as may reasonably be required in order to stabilize and/or secure
the fire-damaged structure in a fashion which will prevent the fire-damaged
structure from being a public nuisance or a threat to the health, safety or
welfare of the public.
§ 121-2. Designation of enforcing officer.
The Code Enforcement Officer of West Hanover Township, or such official's
designee, is hereby appointed as the designated officer who is authorized to
carry out the responsibilities and duties stated herein.
§ 121-3. Certificate required for payment of claims.
No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter the "insuring
agent") doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a
claim of a named insured for fire damage to a structure located within
West Hanover Township (hereinafter the "municipality") where the amount
recoverable for the fire loss to the structure under all policies exceeds
$7,500, unless the insuring agent is furnished by the Municipal Treasurer
with a municipal certificate pursuant to Section 508(B) of Act 98 of 1992,
as amended, and unless there is compliance with Section 508(C) and (D) of
Act 98 of 1992, as amended,42 and the provisions of this article.
§ 121-4. Payment of claims.
Where, pursuant to Section 508(B)(1)(I) of Act 98 of 1992, as amended,43
the Municipal Treasurer issues a certificate indicating that there are no
delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user charges against real
property, the insuring agent shall pay the claim of the named insured;
provided however, that if the loss agreed upon by the named insured
and the insuring agent equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of
liability on all fire policies covering the building restructure, the following
procedures must be followed:
A. Transfer of proceeds.
42.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638(b), (c) and (d), respectively.
43.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. §638(b)(1)(i).
§ 121-1 INSURANCE § 121-4
121:115
(1) The insuring agent shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to
the designated officer of the municipality in the aggregate $2,000
for each $15,000 of a claim and for each fraction of that amount of
a claim, this section to be applied such that if the claim is $15,000
or less, the amount transferred to the municipality shall be $2,000;
or
(2) If, at the time of a proof of loss agreed to between the named
insured and the insuring agent, the named insured has submitted a
contractor's signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or
securing the building or other structure, the insuring agent shall
transfer to the municipality from the insurance proceeds the
amount specified in the estimate.
B. The transfer of proceeds shall be on a pro rata basis by all companies,
associates or exchanges insuring the building or other structure.
C. After the transfer, the named insured may submit a contractor's signed
estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the building or
other structure, and the designated officer shall return the amount of
the funds transferred to the municipality in excess of the estimate to the
named insured, if the municipality has not commenced to remove,
repair or secure the building or other structure.
D. Upon receipt of proceeds under this section, the municipality shall do
the following:
(1) The designated officer shall place the proceeds in a separate fund
to be used solely as security against the total costs of removing,
repairing or securing the building or structure which are insured
by the municipality. Such costs shall include, without limitation,
any engineering, legal or administrative costs incurred by the
municipality in connection with such removal, repair or securing of
the building or any proceedings related thereto.
(2) It is the obligation of the insuring agent when transferring the
proceeds to provide the municipality with the name and address of
the named insured. Upon receipt of the transferred funds and the
names and address of the named insured, the designated officer
shall contact the named insured, certify that the proceeds have
been received by the municipality and notify the named insured
that the procedures under this subsection shall be followed.
(3) When repairs, removal or securing of the building or other
structure have been completed in accordance with all applicable
regulations and orders of the municipality and the required proof of
such completion received by the designated officer, and if the
municipality has not incurred any costs for repairs, removal or
securing, the fund shall be returned to the named insured. If the
municipality has incurred costs for repairs, removal or securing of
the building or other structure, the costs shall be paid from the
§ 121-4 WEST HANOVER CODE § 121-4
121:116
§ 121-5. Adoption of regulations and fees.
The Board of Supervisors may, by resolution, adopt procedures and
regulations to implement Act 98 of 1992, as amended,44 and this article,
and may by resolution fix reasonable fees to be charged for municipal
activities or services provided pursuant to Act 98 of 1992, as amended, and
this article, including but not limited to issuance of certificates and bills,
performance of inspections and the opening of separate fund accounts.
§ 121-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, association, firm, partnership or corporation who fails to
comply with the requirements of this article or any regulations issued
pursuant thereto shall be guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction
thereof before any District Justice, shall be sentenced to pay a fine not
exceeding $600, and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
thereof, shall be imprisoned in the Dauphin County Prison for not more than
30 days; however, any person, association, firm, partnership or corporation
who fails to comply with any of the requirements of this article pertaining
to the payment of insurance proceeds as security against the costs and
charges of securing a fire-damaged structure, or any regulations issued
pursuant thereto, shall be guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction
thereof before any District Justice, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of
not less than $1,000, and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
thereof, shall be imprisoned in the Dauphin County Prison for not more than
30 days.
fund and if excess funds remain, the municipality shall transfer the
remaining funds to the named insured.
(4) To the extent that interest is earned on proceeds held by the
municipality pursuant to this section, and not returned to the
named insured, such interest shall belong to the municipality. To
the extent that proceeds are returned to the named insured,
interest earned on such proceeds shall be distributed to the named
insured at the time that the proceeds are returned.
E. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the
municipality to recover any deficiency. Furthermore, nothing in this
subsection shall be construed to prohibit the municipality and the
named insured from entering into an agreement that permits the
transfer of funds to the named insured if some other reasonable
disposition of the damaged property has been negotiated.
44.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638.
§ 121-4 INSURANCE § 121-6
121:117
Chapter 126
KEY LOCK BOXES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Company — See Ch. 19.
Fire Marshal — See Ch. 22.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 103.
Fire Protection Districts — See Ch. 105.
§ 126-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Key Lock Box
Ordinance."
§ 126-2. Purpose.
In order to assist in providing effective response to emergency occurrences
in the Township and for the protection of public and private property, the
West Hanover Township Volunteer Fire Company must gain access to a
structure in order to inspect emergency situations and assess the need
for further action related to the emergency. In certain instances, when
responding to emergency calls initiated by a remote dialing automatic
detection or suppression system, entrance may be gained without forceful
entry in to the structure. To improve emergency response time and
minimize the need for forcible entry of a structure, the purpose of this
chapter is to require certain nonresidential structures to have secured
key lock box systems installed at the entrance of the structure to enable
members of the West Hanover Volunteer Fire Company to securely enter the
structure during an emergency occurrence detected by a remote response
dial-up automatic fire detection or suppression system and/or a 911 call.
§ 126-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall have
the meanings herein ascribed thereto unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
AUTOMATIC DETECTION SYSTEM — Any centrally monitored system,
device, equipment, mechanical, electrical or battery-operated arrangement
to activate a remote telephone calling response, alarm or signal of the
occurrence of a police, fire, hazard or medical emergency requiring urgent
attention and to which police, fire or EMS personnel are expected to
respond.
AUTOMATIC SUPPRESSION SYSTEM — Any system that automatically
detects a fire, activates an alarm and suppresses a fire by the application of
an extinguishing agent through fixed piping and nozzles.
CODE OFFICIAL — The individual appointed by the Board of Supervisors,
serving the Township as per the requirements of the Pennsylvania Uniform
§ 121-6 WEST HANOVER CODE § 126-3
126:118
Construction Code, and also responsible for the enforcement of the
Township's nuisance, property maintenance and other regulations identified
in the Township Code.[Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-9]
FIRE COMPANIES — All members and equipment of the West Hanover
Township Volunteer Fire Company.
FIRE EMERGENCY — A fire.
FIRE MARSHAL — The individual appointed by the Board of Supervisors
serving the Township as per the requirements of Chapter 22 of the
Township Code.[Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-9]
MEDICAL EMERGENCY — An emergency involving the health of a person.
PERSON — Any individual, group, firm, partnership, association, company,
corporation or organization of any kind.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — All members of the Pennsylvania State Police
Department.
POLICE EMERGENCY — Any incident requiring prompt response by the
Pennsylvania State Police.
REMOTE RESPONSE DIAL-UP AUTOMATIC DETECTION SYSTEM — An
automatic detection system that, upon detection of smoke or fire conditions
in a structure, activates an alarm and/or provides dial-up telephone contact
services to local emergency response agencies to which police, fire or EMS
personnel are engaged to respond.
REMOTE RESPONSE DIAL-UP AUTOMATIC SUPPRESSION SYSTEM —
An automatic suppression system that, upon detection of smoke or fire
conditions in a structure, activates a suppression system and/or provides
dial-up telephone contact services to local emergency response agencies to
which police, fire or EMS personnel are engaged to respond.
STRUCTURE — That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of West Hanover, Dauphin County,
Pennsylvania. 45
§ 126-4. Key lock box required. [Amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-9]
All structures within the Township having a remote response dial-up
automatic detection system and/or a remote response dial-up automatic
suppression system that are secured in a manner that restricts access
during an emergency, including, but not limited to commercial and
industrial structures, multifamily residential structures that have restricted
access through a locked door or have a common corridor for access to
the living units, government structures, health-care facilities and schools
and churches, shall be equipped with a key lock box at or near the main
45.Editor's Note: The former definition of “Township Manager,” which immediately followed
this definition, was repealed 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-9.
§ 126-3 KEY LOCK BOXES § 126-4
126:119
entrance or in such other location approved by the Code Official or Fire
Marshal.
§ 126-5. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
§ 126-6. Emergency access contingency plan. [Amended 11-7-2005
by Ord. No. 2005-9]
In unique circumstances only, nonexempt private nonresidential structures
with a remote response dial-up automatic detection system and/or a remote
response dial-up automatic suppression system may be exempt from this
ordinance upon approval of an emergency access contingency plan. The
property/business owner shall submit the plan in writing. The Code Official,
Fire Marshal and designated representatives of the West Hanover Township
Fire Company shall review and have final approval of the emergency access
contingency plans, which shall exempt the property/business owner from
these requirements in full or in part. Content of the emergency access
contingency plan shall be as follows:
§ 126-7. Time of compliance.
The owner of each structure constructed after the effective date of this
chapter and subject to this chapter shall have a key lock box installed and
A. Any nonresidential structure not serviced by a remote response dial-up
automatic detection system and/or a remote response dial-up automatic
suppression system;
B. Any nonresidential structure that has a remote response dial-up
automatic detection system and/or a remote response dial-up automatic
suppression system, but is open 24 hours a day with the owner and
responsible management in attendance at all times;
C. Single-family residential dwellings; and
D. PA State Police facilities.
A. Name of business.
B. Address of business.
C. Nature of business.
D. Justification for exemption.
E. Description of entrance process in event of emergency.
F. Listing of all permanent contact information.
G. Letter indemnifying WHTFC for damages caused in an emergency
response from a remote dialing alarm system.
§ 126-4 WEST HANOVER CODE § 126-7
126:120
operational prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit. The owner of each
existing structure subject to the requirements of this chapter shall have
one year from the effective date of this ordinance to have a key lock box
installed and operational.
§ 126-8. Key lock box type. [Amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-9]
The key lock box shall be an Underwriter's Laboratory approved model as
approved by the Fire Marshal. The key lock box shall be equipped with a
lock which can be opened only with a key that is issued to the Fire Marshal.
Emergency vehicles shall each be equipped with one key that is held in
a special security device. The owner of the structure is prohibited from
obtaining or otherwise possessing a key to open the lock box.
§ 126-9. Location. [Amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-9]
The key lock box shall be mounted on the structure entrance at a height of
four feet and within three feet thereof or such other location approved by
the Township Code Official or Fire Marshal. Flush-mounted or recessed key
lock box installations shall be permitted, provided that the key lock box is
clearly marked.
§ 126-10. Inspection following installation. [Amended 11-7-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-9]
Once the key lock box is installed, the owner of the structure shall contact
the Township Code Official or Fire Marshal during regular office hours to
arrange for the owner of the structure to be visited by the Fire Companies
to inspect the key lock box and install the access keys and any other items
required by this chapter.
§ 126-11. Contents of key lock box.
The key lock box shall contain keys to all locked entrances whether on the
interior or exterior of the structure, keys to locked mechanical or electrical
equipment rooms, keys to elevator rooms and controls, keys to any fenced
or secured area, directions to the fire alarm panels or controls and any
hazardous materials stored in the structure. If any of the contents of the key
lock box must be removed or anything is to be added thereto, arrangements
shall be made with the Township to open the key lock box, inspect the items
to be added to or removed from the box, and then lock the box.
§ 126-12. Contact person. [Amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-9]
The owner of each structure required to have a key lock box shall provide
a list of contact persons, indicating the name, home address and home
telephone number to the Township Code Official or Fire Marshal. The owner
of each structure shall immediately upon any change with respect to the list
of contact persons provide the Township Code Official or Fire Marshal with
such information.
§ 126-7 KEY LOCK BOXES § 126-13
126:121
§ 126-13. Municipal liability.
The Board of Supervisors, and its agents, officials and representatives shall
not under any circumstances be liable or responsible for damages caused
to any person or property by reason of the provisions of this chapter, or
by reason of the conduct of any activity in compliance or noncompliance
with the terms and provisions hereof. The person, persons, company or
companies responsible for any lock box shall bear sole liability for any
damages caused as a result thereof.
§ 126-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, upon summary
conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000,
plus costs of prosecution and in default of payment thereof, be imprisoned
in the Dauphin County Prison for a period of not more than 30 days. Each
day of violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 126-15. Saving clause.
Nothing in this chapter hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit
or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability
incurred, or any cause of action acquired or existing, nor shall any just or
legal right or remedy or any character be lost, impaired or affected by this
chapter.
Chapter 139
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Park and Recreation Board — See Ch. 48.
Animals — See Ch. 67.
Open burning — See Ch. 85.
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 92.
Transient retail and mobile merchant
business — See Ch. 182.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 187.
§ 126-13 WEST HANOVER CODE § 126-15
126:122
ARTICLE I
Use of Recreational Facilities
[Adopted 1-20-1986 as Ch. 16, Part 1, of the 1986 Code]
§ 139-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
PARK or PARKS — Unless specifically limited, shall be deemed to include all
parks, playgrounds, recreation areas, tennis courts, recreation structures
and facilities, and also entrances and approaches thereto, and all other
land or property or structures supervised or managed by the West Hanover
Recreation Board, now or hereafter owned or acquired by the West Hanover
Township for park or recreational purposes.
PERSON — Any natural person, corporation, organization of persons,
company, association or partnership.
RULES AND REGULATIONS — Any rules and regulations hereby or
hereafter promulgated by the Recreation Board under the authority herein
conferred.
§ 139-2. Park hours.
All parks shall be opened daily to the public at such hours as the Recreation
Board may from time to time designate, but in no event shall any person be
permitted to be in attendance in any park between 10:00 p.m. and sunrise,
unless special permission be granted by the Recreation Board.
§ 139-3. Prohibited conduct. [Amended 8-1-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-7]
It shall be a violation of this article if any person in attendance at a park
shall commit the following:
A. Injure, deface, remove, cut or damage any of the trees, plants, shrubs,
turf, buildings, structures, signs or fixtures, or any other property of
West Hanover Township located within the park.
B. Litter any area of the park with garbage, paper, bottles, cans or other
waste material; nor dispose of the same in any way except in
receptacles designated for such purpose.
C. Kindle or maintain any fire in the park except in fireplaces or areas
specially designated for that purpose and located by authority of the
Recreation Board. Charcoal is the only fuel permitted in the cooking
grills provided in the park. Wood burning is restricted to the fire ring
areas only.
D. Remove any bench, seat, table or other appliance without permission of
the Recreation Board.
§ 139-1 KEY LOCK BOXES § 139-3
126:123
E. Injure, deface, destroy or remove any notice, rule or regulation posted
at any place within the park by authority of the Recreation Board; nor
shall any notice or placard be posted within the park other than by
authority of said Board.
F. Set up any booth, table or stand for the sale of any article or service
whatsoever within the limits of the park without permission of the
Recreation Board; distribute, sell, service or rent any services or
commodity or solicit for any purpose without permission of the
Recreation Board.
G. Operate, stop or park any vehicle, bicycle or other means of conveyance
except in areas where permitted or designated by proper authority of
the Recreation Board, or operate the same in a reckless or negligent
manner or in excess of any posted speed limit or in such a manner as to
become a nuisance to other area users.
H. Operate commercial vehicles, unless providing authorized services.
I. Use of tobacco products of any kind; all parks shall be posted as
tobacco-free areas. [Added 5-6-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-0546]
J. No alcohol shall be served, possessed, or consumed in any park unless
approved in accordance with the requirements outlined in the West
Hanover Township Parks and Recreation rental application (herein
attached as part of this subsection47), West Hanover Township Parks
and Recreation caterer agreement (herein attached as part of this
subsection48), and within the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. No person shall enter the park in an intoxicated state or
otherwise be under the influence of alcohol or illegal drugs. Such
persons will be immediately ejected from the park facilities and
prosecuted under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
[Amended 12-19-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-02]
K. Carry or discharge any firearms, slingshots, firecrackers, paint ball,
fireworks or other missile-propelling instruments or explosives or
arrows, or other dangerous weapons which have such properties as to
cause annoyance or injury to any person or property, unless permission
has been granted by the Recreation Board in designated areas; police
officers in the performance of their duties will be exempt from these
provisions.
L. Swim, golf, pitch horseshoes, skateboard, roller-blade, engage in
archery, camp or launch, dock or land any boat, engage in finding
buried objects with special detectors or participate in any other form of
recreation, sporting endeavor or pastime, except in those areas which
46.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections I
through U as Subsections J through V, respectively.
47.Editor's Note: Said application is on file in the Township offices.
48.Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 139-3 WEST HANOVER CODE § 139-3
126:124
§ 139-4. Fishing.
All laws pertaining to fishing in the commonwealth shall apply to fishing in
parks and recreation areas, and provisions thereof are hereby incorporated
by reference.
§ 139-5. Reservation for specific uses.
The use of all parks shall be on a first-come-first-served basis unless
otherwise reserved:
may be designated from time to time for that purpose by the Recreation
Board.
M. Disrobe or change clothing except in buildings or facilities made
available for that purpose.
N. Disturb the peace by any conduct so as to annoy any other person using
the park for recreational purposes.
O. Operate a snowmobile, minibike, motorcycle, ATV, off-road vehicles or
any vehicle, recreational or otherwise, except on designated roads,
trails or areas set aside for their use.
P. Use threatening, abusive, insulting, profane or obscene language or
words.
Q. Commit any disorderly or immoral acts.
R. Hold any public meeting or rally with more than 20 persons or engage
in any marching or driving as members of a military, political or other
organization without permission of the Recreation Board, which
permission shall not be granted until a statement of information is filed
with the Recreation Board identifying the name of the organization, its
purpose, number of persons expected to be in attendance, expected
duration of meeting and names of persons in charge.
S. Hunt for, capture or kill, or attempt to capture or kill, or aid or assist in
the capturing or killing of, in any manner, any wild bird or wild animal
of any description, either game or otherwise, and, to that end, it is
unlawful for any person to carry onto or possess in any park a shotgun
or rifle or pistol or firearm of any make or kind unless specific
permission is granted for a designated area by authority of the
Recreation Board.
T. Allow pets, domestic animals or farm animals to run at large out of
control; and to permit any domestic animal to leave animal waste
without cleaning up and properly disposing of the waste.
U. Conduct any form of gambling in a Township park.
V. Wash or service vehicle of any kind or park overnight.
§ 139-3 KEY LOCK BOXES § 139-5
126:125
§ 139-6. Authorization to promulgate additional rules.
The Recreation Board is authorized to establish additional rules and
regulations as deemed necessary, from time to time, but such rules shall not
become effective until approved by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 139-7. Authority to close areas.
Recreation facilities which become hazardous for public use due to weather,
water, fire or unforeseeable conditions may be closed only at the discretion
of the Recreation Board.
§ 139-8. Enforcement.
Enforcement of the provisions of this article shall be by the Pennsylvania
State Police or the Code Enforcement Officer, or his designee, of West
Hanover Township.
§ 139-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-1-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-4]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600. It is further provided that, upon judgment against any person
by summary conviction, or by proceedings by summons on default of the
payment of the fine or penalty imposed and the costs, the defendant may be
sentenced and committed to the county prison for a period not exceeding
30 days.
A. By annual permission granted by the Board of Supervisors under any
use agreement for the scheduling of various league games, etc.
[Amended 8-1-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-7]
B. For school or college athletic games, practice, contests or exhibitions.
C. For regularly scheduled school district or municipal recreation
programs.
D. By permission granted by the Recreation Board for a specific requested
use.
§ 139-5 WEST HANOVER CODE § 139-9
126:126
Chapter 144
PLUMBING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 78. Sewers — See Ch. 158.
§ 144-1. Adoption of International Plumbing Code.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Secretary of the Township of West Hanover, being marked and designated
as the "International Plumbing Code, 2000 Edition," as published by the
International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the code of the
Township of West Hanover for regulating design, construction, quality of
materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, relocation, replacement,
addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems in the Township of
West Hanover and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of
fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions
and terms of such International Plumbing Code, 2000 Edition, published by
the International Code Council on file in the office of the Township of West
Hanover, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully
set out in this chapter.
§ 144-2. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
Section 101.1 Insert: "West Hanover Township."
Section 106.6.2 Insert: Fee Schedule: A fee for each plan examination,
building permit and inspection for new construction and
additions, the moving of buildings, demolition of
buildings and the erection of signs shall be paid in
accordance with a schedule of fees which shall be
established by resolution of the Board of Supervisors of
West Hanover Township and shall be subject to change
by resolution of said Board from time to time.
Section 301.4(A) Insert: Public systems available: A public water main or
public sewer system shall be considered to be available
to the structure where the structure is located within
150 feet of the public water main or sewer.
Section 305.6.1 Insert: Building sewers that connect to private sewage
disposal systems shall be a minimum of 36 inches below
finished grade at the point of septic tank connection.
Building sewers shall be a minimum of 36 inches below
grade.
§ 139-9 PLUMBING § 144-3
144:127
§ 144-3. Saving clause.
Nothing in this chapter or in the Plumbing Code hereby adopted shall
be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or
any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance; nor shall any just or
legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this
chapter.
§ 144-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a finenot exceeding $1,000. Each
day that a violation continues beyond the date fixed for compliance shall
constitute a separate offense. It is further provided that, upon judgment
against any person by summary conviction, or by proceedings by summons
on default of payment of the fine or penalty imposed and the costs, the
defendant maybe sentenced and committed to the county prison for a period
not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 148
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 75.
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 81.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 103.
Solid waste — See Ch. 165.
§ 148-1. Adoption of International Property Maintenance Code.
[Amended 10-2-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-5; 5-18-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-11]
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Secretary of the Township of West Hanover, being marked and designated
as the "International Property Maintenance Code, First Printing, 2009,"
as published by the International Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby
adopted as the International Property Maintenance Code of the Township
of West Hanover in the State of Pennsylvania, for the control of buildings
and structures as herein provided, and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance
Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set
out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if
any, prescribed in § 148-2 of this chapter.
§ 144-3 WEST HANOVER CODE § 148-2
144:128
§ 148-2. Additions, insertions and changes. [Amended 4-4-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-5; 10-2-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-5]
The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
Section 101.1 Title. Insert: "West Hanover Township."
Section
110.1.1
Demolition. Add: "Transfer of ownership. It shall be
unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure
who has received a compliance order upon whom a notice
of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage,
lease or otherwise dispose of to another until the
provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation
have been complied with, or until such owner shall first
furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true
copy of any compliance order or notice of violation issued
by the Code Enforcement Officer and shall furnish to the
Code Enforcement Officer a signed and notarized
statement to the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee,
acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or
notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility
without condition for making the correction or repairs
required by such compliance order or notice of violation.”
Section 302.2 Exception. Delete in its entirety.
Section 302.4 Weeds. Delete this section.
Section 305.3 Interior surfaces. Delete in its entirety.
Add: “Floors, walls, windows, doors, ceilings and other
interior surfaces shall be maintained in good, clean and
sanitary condition. Peeling paint, cracked or loose plaster,
decayed wood and other defective surface conditions shall
be eliminated. Only substantial areas of peeling paint,
cracked and/or loose plaster and the presence of any
decayed wood shall constitute violations under this Code.
The dwelling must be free of hazardous conditions that
seriously threaten the structural integrity of the interior
wall or ceiling or pose other health and safety risks as
evidenced by any leaning, large holes, loose surface
materials, severe buckling or bulging, or noticeable
movement under walking stress. Any defects that allow air
to infiltrate or penetrate into the interior, such as large
areas of loose material, shall be considered violations
under this Code. Cracks of 1/8” width or less that are not
accompanied by large areas of loose material shall not be
deemed violations under this code.”
§ 148-2 PLUMBING § 148-2
144:129
Section
305.3.1
Bathroom and kitchen floors. INSERT: “Every toilet,
bathroom and kitchen floor surface shall be constructed
and maintained to be substantially impervious to water.
Such floors shall be easy to clean and maintain in a sanitary
condition. Bathroom flooring shall not have any defects
that would either render the surface uncleanable or allow
water penetration. Small holes, tears, depressions, slits or
seams in kitchen floors that are not in close proximity to
plumbing fixtures shall be acceptable, unless such defects
present a tripping hazard.”
Section
307.3.3
Containers. Must be in compliance with Ordinance 1998-9,
Installation of Trash Receptacle Enclosures.
Section 602.3 Heat supply. Insert: "November 1 to April 1."
Section 602.4 Occupiable workspaces. Insert: "November 1 to April 1."
Section 604.2 Service. Delete: “Dwelling units shall be served by a 120/
240 volt, single-phase electrical service having a rating of
not less than 60 amperes.” “Every dwelling shall be served
by a main service that is not less than 100 amperes, threewire,
220 volt three-wire, single-phase electrical service.”
Section 702.5 Basement bedrooms. Every basement used for sleeping
shall comply with Chapter 4 and shall have a second means
of egress in accordance with Section 702.4 as well as
Section 704.
§ 148-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $1,000. Each
day that a violation continues beyond the date fixed for compliance shall
constitute a separate offense. It is further provided that, upon judgement
against any person by summary conviction, or by proceedings by summons
on default of payment of the fine or penalty imposed and the costs, the
defendant may be sentenced and committed to the county prison for a
period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 148-4. Saving clause.
Nothing in this article or in the code hereby adopted shall be construed to
affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired,
or liability incurred, or any cause of action acquired or existing, nor shall
any just or legal right or remedy or any character be lost, impaired or
affected by this article.
§ 148-2 WEST HANOVER CODE § 148-4
144:130
Chapter 158
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water and Sewer Authority — See Ch. 4, Art.
II.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 88.
Plumbing — See Ch. 144.
§ 148-4 PLUMBING § 148-4
144:131

ARTICLE I
On-Lot Sewage Disposal
[Adopted 9-7-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-10]
§ 158-1. Title; authority; purpose.
§ 158-2. Word usage and definitions.
A. This article may be cited as the "OLDS (On-Lot Disposal System)
Management Program for West Hanover Township."
B. As mandated by the municipal codes, the Clean Streams Law (35 P.S.
§§ 691.1 to 691.1001), and the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act
of January 24, 1966, P.L. 1535, as amended, 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.,
known as "Act 537"), municipalities have the power and the duty to
provide for adequate sewage treatment facilities and for the protection
of the public health by preventing the discharge of untreated or
inadequately treated sewage. The Official Sewage Facilities Plan for
West Hanover Township indicates that it is necessary to formulate and
implement a sewage management program to effectively prevent and
abate water pollution and hazards to the public health caused by
improper treatment and disposal of sewage.
C. The purpose of this article is to provide for the inspection, maintenance
and rehabilitation of on-lot sewage disposal systems; to further permit
the township to intervene in situations which are public nuisances or
hazards to the public health; and to establish penalties and appeal
procedures necessary for the proper administration of a sewage
management program.
A. General terms. In the interpretation of this article, the singular shall
include the plural, and the masculine shall include the feminine and the
neuter.
B. Specific terms.
(1) For the purposes of this article, the terms used shall be construed
to have the following meanings:
ACT — The Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, Act of January 24,
1966, P.L. (1965) 1535, No. 537, as amended, 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
ALTERNATIVE SYSTEM — A system for the disposal of domestic
wastewaters not operating below ground level but located on or
near the site of the building or buildings being served (e.g.,
composing toilets, gray water recycling systems, incinerating
toilets, spray irrigation and black water recycling systems, etc.).
AUTHORIZED AGENT — A licensed sewage enforcement officer,
professional engineer or sanitarian, plumbing inspector, soils
scientist or any other qualified or licensed person who is delegated
to function within the specified limits as the agent of the Board of
§ 158-1 PLUMBING § 158-2
144:133
Supervisors of West Hanover Township to carry out the provisions
of this article.
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of the Township of West
Hanover, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (hereinafter called "CEO") — An
individual employed by the township to administer and enforce this
and other ordinances in the township.
COMMUNITY SEWAGE SYSTEM — Any system, whether publicly
or privately owned, for the collection of sewage publicly, or
industrial wastes of a liquid nature from two or more lots or uses,
or two or more equivalent dwelling units, and the treatment and/
or disposal of the sewage or industrial waste on one or more of the
lots or at any other site and which shall comply with all applicable
regulations of the DEP.
DEP — The Department of Environmental Protection of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any successor agency.
DEVELOPER — Any person, partnership or corporation which
erects or contracts to erect a building on property owned by it with
the intent to sell the building to some other party upon its full or
partial completion, or upon the conveyance of property on which
the building is to be built.
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT (EDU) — For the purpose of
determining the number of lots in a subdivision or land
development, that part of a multiple-family dwelling, commercial,
industrial or institutional establishment with sewage flows equal to
400 gallons per day.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within the township upon
which there is erected a structure intended for continuous or
periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals
and from which structure sewage shall or may be discharged.
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE SYSTEM — Any system of piping, tanks or
other facilities serving a single lot and collecting and disposing
of sewage in whole or in part into the soil or any waters of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or by means of conveyance to
another site for final disposal.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — A land development as defined in the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968,
P.L. 805, No. 247, as amended, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a
plat or otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or
built upon as a unit.
MALFUNCTION — The condition which occurs when an on-lot
sewage disposal system causes pollution to the ground or surface
waters, contamination of private or public drinking water supplies,
§ 158-2 WEST HANOVER CODE § 158-2
144:134
nuisance problems or hazard to public health. Indications of
malfunctioning systems include but are not limited to foul odors,
lush grass growing over the system, backup of wastewater in the
attached buildings, soggy ground over the system, surfacing
sewage effluent flowing over the ground and occurring at any time
of the year.
MANAGEMENT PROGRAM — The management program shall
encompass the entire area of West Hanover Township serviced by
sewage facilities or any other alternative system which discharges
into the soils of the township. All systems shall be operated under
the jurisdiction of the West Hanover Township Board of Supervisors
regulating the subsurface disposal and/or alternate systems, and
other applicable laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
OFFICIAL PLAN — A comprehensive plan for the provision of
adequate sewage disposal systems adopted by the township and
approved by the DEP in accordance with the Act and with
applicable DEP regulations.
ON-LOT SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — Any sewage system
disposing of sewage in whole or in part into the soil or any waters
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or by means of conveyance
to another site for final disposal, and which is located upon the lot
which it serves.
OWNER — Any person, corporation, partnership, etc., holding
deed/title to lands within West Hanover Township.
PERSON — Any individual, association, partnership, public or
private corporation whether for profit or not-for-profit, trust, estate
or other legally recognized entity. Whenever the term "person" is
used in connection with any clause providing for the imposition of
a fine or penalty or the ordering of action to comply with the terms
of this article, the term "person" shall include the members of an
association, partnership or firm and the officers of any public or
private corporation, whether for profit or not-for-profit.
PLANNING MODULE FOR LAND DEVELOPMENT — A revision to,
or exception to the revision of, the Township Official Plan submitted
in connection with the request for approval of a subdivision or land
development in accordance with DEP regulations.
PUMPER/HAULER — Any person, company, partnership or
corporation which engages in cleaning community or individual
sewage systems and transports the septage cleaned from these
systems.
PUMPER'S REPORT/RECEIPT — Form which shall be used by all
licensed pumper/haulers to report each pumping of on-lot sewage
disposal systems in the township.
REHABILITATION — Work done to modify, alter, repair, enlarge or
replace an existing on-lot sewage disposal system.
§ 158-2 PLUMBING § 158-2
144:135
§ 158-3. Applicability.
From the effective date of this article, its provisions shall apply to all
persons owning any property in the township serviced by an on-lot sewage
disposal system and to all persons installing or rehabilitating on-lot sewage
disposal systems.
REPLACEMENT AREA — An area designated as the future location
of an individual on-lot sewage system that shall be installed should
the initial individual on-lot system installed or to be installed fail
or otherwise become inoperable and which shall meet all the
regulations of the DEP and all applicable township ordinances for
an individual on-lot sewage system, and shall be protected from
encroachment by an easement recorded on the final plan as filed
with the Dauphin County Recorder of Deeds.
SEPTAGE — The residual scum and sludge pumped from septic
systems.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products
or excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings
or any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or inimical
to the public health, or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of
water for domestic water supply or for recreation.
SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (hereinafter called "SEO") —
A person appointed by the Board to administer the provisions of
this article and authorized by the DEP in accordance with Chapter
71, Administration of Sewage Facilities Program, of Title 25, Rules
and Regulations; to perform percolation tests, site and soil
evaluation, and issue sewage permits for on-lot disposal systems.
SEWAGE FACILITIES — Any method of sewage collection,
conveyance, treatment and disposal which will prevent the
discharge of untreated or inadequately treated sewage into the
waters of this commonwealth or otherwise provide for the safe and
sanitary treatment of sewage.
SINGLE AND SEPARATE OWNERSHIP — The ownership of a lot
by one or more persons, which ownership is separate and distinct
from that of any abutting or adjoining lot.
SUBDIVISION — A subdivision as defined by the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No.
247, as amended, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
TOWNSHIP — West Hanover Township, Dauphin County,
Pennsylvania.
(2) All other definitions of words and terms used in this article shall
have the same meaning as set forth in Chapter 73, Standards for
Sewage Disposal Facilities, of Title 25, Rules and Regulations,
Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 158-2 WEST HANOVER CODE § 158-4
144:136
§ 158-4. Sewage permit requirements.
A. No person shall install, construct or request bid proposals for
construction or alter an individual sewage system or community
sewage system or construct or request bid proposals for construction or
install or occupy any building or structure for which an individual
sewage system or community sewage system is to be installed without
first obtaining a permit indicating that the site and the plans and
specifications of such system are in compliance with the provisions of
the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (hereinafter called "Act 537" or
"Act") and the standards adopted pursuant to that Act.49
B. No system or structure designed to provide individual or community
sewage disposal shall be covered from view until approval to cover the
same has been given by the Municipal SEO. If 72 hours have elapsed,
excepting Sundays and holidays, since the SEO issuing the permit
received notification of completion of construction, the applicant may
cover said system or structure, unless permission has been specifically
refused by the SEO.
C. The township may require applicants for sewage permits to notify the
township's certified SEO of the schedule for construction of the
permitted on-lot sewage disposal system so that inspection(s) in
addition to the final inspection required by Act 537 may be scheduled
and performed by the township's certified SEO at the cost of the
applicant.
D. No building or occupancy permit shall be issued by the township or its
CEO for a new building which will contain sewage-generating facilities
until a valid sewage permit has been obtained from the township's
certified SEO.
E. No building or occupancy permit shall be issued and no work shall
begin on any alteration or conversion of any existing structure, if said
alteration or conversion will result in the increase or potential increase
in sewage flows from the structure, until the township's CEO and the
structure's owner receive from the township's SEO either a permit for
alteration or a replacement of the existing sewage disposal system or
written notification that such a permit will not be required. In
accordance with Chapter 73 regulations, the certified SEO shall
determine whether the proposed alteration or conversion of the
structure will result in increased sewage flows.
F. Sewage permits may be issued only by a certified SEO employed by the
township for that express purpose. The DEP shall be notified by the
township as to the identity of its currently employed certified SEO
G. No sewage permit may be issued unless proof is provided that the
owner of record has owned the lot since May 15, 1972, or that Act 537
planning for that lot has been provided by the township.
49.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 158-4 PLUMBING § 158-4
144:137
§ 158-5. Ground markers.
Any person who shall install new or rehabilitated systems shall provide a
marker or markers at ground level locating the subsurface waste disposal
tank and other important components of the system requiring periodic
inspection and maintenance. Requirements for marker types and locations
will be determined by the township's SEO. In addition, a riser or access
hatch shall be constructed so as to enable easy access to the waste disposal
tank, and prevent odors from escaping and to prevent children from
removing the hatch.
§ 158-6. Replacement areas.
H. No final Act 241 approval on a subdivision plan may begin until Act 537
planning is approved by the township.
A. Requirements.
(1) After the effective date of this article, a replacement area for an
individual on-lot sewage system shall be required for all lots or lots
to be created which are not serviced or to be serviced by a
community sewage system, or for which a valid permit for
installation of an individual on-lot sewage system has not been
issued. All proposed and existing lots (created prior to the effective
date of this article) requiring a sewage permit to be issued shall be
required to show that the lot can provide areas for both a primary
and secondary system. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-01]
(2) The replacement area provided shall comply with the Act and with
all regulations issued by the DEP as incorporated into this article
concerning individual on-lot sewage systems, including isolation
distances, and with the terms of this article and any other
applicable township ordinances.
B. Identification of replacement area.
(1) Each applicant who shall submit a plan for the subdivision or
development of land or who shall apply for a permit for the
installation of an individual on-lot sewage system, or who shall
request approval of a planning module for land development or the
adoption of a revision, exception to revision or supplement to the
official plan shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the SEO that a
suitable area exists on the lot or on each lot to be created for an
initial individual on-lot sewage system and for the replacement
area. The SEO shall perform or observe all tests required for the
location of an individual on-lot sewage system to confirm the
suitability of the replacement area. Allowance of open land for the
replacement area without testing performed or observed by the
SEO shall not constitute compliance with the requirements of this
section.
§ 158-4 WEST HANOVER CODE § 158-6
144:138
(2) The location of the initial individual on-lot sewage system and the
replacement area as confirmed by the SEO shall be identified on
the plot plans and diagrams submitted as part of the permit
application.
(3) If the application has been submitted as a part of an application for
subdivision or land development approval or as part of a request
that the township approve a planning module for land development
or amend its official plan, or a request for an exception to the
revision of the official plan, the location of each initial individual onlot
sewage system and each replacement area shall be noted upon
the plans. If the application is for subdivision or land development
approval, a note constituting a permanent easement shall be added
to the plans stating that no improvements shall be constructed
upon the replacement area, and the deed to be recorded for each
lot created as part of the subdivision or land development shall
contain language reflecting this limitation.
(4) Any revisions to a permit or plan affecting a replacement area
which previously has been approved pursuant to the provisions of
this article shall be reviewed for approval by the Board or its
authorized agent.
C. Construction restrictions.
(1) The easement for the replacement area noted upon the plan and
recorded with the Dauphin County Recorder of Deeds shall state
that no permanent or temporary improvements of any character,
other than shallow-rooted plant matter, shall be constructed upon
the replacement area.
(2) This provision shall be enforced by the township unless the person
who desires to construct such improvements shall demonstrate to
the satisfaction of the SEO that an alternate replacement area
which complies with all applicable regulations of the DEP, this
article and all other applicable township ordinances, exists upon
the lot. If such an alternate replacement area shall be identified,
the alternate replacement area may be considered to be the
replacement area required by this article and shall be designated
as the replacement area. The newly designated replacement area
shall thereafter be considered the replacement area for the
purposes of this article.
D. Relief from replacement area requirement.
(1) If any lot held in single and separate ownership as of the effective
date of this article does not contain land suitable for a replacement
area, the applicant submitting a land development plan or a
planning module for land development or desiring to install an
individual on-lot sewage system may request that the Board grant
an exception to the requirement of providing a replacement area.
The applicant for such an exception shall present credible evidence
§ 158-6 PLUMBING § 158-6
144:139
§ 158-7. Inspections.
to the Board demonstrating that the lot was held in single and
separate ownership on the effective date of this article; the size of
the lot; inability of the applicant to acquire adjacent land or the
unsuitability of adjacent land which might be able to be acquired;
and the testing conducted to determine that the lot is not suitable
to provide a replacement area.
(2) At all times the burden to present credible evidence and the burden
of persuasion shall be upon the applicant for an exception from the
terms of this article. In no case shall any lot be exempted from the
requirements of § 158-4 of this article.
A. Any on-lot sewage disposal system may be inspected by the township's
authorized agent at any reasonable time as of the effective date of this
article.
B. The inspection may include a physical tour of the property, the taking of
samples from surface water, wells, other ground water sources, the
sampling of the contents of the sewage disposal system itself and/or the
introduction of a traceable substance into the interior plumbing of the
structure served to ascertain the path and ultimate destination of
wastewater generated in the structure. A copy of the inspection report
shall be furnished to the owner and current resident which shall include
all of the following information which is reasonably available to the
individual or agency responsible for pumping the septic tank: date of
inspection; name and address of system owner; description and
diagram of the location of the system, including location of access
hatches, risers and markers; size of tanks and disposal fields; current
occupant's name and number of users; indication of any system
malfunction observed; results of any and all soils and water tests; and
any remedial action required.
C. The township's authorized agent shall have the right to enter upon land
for the purposes of inspections described above. In the event that
access to inspect the property is denied, the following steps shall be
taken:
(1) The matter will be officially referred to the Board for action.
(2) The Board may schedule a review at the next scheduled meeting of
the Board, or, if the situation threatens the health or safety of the
residents of the township, the Board may commence an immediate
procedure to obtain a search warrant from the District justice.
(3) Upon receipt of a search warrant to inspect the property, the
authorized agent of the township shall be accompanied by an
officer of the County or State Police, and the inspection shall be
completed in accordance with this section.
§ 158-6 WEST HANOVER CODE § 158-7
144:140
§ 158-8. Prohibited discharges into system.
Only normal domestic wastes shall be discharged into any on-lot sewage
disposal system. The following shall not be discharged into the system:
§ 158-9. Maintenance of system.
D. A schedule of routine inspections may be established by the township, if
necessary, to assure the proper function of the systems in the township.
E. The township's authorized agent shall inspect systems known to be, or
alleged to be, malfunctioning. Should said inspections reveal that the
system is malfunctioning, the township shall take action to require the
correction of the malfunction. If total correction is not technically or
financially feasible in the opinion of the township and a representative
of the DEP, action by the owner to mitigate the malfunction shall be
required.
F. There may arise geographic areas within the township where numerous
on-lot sewage disposal systems are malfunctioning. A resolution of
these area-wide problems may necessitate detailed planning and a
township-sponsored revision to that area's Act 537 Official Sewage
Facilities Plan. When a DEP authorized Official Sewage Facilities Plan
Revision has been undertaken by the township, mandatory repair or
replacement of individual malfunctioning sewage disposal systems
within the study area may be delayed, at the discretion of the township,
pending the outcome of the plan revision process. However, the
township may compel immediate corrective action whenever a
malfunction, as determined by township officials and the Pennsylvania
DEP, represents a serious public health or environmental threat.
A. Industrial waste.
B. Automobile oil and other nondomestic oil.
C. Toxic or hazardous substances or chemicals, including but not limited
to pesticides, disinfectants, acids, paints, paint thinners, herbicides,
gasoline and other solvents.
D. Clean surface or ground water, including water from roof or cellar
drains, springs, basement sump pumps and french drains.
A. Pumping of tank. [Amended 4-16-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-4]
(1) Any person owning a building served by an on-lot sewage disposal
system shall have the septic tank pumped by a qualified pumper/
hauler after the effective date of this article based on the following
schedule:
(a) Properties located in West Hanover Township Precinct 1:
within one year of effective date of this article.
§ 158-7 PLUMBING § 158-9
144:141
(b) Properties located in West Hanover Township Precinct 2:
within two years of effective date of this article.
(c) Properties located in West Hanover Township Precinct 3:
within three years of effective date of this article.
(d) Properties located in West Hanover Township Precinct 4:
within four years of effective date of this article.
(2) Thereafter, that person shall have the septic tank pumped at least
once every four years. Synchronism with the above precinct
pumping schedule will not be required after the initial pumping.
Receipts from the pumper/hauler shall be submitted to the
township as required in Subsection F.
B. Any person providing a receipt or other written evidence showing that
their tank had been pumped within three years of the first-year
anniversary of the effective date of this article, then the township may
delay that person's initial required pumping to conform to the general
four-year frequency requirement. [Amended 4-16-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-4]
C. The township may allow an extension of up to two years to the pump out
period when the owner can demonstrate to the township that the
system can operate properly for this additional period of time. This
extension is not recurring, and the township must approve each
extension. Such a request must be made no sooner than six months
prior to the date when the next required pumping is to be completed.
The request must be in writing with all supporting documents attached.
The township, in making its determination, shall take into account the
information submitted by the applicant, the sewerage permit issued by
the Township SEO upon installation or rehabilitation of the system and
supporting documentation, reports or inspection and maintenance of
the system and other relevant information, and may conduct an on-site
inspection. The applicant shall bear the cost of any inspection, surface
or subsurface, and soil or wastes sampling conducted for the purposes
of evaluating the request. The applicant shall receive a decision within
60 days of accumulation of all necessary information by the township.
[Amended 4-16-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-3; 4-16-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-4]
D. The required pumping frequency may be increased at the discretion of
the authorized agent if the septic tank is undersized, if solids buildup in
the tank is above average, if the hydraulic load on the system increases
significantly above average, if a garbage grinder is used in the building,
if the system malfunctions or for other good cause shown.
E. Each time a septic tank or other subsurface waste disposal system tank
is pumped out, the township, its authorized agent or a private septage
pumper/hauler, whichever provides the service, shall provide to the
§ 158-9 WEST HANOVER CODE § 158-9
144:142
owner of the subsurface waste disposal system a signed pumper's
report/receipt containing at a minimum the following information:
(1) Date of pumping.
(2) Name and address of the system owner.
(3) Address of the tank's location, if different from the owner's.
(4) Description and diagram of the location of the tank, including the
location of any markers, risers and access hatches and size of the
tank.
(5) The date the existing system was installed.
(6) Last date of pump out.
(7) List of other maintenance performed.
(8) Any indications of system malfunction observed.
(9) Amount of septage or other solid or semisolid material removed.
(10) List of recommendations.
(11) Destination of the septage (name of the treatment facility).
F. Upon completion of each required pumping, the township, its
authorized agent or a private septage waste hauler shall fill out and
submit a pumper's report/receipt, copies of which shall be provided by
the township to all licensed pumpers/haulers. The township's
authorized agent or a private septage pumper/hauler shall provide one
copy of the pumper's report/receipt to the owner and one copy to the
township. Copies must be received at the township's business office
within 30 days of the date of pumping. The pumper's report/receipt will
include verification that the baffles in the septic tank have been
inspected and found to be in good working order.
G. Any person owning a building served by an alternative system or on-lot
sewage disposal system which contains an aerobic treatment tank shall
follow the operation and maintenance recommendations of the
equipment manufacturer. A copy of the manufacturer's
recommendations and a copy of the service agreement shall be
submitted to the township within six months of the effective date of this
article. Thereafter, service receipts shall be submitted to the township
at the intervals specified by the manufacturer's recommendations. In no
case may the service or pumping intervals exceed those required for
septic tanks.
H. Any person owning a building served by a cesspool or dry well shall
have that system pumped according to the schedule prescribed for
septic tanks in Subsection A.
§ 158-9 PLUMBING § 158-9
144:143
§ 158-10. System rehabilitation.
I. The township may require additional maintenance activity as needed,
including but not necessarily limited to cleaning and unclogging of
piping, servicing and the repair of mechanical equipment, leveling of
distribution boxes, tanks and lines, removal of obstructing roots or
trees, the diversion of surface water away from the disposal area, etc.
Repair permits issued by the certified SEO must be secured for these
activities.
A. No person shall operate and maintain an on-lot sewage disposal system
in such a manner that it malfunctions. All liquid wastes, including
kitchen and laundry wastes and water softener backwash, shall be
discharged to a treatment tank. No sewage system shall discharge
untreated or partially treated sewage to the surface of the ground or
into the waters of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania unless a permit
to discharge has been obtained from the DEP.
B. The township shall issue a written notice of violation to any person who
is the owner of a property in the township which is found to be served
by a malfunctioning on-lot sewage disposal system or which is
discharging raw or partially treated sewage without a permit.
C. Within seven days of notification by the township that a malfunction has
been identified, the owner shall make application to the township's
certified SEO for a permit to repair or replace the malfunctioning
system. Within 30 days of initial notification by the township,
construction of the permitted repair or replacement shall commence.
Within 60 days of the original notification by the township, the
construction shall be completed unless seasonal or unique conditions
mandate a longer period, in which case the township shall set an
extended completion date.
D. The township's certified SEO shall have the authority to require the
repair of any malfunction by the following methods: cleaning, repair or
replacement of components of the existing system, adding capacity or
otherwise altering or replacing the system's treatment tank, expanding
the existing disposal area, replacing the existing disposal area,
replacing a gravity distribution system with a pressurized system,
replacing the system with a holding tank or other alternatives as
appropriate for the specific site.
E. In lieu of or in combination with the remedies described in Subsection
D, the SEO may require the installation of water conservation
equipment and the institution of water conservation practices in
structures served. Water-using devices and appliances in the structure
may be required to be retrofitted with water-saving appurtenances or
they may be required to be replaced by water-conserving devices and
appliances. Wastewater generation in the structure may also be
reduced by requiring changes in water usage patterns in the structure
§ 158-9 WEST HANOVER CODE § 158-10
144:144
§ 158-11. Work done by township; liens.
The township, upon written notice from the SEO that an imminent health
hazard exists due to failure of a property owner to maintain, repair or
replace an on-lot sewage disposal system as provided under the terms
of this article, shall have the authority to perform or contract to have
performed the work required by the SEO. The owner shall be charged for
the work performed and, if necessary, a lien shall be entered therefor in
accordance with law.
§ 158-12. Disposal of septage.
served. The use of laundry facilities may be limited to one load per day
or discontinued altogether, etc.
F. In the event that the rehabilitation measures in Subsections A through
E are not feasible or do not prove effective, the township may require
the owner to apply for a permit to construct a holding tank in
accordance with township ordinance. Upon receipt of said permit, the
owner shall complete construction of the system within 30 days.
G. Should none of the remedies described above prove totally effective in
eliminating the malfunction of an existing on-lot sewage disposal
system, the owner is not absolved of responsibility for that malfunction.
The township may require whatever action is necessary to lessen or
mitigate the malfunction to the extent that it feels necessary.
A. All septage pumper/haulers operating within the township shall be
licensed with the township and shall comply with all reporting
requirements established by the township.
B. All septage originating within the municipal sewage management
district shall be disposed of at sites or facilities approved by the DEP.
Approved sites or facilities shall include the following: septage
treatment facilities, wastewater treatment plants, composting sites and
approved farm lands.
C. Septage pumper/haulers operating within the township shall operate in
a manner consistent with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Solid Waste
Management Act (Act 97 of 1980, 35 P.S. §§ 6018.101 through
6018.1003), and regulations adopted pursuant to such Act.
(1) Any septage pumper/hauler who violates any of the provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a
fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs, and, in default of payment
thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for a term not to exceed
30 days. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense. [Amended 7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-7]
(2) If any pumper/hauler shall have been convicted on two occasions of
any violation of this article, or for violating the conditions of its
state permit or of any state or local law governing its operation, the
§ 158-10 PLUMBING § 158-12
144:145
§ 158-13. Discontinuance of individual sewage system. [Added
4-16-1996 by Ord. No. 1966-3]
§ 158-14. Administration; records; fees.
§ 158-15. Appeals.
Board shall have the power to suspend said pumper/hauler from
operating within the township for a period of not less than six
months or more than two years for each violation, as determined
by the township. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
A. Upon the discontinuance of the use of any tank for sewage disposal
purposes, whether by mandatory or voluntary connection to a
community sewage system or abandonment for any other reason, the
owner thereof shall have the tank pumped and flushed by a pumper/
hauler and, at the owner's option, either physically removed from the
premises or filled with soil and/or stone.
B. When the owner elects to have the tank filled with stone as permitted by
Subsection A above, said tank may then be used for the discharge of
stormwater, sump pump discharge or other effluent not qualifying for
discharge into the community sewage system, provided that said
discharge is otherwise permitted by applicable law.
A. The township shall fully utilize those powers it possesses through
enabling statutes and ordinances to effect the purposes of this article.
B. The township shall employ qualified individuals to carry out the
provisions of this article. Those employees shall include a certified SEO,
a CEO, a secretary, administrator or other persons as required. The
township may also contract with private qualified persons or firms as
necessary to carry out the provisions of this article.
C. All permits, records, reports, files and other written material relating to
the installation, operation and maintenance and malfunction of on-lot
sewage disposal systems shall become the property of the township.
Existing and future records shall be available for public inspection
during required business hours at the official municipal office. All
records pertaining to sewage permits, building permits, occupancy
permits and all other aspects of the township's OLDS Management
Program shall be made available, upon request, for inspection by
representatives of the DEP.
D. The Board shall establish all administrative procedures necessary to
properly carry out the provisions of this article.
E. The Board may establish a fee schedule, and subsequently collect fees,
to cover the cost to the township of administering this program.
§ 158-12 WEST HANOVER CODE § 158-15
144:146
§ 158-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-17-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-7]
Any person, other than a pumper/hauler, who violates any of the provisions
of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not less than $100 and costs and not more than $300 and costs, or, in default
thereof, shall be confined in the county jail for a period of not more than 30
days. Each day of noncompliance shall constitute a separate offense.
A. Appeals from decisions of the township or its authorized agent under
this article shall be made to the Board, in writing, within 45 days from
the date of the decision in question.
B. The appellant shall be entitled to a hearing before the Board at its next
regularly scheduled meeting, if the appeal is received at least 14 days
prior to that meeting. If the appeal is received within 14 days of the next
regularly scheduled meeting, the appeal shall be heard at the
subsequent meeting. The township shall thereafter affirm, modify or
reverse the aforesaid decision. The hearing may be postponed for a
good cause shown by the appellant or the township. Additional evidence
may be introduced at the hearing, provided that it is submitted with the
written notice of appeal.
C. A decision shall be rendered, in writing, within 45 days of the date of
the hearing. If a decision is not rendered within 45 days, the relief
sought by the appellant shall be deemed granted.
§ 158-15 PLUMBING § 158-16
144:147

ARTICLE II
Holding Tanks
[Adopted 3-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-4]
§ 158-17. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for the use and
maintenance of existing and new holding tanks designed to retain sewage,
whether from residential or commercial or industrial uses, and it is hereby
declared that the enactment of this article is necessary for the protection,
benefit and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the residents of
West Hanover Township.
§ 158-18. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms used in this article shall be as follows:
HOLDING TANK — A watertight receptacle, whether permanent or
temporary, which receives and retains sewage conveyed by a water-carrying
system and is designed and constructed to facilitate the ultimate disposal of
the sewage to an approved site.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within the township upon which
there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure
sewage shall or may be discharged.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any property located in the township.
PERMIT — A written approval as issued by the Sewage Enforcement Officer
of the township authorizing utilization of a holding tank.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, corporation
or any other group or entity.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrement or other discharge from bodies of human beings or animals and
any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or inimical to the public
health or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic water
supply or for recreation.
SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The person appointed by the Board
of Supervisors to administer the provisions of this article and to administer
the Sewage Facilities Act50 and regulations adopted with regard thereto.
TOWNSHIP — West Hanover Township, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
50.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 158-17 PLUMBING § 158-19
144:149
§ 158-19. Rights and privileges granted.
The township is hereby authorized and empowered to undertake within the
township the control and methods of holding tank use, sewage disposal and
sewage collection and transportation thereof.
§ 158-20. Adoption of rules and regulations.
The township is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt such rules and
regulations concerning sewage which it may deem necessary from time to
time to effect the purposes herein.
§ 158-21. Conformity with applicable law.
All such rules and regulations adopted by the township shall be in
conformity with the provisions herein, all other ordinances of the township
and all applicable laws and applicable rules and regulations of
administrative agencies of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 158-22. Rates and charges.
The township shall have the right and power to fix, alter, charge and collect
rates, assessments and other charges in the area served by its facilities at
reasonable and uniform rates as authorized by applicable law.
§ 158-23. Exclusiveness of rights and privileges.
§ 158-24. Duties of improved property owner.
The owner of an improved property that utilizes a holding tank shall:
A. The collection and transportation of all sewage from any improved
property utilizing a holding tank shall be done solely by or under the
direction and control of the township, and the disposal thereof shall be
made only at such sites as may be approved by the Department of
Environmental Protection of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. The township will receive, review and retain pumping receipts from
permitted holding tanks. Pumping receipts shall be submitted to the
township on the first day of January, April, July and November for all
pumping performed in the three-month period immediately preceding
the submittal date.
C. The township will complete and retain annual inspection reports for
each permitted tank. Inspection fees, as adopted by resolution of the
township, shall be paid by the owner.
A. Prior to issuance of the holding tank permit, enter into an agreement
with a licensed hauler approved by the township, evidencing the
hauler's agreement to collect, transport and dispose of the contents of
the holding tank at a licensed permanent dumping site.
§ 158-19 WEST HANOVER CODE § 158-24
144:150
§ 158-25. Abatement of nuisances.
In addition to any other remedies provided in this article, any violation of
this article shall constitute a nuisance and shall be abated by the township
by either seeking mitigation of the nuisance or appropriate equitable relief
from a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 158-26. Use of alternate sewage system.
No permit for the use of a holding tank shall be issued, whether pursuant to
this article, any rules or regulations adopted herein or otherwise, unless all
other possible means of collecting and disposing of sewage at the property
in question have been considered and found to be unusable.
§ 158-27. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of § 158-24 shall, upon conviction
thereof by summary proceedings, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $100 and not more than $300, and, in default of said fine and costs, to
undergo imprisonment in the county prison for a period not in excess of 30
days.
B. Obtain a permit from the Sewage Enforcement Officer for permission to
install a holding tank. Prior to and as a condition of issuance of the
permit, the property owner shall pay the applicable permit fee and shall
pay an additional sum as prescribed by resolution as security for the
compliance by the property owner with the provisions of this article.
C. Maintain a holding tank in conformance with this or any ordinance of
the township, the provisions of any applicable law and the rules and
regulations of the township and any administrative agency of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
D. Permit only the township or its agent to inspect the holding tank on an
annual basis.
E. Permit only the township or a licensed hauler approved by the township
to collect, transport and dispose of the contents therein.
F. Pay within 10 days any charge, rate or assessment which is fixed by the
township.
G. Fill or remove any holding tank which has remained unused for a period
of four consecutive years, filling said holding tank with dirt or a similar
material; or fill or remove any holding tank within 30 days after
connection to another approved system.
§ 158-24 PLUMBING § 158-27
144:151

ARTICLE III
Connections
[Adopted 5-1-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-5]
§ 158-28. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms and phrases used in this article shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY — West Hanover Township Water and Sewer Authority, a
Pennsylvania municipality authority, organized by the township.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the sewage drainage system of
any structure to the lateral of a sewer.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property located within the township upon
which there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic
habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which
structure sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes shall be or may be
discharged.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any improved property located in the
township used wholly or in part for the manufacturing, processing,
cleaning, laundering or assembly of any product, commodity or article, or
any other improved property located in the township from which wastes, in
addition to or other than sanitary sewage, are discharged.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any and all wastes discharged from an industrial
establishment, other than sanitary sewage.
LATERAL — That part of the sewer system extending from a sewer to the
curbline or, if there shall be no curbline, extending to the property line; or,
if no such lateral shall be provided, then "lateral" shall mean that portion of
or place in a sewer which is provided for connection of any building sewer.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any improved property.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society,
corporation or other group or entity.
SANITARY SEWAGE — Normal water-carried household and toilet wastes
discharged from any improved property.
SEWER — Any pipe or conduit constituting a part of the sewer system used
or usable for sewage collection purposes.
SEWER SYSTEM — All facilities, as of any particular time, for collecting,
transporting, pumping, treating and/or disposing of sanitary sewage and/
or industrial wastes, situate in the township, to be constructed, acquired,
owned, maintained and operated by the Authority in, adjacent to and for
certain portions of the township.
TOWNSHIP — The township of West Hanover, Dauphin County,
Pennsylvania, acting by and through its Board of Supervisors, or, in
appropriate cases, by and through its authorized representatives.
§ 158-28 PLUMBING § 158-29
144:153
§ 158-29. Connection to sewer system required.
The owner of any improved property located in the township and accessible
to and whose principal building is within 150 feet from the sewer system
shall connect such improved property to the sewer system, in such manner
as the township and the Authority may require, within 60 days after notice
to such owner from the township to make such connection, for the purpose
of discharge of all sanitary sewage and industrial wastes from such
improved property, subject to such limitations and restrictions as shall be
established herein or otherwise shall be established by the township or the
Authority, from time to time.
§ 158-30. Wastes to be conducted into sewer.
All sanitary sewage and industrial wastes from any improved property, after
connection of such improved property with a sewer shall be required under
§ 158-29, shall be conducted into a sewer, subject to such limitations and
restrictions as shall be established herein or otherwise shall be established
by the township or the Authority from time to time.
§ 158-31. Discharge to public or private property and natural
outlets.
§ 158-32. Privy vaults, cesspools, sinkholes and septic tanks.
A. No person shall place or deposit or permit to be placed or deposited
upon public or private property within the township any sanitary
sewage or industrial wastes in violation of § 158-29.
B. No person shall discharge or permit to be discharged to any natural
outlet within the township any sanitary sewage or industrial wastes in
violation of § 158-29, except where suitable treatment has been
provided which is satisfactory to the township.
A. No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle
shall be used and maintained at any time upon any improved property
which has been connected to a sewer or which shall be required under
§ 158-29 to be connected to a sewer.
B. Every such privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar
receptacle in existence shall be abandoned and, at the discretion of the
township, shall be cleansed and filled at the expense of the owner of
such improved property and under the direction and supervision of the
township; and any such privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or
similar receptacle not so abandoned and, if required by the township,
cleansed and filled shall constitute a nuisance and such nuisance may
be abated as provided by law, at the expense of the owner of such
improved property.
C. No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle at
any time shall be connected with a sewer.
§ 158-29 WEST HANOVER CODE § 158-33
144:154
§ 158-33. Notice to make connection.
The notice by the township to make a connection to a sewer, referred to in
§ 158-29, shall consist of a copy of this article, including any amendments
at the time in effect, or a brief summary of each section thereof, and a
written or printed document requiring such connection in accordance with
the provisions of this article and specifying that such connection shall be
made within 60 days from the date such notice is given. Such notice may
be given at any time after a sewer is in place which can receive and convey
sanitary sewage and industrial wastes for treatment and disposal from the
particular improved property. Such notice shall be served upon the owner
either by personal service or by registered mail or by such other method as
at the time may be provided by law.
§ 158-34. Connection permit required.
No person shall uncover, connect with, make any opening into or use, alter
or disturb, in any manner, any sewer or the sewer system without first
making application for and securing a permit, in writing, from the Authority.
§ 158-35. Separate connection required; exceptions.
Except as otherwise provided in this section, each improved property shall
be connected separately and independently with a sewer through a building
sewer. Grouping of more than one improved property on one building sewer
shall not be permitted, except under special circumstances and for good
sanitary reasons or other good cause shown, and then only after special
permission of the township and the Authority, in writing, shall have been
secured.
§ 158-36. Costs of connection; indemnification.
All costs and expenses of construction of a building sewer and all costs
and expenses of connection of a building sewer to a lateral shall be borne
by the owner of the improved property to be connected; and such owner
shall indemnify and save harmless the township and the Authority from all
loss or damage that may be occasioned, directly or indirectly, as a result of
construction of a building sewer or of connection of a building sewer to a
sewer.
§ 158-37. Location of connection.
A. A building sewer shall be connected to a sewer at the place designated
by the Authority and where the lateral is provided.
B. The invert of a building sewer at the point of connection to a lateral
shall be at the same or a higher elevation than the invert of the lateral.
A smooth, neat joint shall be made and the connection of a building
sewer to the lateral shall be made secure and watertight.
§ 158-33 PLUMBING § 158-38
144:155
§ 158-38. Connection by township; bill for costs; lien.
If the owner of any improved property located in the township and
accessible to and whose principal building is within 150 feet from the
sewer system, after 60 days' notice from the township, in accordance with
§ 158-29, shall fail to connect such improved property, as required, the
township may make such connection and may collect from such owner the
costs and expenses thereof. In such case, the township shall forthwith,
upon completion of the work, send an itemized bill of the cost of the
construction of such connection to the owner of the improved property to
which connection has been so made, which bill shall be payable forthwith.
In case of neglect or refusal by the owner of such improved property to
pay said bill, the township shall file a municipal lien for said construction
within six months of the date of the completion of the construction of
said connection, the same to be subject in all respects to the general law
providing for the filing and recovery of municipal liens.
§ 158-39. Existing sewer lines.
Where an improved property, at the time connection to a sewer is required,
shall be served by its own sewage disposal system or device, the existing
house sewer line shall be broken on the structure side of such sewage
disposal system or device and attachment shall be made, with proper
fittings, to continue such house sewer line as a building sewer.
§ 158-40. Inspection and approval of sewer.
No building sewer shall be covered until it has been inspected and approved
by the township and the Authority. If any part of a building sewer is covered
before so being inspected and approved, it shall be uncovered for inspection
at the cost and expense of the owner of the improved property to be
connected to a sewer.
§ 158-41. Maintenance of sewer.
Every building sewer of any improved property shall be maintained in
a sanitary and safe operating condition by the owner of such improved
property.
§ 158-42. Enclosure of excavation; restoration of disturbed areas.
Every excavation for a building sewer shall be guarded adequately with
barricades and lights to protect all persons from damage and injury. Streets,
sidewalks and other public property disturbed in the course of installation
of a building sewer shall be restored, at the cost and expense of the owner
of the improved property being connected, in a manner satisfactory to the
township.
§ 158-38 WEST HANOVER CODE § 158-43
144:156
§ 158-43. Failure to remedy unsatisfactory conditions.
If any person shall fail or refuse, upon receipt of a notice of the township
or the Authority, in writing, to remedy any unsatisfactory condition with
respect to a building sewer, within 60 days of receipt of such notice, the
township or the Authority may refuse to permit such person to discharge
sanitary sewage and industrial wastes into the sewer system until such
unsatisfactory condition shall have been remedied to the satisfaction of the
township and the Authority.
§ 158-44. Adoption of additional rules and regulations.
The township reserves the right to adopt, from time to time, additional
rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary and proper relating to
connections with a sewer and the sewer system, which additional rules and
regulations, to the extent appropriate, shall be and shall be construed as
part of this article.
§ 158-45. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-1-1996 by Ord. No.
1996-5]
Any person who violates or permits the violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding, pay a fine
of not less than $100 nor more than $600, together with all court costs,
including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by West Hanover Township.
Each day that a violation shall continue shall be deemed and shall be taken
to be a separate violation and shall be actionable as such.
§ 158-46. Recovery of fines and costs.
Fines and costs imposed under provisions of this article shall be enforceable
and recoverable in the manner at the time provided by applicable law.
§ 158-47. Declaration of purpose.
It is declared that enactment of this article is necessary for the protection,
benefit and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of inhabitants of
the township.
§ 158-43 PLUMBING § 158-47
144:157
Chapter 165
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Advisory Council — See Ch.
15.
Hazardous waste — See Ch. 116.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 148.
§ 158-47 WEST HANOVER CODE § 158-47
144:158
ARTICLE I
Municipal Solid Waste Reduction and Recycling
§ 165-1. Statutory authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the Municipal Waste Planning,
Recycling and Waste Reduction Act, Act of July 28, 1988 (P.L. 556, No. 101),
53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 165-2. Purposes and goals.
The purposes and goals of this chapter are to:
§ 165-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORIZED COLLECTOR — A person, individual, partnership or
corporation or employer or agent thereof authorized by contract with the
municipality to collect solid waste from residential, commercial and
institutional properties as herein defined.
A. Require solid waste reduction and recycling as a means of managing
municipal waste and conserving resources and energy.
B. Protect the public health, safety and welfare from the short- and longterm
dangers of collection, transportation, processing and storage of
solid waste.
C. Utilize, wherever feasible, the capabilities of private enterprise in
accomplishing the desired objectives of an effective, comprehensive
solid waste management program.
D. Establish and implement within the township a recycling program to
return valuable materials to productive use to conserve energy and to
protect capacity at waste processing and disposal facilities.
E. Recycle at least 25% of all solid waste and source-separated recyclable
materials generated in the township on and after January 1, 1997.
F. Reduce the weight or volume of solid waste generated per capita in the
township on January 1, 1997, to a weight or volume less than that
generated per capita on the effective date of this chapter.
G. Educate each person living or working in the township of the economic,
environmental and energy benefits of recycling and waste reduction,
and encourage, through a variety of means, participation in such
activities.
H. Promote the procurement and use of products and materials with
recycled content and materials that are recyclable by the township to
the greatest extent practicable.
§ 165-1 PLUMBING § 165-3
144:159
BULKY WASTE — Items of refuse, including but not limited to appliances,
large auto parts and furniture, which require collection in other than
conventional compactor refuse collection vehicles.
COMMERCIAL PROPERTIES — All properties used for industrial,
commercial, business or office purposes, and all multifamily structures
having four or more dwelling units, provided that such dwelling units are
not individually owned.
COMMONWEALTH — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
DCISWA — The Dauphin County Intermunicipal Solid Waste Authority,
which has responsibility for municipal solid waste management in Dauphin
County, Pennsylvania.
DESIGNATED DISPOSAL SITE — A site specified by the DCISWA.
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete independent living
facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.[Amended 9-2-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-04]
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those facilities that house or serve
groups of people, including but not limited to hospitals, nursing homes,
child day-care centers, libraries, churches and nonprofit associations.
MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENT — Public facilities operated by the township
or other governmental authorities.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE (hereinafter referred to as "solid waste") —
Garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office waste and other material,
including solid, semisolid or contained gaseous material resulting from
operation of residential, municipal, commercial or institutional
establishments and from community activities.
PaDEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, cooperation, cooperative
enterprise, trust, federal institution or agency, state institution or agency,
municipality, other governmental agency or any other entity or any group of
such persons which is recognized by law and is subject to rights and duties.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials specified by the township
for separate collection in accordance with recycling regulations. Such
materials may include but not be limited to aluminum products, ferrous
containers, bimetal containers, glass containers, newspapers, magazines
and periodicals, office paper, plastic containers and yard wastes.[Amended
9-2-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-04]
RECYCLING — The separation, collection, processing and marketing or
reuse of recyclable materials.
REGULATIONS — The Municipal Solid Waste Regulations developed and
adopted by the township, DCISWA and PaDEP to govern the storage,
collection and disposal of solid waste; and the collection, transportation and
marketing of recyclables.
§ 165-3 WEST HANOVER CODE § 165-3
144:160
RESIDENCE — An occupied single or multifamily dwelling having up to
three dwelling units per structure, or each unit in a multifamily structure if
the dwelling units are individually owned with separate entrances.
SANITARY LANDFILL — A PaDEP approved facility for disposing of refuse
on land without creating nuisances or hazards to the public health or safety.
This is done by confining refuse to the smallest practical volume, and
covering it with a layer of earth at the conclusion of each day's operation or
at such more frequent intervals as may be necessary.[Amended 9-2-2008
by Ord. No. 2008-04]
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT — The purposeful systematic control of the
storage, collection, transportation, processing and disposal of solid waste,
and recycling of recyclable materials.[Amended 9-2-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-04]
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials that are
separated from municipal waste at the point of origin for the purpose of
recycling.
TOWNSHIP — West Hanover Township.
YARD WASTE — Grass clippings, leaves, garden residues, shrubbery and
tree trimmings and similar material.
§ 165-4. Mandatory recycling program for residential dwelling
units.
There is hereby established a program for the mandatory source-separation
of recyclable materials from solid waste by persons located in the township.
§ 165-5. Mandatory recycling program for certain uses. [Amended
9-2-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-04]
A. Residents of each dwelling unit, or multifamily housing of less than four
units, are hereby required to separate all recyclable materials as
specified by regulation from other solid waste generated at their
homes, apartments and other residential establishments and to store
such materials in compliance with the township codified ordinances
until collection.
B. Recyclable materials from residential dwelling units shall be placed at
the curb or other similar area, separated from solid waste; for collection
at such times and dates as may be established by regulation. Such
regulations shall schedule a minimum of one day per week for pickup of
recyclables from township dwelling units.
A. Commercial properties, multifamily housing of four or more units,
institutional, industrial and municipal establishments are hereby
required to separate all recyclable materials as specified by regulation
and to store such material in compliance with the Township codified
ordinances until collection from a bona fide and authorized collection
service. A minimum schedule of one day biweekly for pickup of
§ 165-3 PLUMBING § 165-5
144:161
recyclables from commercial properties and institutional
establishments is recommended. During periodic inspections to
determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter, commercial
properties, multifamily housing of four or more units, institutional,
industrial and municipal establishments will be asked to provide
evidence of their recycling service and program, including agreements
with waste haulers outlining the means to which recyclables are
entering the recycling stream and/or any Township designated
recyclables processing facility.
B. The owner, landlord or agent of an owner or landlord of multifamily
rental housing properties with four or more units shall comply with its
responsibilities under this section by establishing a collection system
for recyclable materials at each property. The collection system must
include suitable containers for collecting and sorting materials, easily
accessible locations for the containers and written instructions to the
occupants concerning the use and availability of the collection system.
Owners, landlords and agents of owners or landlords who comply with
this chapter shall not be liable for noncompliance of occupants of their
buildings.
C. The owner, landlord or agent of an owner or persons occupying
commercial (including multifamily rental housing properties with four
or more units), institutional, industrial and municipal establishments
within the Township municipal boundaries, not part of the Township
curbside recycling program and otherwise providing for the recycling
of materials that are required by this chapter to recycle, must provide,
annually, written documentation to the Township of the total number of
tons recycled or estimated to have been recycled. This responsibility
may be passed on to the authorized collector collecting the recyclables
for the owner, landlord or agent of an owner or person occupying
commercial, institutional, industrial and municipal establishments.
D. Recyclable materials collected. The following recyclable materials shall
be collected at all commercial, industrial, institutional, and municipal
establishments (including small business establishments and
multifamily rental housing properties with four or more units):
(1) Acceptable recyclables.
(a) Aluminum food and beverage containers.
(b) Glass food and beverage containers: brown, clear, or green.
(c) Ferrous (steel) cans.
(d) PET plastic containers with the symbol No. 1: with screw tops
only, without caps.
(e) HDPE natural plastic containers with the symbol No. 2:
narrow-neck containers only (milk and water bottles).
§ 165-5 WEST HANOVER CODE § 165-5
144:162
§ 165-6. Yard waste.
All owners of dwelling units in the township who gather yard waste shall
source-separate said waste and place it for collection at one of the
township's designated yard waste dropoff points unless those owners have
(f) HDPE pigmented plastic containers with the symbol No. 2:
narrow-neck containers only, without caps (detergent,
shampoo bottles, etc.).
(g) Plastics with symbols Nos. 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7: narrow and screw
top containers.
(h) Newsprint.
(i) Old corrugated cardboard.
(j) Magazines.
(k) Catalogs.
(l) Cereal boxes.
(m) Telephone books.
(n) Printer paper.
(o) Copier paper.
(p) Mail.
(q) All other office paper without wax liners.
(2) Unacceptable recyclables.
(a) Microwave trays.
(b) Mirrors.
(c) Window or auto glass.
(d) Light bulbs.
(e) Ceramics.
(f) Porcelain.
(g) Plastics unnumbered.
(h) Plastic bags.
(i) Coat hangers.
(j) Glass cookware/bakeware.
(k) Small electronics and equipment.
§ 165-5 PLUMBING § 165-6
144:163
otherwise provided for the disposal of yard waste by means of composting,
or by means of burning where permitted by ordinance.
§ 165-7. Authorization for township to enter into contract.
The township may enter into a contract with public or private agencies for
the curbside collection of all or part of the recyclable materials within its
municipal boundaries.
§ 165-8. Collection by authorized persons.
From the time of placement of recyclable materials at the curb or a similar
area for collection in accordance with this chapter, those materials shall be
and become the property of the township and the authorized collector. It
shall be a violation of this chapter for any person(s) not authorized by the
township to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any
such recyclable material. Any and each such collection in violation hereof
from one or more locations shall constitute a separate and distinct offense
punishable as hereinafter provided.
§ 165-9. Public notice and education.
The township shall establish a comprehensive and sustained public
information and education program concerning recycling program features
and requirements as required by the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling
and Waste Reduction Act.51
§ 165-10. Enforcement and regulations.
The Township Manager or his or her designee is authorized and directed to
enforce this chapter. The Township Manager is also hereby authorized and
directed to establish and promulgate reasonable regulations as to manner,
materials, days and times for the collection of recyclable materials and any
other matters required to implement this chapter in accordance herewith.
§ 165-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating sections of this chapter or any regulations thereof
shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be fined not more than $50
for the first offense, not more than $100 for the second offense and not more
than $500 for the third or subsequent offense. Any person violating § 165-8
of this chapter or any regulation thereof shall, upon conviction before a
District Justice, be fined not more than $1,000.
51.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 165-6 WEST HANOVER CODE § 165-11
144:164
ARTICLE II
Municipal Solid Waste Collection
§ 165-12. Authorization of collectors.
§ 165-13. Licensed collectors required.
Except as otherwise herein expressly provided, all solid waste in the
township shall be collected, transported and disposed of by collectors
licensed by the township, and not by any other person, firm, partnership or
corporation.
§ 165-14. Preparation of solid waste.
All solid waste shall be placed in garbage cans for collection, shall have
drained from it all free liquids and may be wrapped in paper.
§ 165-15. Container requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or corporation,
other than those duly authorized by the township, to collect and haul
solid waste of any nature within or from the township.
B. The Board of Supervisors, after public advertisement of competitive
bids, shall designate one person, partnership or corporation as the
authorized collector. Said authorized collector shall have the exclusive
right and obligation to collect solid waste in and from the township,
except that commercial properties, and institutional and municipal
establishments, as defined in Article I of this chapter, may contract with
collectors other than the authorized collector. If any aforementioned
establishment wishes to use a collector other than the authorized
collector, said establishment must apply for a permit which shall
designate the collector who may haul solid waste from the named
establishment in accordance with the regulations of this chapter.
C. All residential dwelling units, as defined in Article I, shall participate
individually in the solid waste contract with the authorized collector as
provided in Subsection B of this section.
A. Containers for solid waste disposal shall be provided by the owner,
tenant, lessee or occupant of each dwelling unit. The containers may be
made of metal, plastic or rubber, equipped with suitable handles and
tight-fitting covers and shall be watertight and have a capacity of not
more than 33 gallons. Containers shall be of a type approved by the
township and shall be kept in clean, safe and sanitary condition at all
times. Any container that does not conform to the provisions of this part
or that may have ragged or sharp edges or any other defect likely to
injure any person collecting the contents thereof shall be promptly
replaced upon notice. The township shall have the authority to refuse
collection services for failure to comply herewith.
§ 165-12 PLUMBING § 165-15
144:165
§ 165-16. Frequency of collection.
§ 165-17. Sanitation truck specifications.
Trucks for the removal of solid waste shall be metal, securely covered,
watertight, strongly built, kept thoroughly cleansed and well painted and
must, on each side thereof, have painted the name of the authorized
collector or other licensed haulers, telephone number and truck number in
letters of a size to be easily legible. Open trucks or trucks covered with
tarps will not be acceptable for this work.
§ 165-18. Flammable or explosive waste.
Highly flammable or explosive materials shall not be placed in containers
for regular collection but shall be disposed of as directed by the township at
the expense of the owner or possessor thereof.
§ 165-19. Disposal by individuals.
The township may, if, in its discretion, it is necessary and not inconsistent
with the intent of this article, issue a special permit authorizing the actual
producer of solid waste or the owner of the premises upon which it is
accumulated to collect, transport and dispose of such solid waste.
§ 165-20. Receptacles use and unlawful deposit (dumping) of waste.
[Amended 7-7-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-06]
B. Solid waste may be stored in plastic bags if kept in a metal, plastic or
rubber container until collection day.
A. Residential. Waste produced in each dwelling unit shall be collected at
least once each week.
B. Commercial properties and institutional and municipal establishments.
Solid waste produced by commercial properties and institutional and
municipal establishments shall be collected at least once a week. If
necessary to protect public health, solid waste produced in such
establishments shall be collected more frequently upon written
notification of the township.
A. No person shall deposit or cause municipal solid waste to be deposited
in any street, alley or other public place or in any stream or other body
of water or upon private property, whether owned by such person or
not, within the township unless it is in proper receptacles for collection
or under express permit granted by the Township.
B. No person, firm, corporation or any entity shall place, dump, deposit or
cause to be deposited municipal solid waste, bulky waste, recyclable
materials, including but not limited to any building materials, concrete,
unauthorized fill, debris, appliances, tires, metal, wood, solid waste,
hazardous material, and yard waste, on any street, alley, public or
§ 165-15 WEST HANOVER CODE § 165-20
144:166
§ 165-21. Unlawful handling of waste.
No person shall molest, collect, transport through the streets or interfere
with receptacles containing waste or the contents thereof except those
employees of licensed collectors, or those persons to whom the township
may have granted specific permits therefor.
§ 165-22. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction therefor, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $600 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of
payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days,
provided that each day's violation of any of the provisions of this article shall
constitute a separate offense.
private property, stream or other body of water, whether owned by
such person or not, within the Township of West Hanover. Cleanup and/
or removal of all unlawfully deposited and dumped materials shall be
completed within 10 days.
§ 165-20 PLUMBING § 165-22
144:167

ARTICLE III
Solid Waste Collectors
§ 165-23. Dumping regulations.
Every individual, partnership, firm or corporation collecting solid waste
within the boundaries of the township shall dump all such solid waste
collected within the boundaries of the township at designated disposal sites
existing and operating in accordance with the rules and regulations of the
PaDEP.
§ 165-24. Permit required.
Every individual, partnership, firm or corporation collecting and hauling
solid waste or recyclable materials for commercial properties, and
institutional and municipal establishments, shall obtain a permit from the
township.
§ 165-25. Permit term.
All permits shall be issued for a period of one year commencing on July 1
and ending on June 30. Such permits are not transferable.
§ 165-26. Permit fees. [Amended 7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-7]
All persons collecting solid waste or recyclable materials in the township
shall pay a fee as set forth from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors for the use of one truck and a fee as set forth from time to time
by resolution of the Board of Supervisors for each additional truck, annually,
for a permit enabling them to operate within the township.
§ 165-27. Solid waste and recycling supervision.
The direction, supervision and control of the solid waste and recycling
program shall be by the Township Manager or his agent. The Township
Manager or his agent shall generally supervise the collection and disposal
of solid waste in the township. The West Hanover Township Environmental
Advisory Committee shall act in an advisory capacity to the Township
Manager and the Board of Supervisors.
§ 165-28. Dumping of hazardous wastes prohibited.
Hazardous waste, as defined by the United States Environmental Protection
Agency and the PaDEP, shall not be dumped or disposed at any designated
disposal site.
§ 165-29. Violations and penalties.
Any person, association, partnership or corporation who fails to comply
with any of the requirements or provisions of this article or any regulations
issued pursuant to this article or who fails or refuses to comply with any
§ 165-23 PLUMBING § 165-29
144:169
notice, order or direction of any officer or employee of the township given
pursuant to the authority conferred herein shall be guilty of a summary
offense and, upon conviction thereof before any District Justice, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $600 and
costs of prosecution for each and every offense, and, in default of payment
thereof, shall be imprisoned in the county jail for not more than 30 days.
§ 165-29 WEST HANOVER CODE § 165-29
144:170
Chapter 168
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 88.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 108.
Sewers — See Ch. 158.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 170.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
173.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 165-29 PLUMBING § 165-29
144:171

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 168-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "West Hanover
Township Stormwater Management Ordinance."
§ 168-2. Statement of findings.
The governing body of the Township finds that:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases flood flows and
velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the
carrying capacity of existing streams and storm sewers, greatly
increases the cost of public facilities to convey and manage stormwater,
undermines floodplain management and flood reduction efforts in
upstream and downstream communities, reduces groundwater
recharge, threatens public health and safety, and increases nonpoint
source pollution of water resources.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated runoff, is fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare,
and the protection of the people of the Township and all the people of
the commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.
C. Inadequate planning and management of stormwater runoff resulting
from land development and redevelopment throughout a watershed can
also harm surface water resources by changing the natural hydrologic
patterns; accelerating stream flows (which increase scour and erosion
of streambeds and stream banks, thereby elevating sedimentation);
destroying aquatic habitat; and elevating aquatic pollutant
concentrations and loadings such as sediments, nutrients, heavy
metals, and pathogens. Groundwater resources are also impacted
through loss of recharge.
D. Stormwater is an important water resource which provides
groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams,
which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
E. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component in successfully addressing stormwater issues.
F. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES).
§ 168-1 PLUMBING § 168-2
144:173
§ 168-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety, and welfare within
West Hanover Township, by minimizing the harms and maximizing the
benefits described in § 168-2 of this chapter through provisions intended to:
§ 168-4. Statutory authority.
G. Nonstormwater discharges to municipal separate storm sewer systems
can contribute to pollution of waters of the commonwealth.
A. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93 to protect, maintain, reclaim, and
restore the existing and designated uses of the waters of the
commonwealth.
B. Manage accelerated runoff and erosion and sedimentation problems
close to their source, by regulating activities that cause these problems.
C. Preserve the natural drainage systems to the maximum extent
practicable.
D. Maintain groundwater recharge, to prevent degradation of surface
water and groundwater quality, and to otherwise protect water
resources.
E. Maintain existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses.
F. Preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams and prevent
scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
G. Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source, with a minimum
of structures and a maximum use of natural processes.
H. Provide procedures, performance standards, and design criteria for
stormwater planning and management.
I. Provide proper operations and maintenance of all temporary and
permanent stormwater management facilities and best management
practices (BMPs) that are constructed and implemented.
J. Provide standards to meet the NPDES permit requirements.
K. Implement an illegal discharge detection and elimination program
within MS4 permitted urbanized areas to address non-stormwater
discharges into the Township's separate storm sewer system.
A. Primary authority. West Hanover Township is empowered to regulate
these activities by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864
(Act 167), 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., as amended, the Storm Water
Management Act.
B. Secondary authority. West Hanover Township also is empowered to
regulate land use activities that affect runoff by the authority of the Act
§ 168-2 WEST HANOVER CODE § 168-4
144:174
§ 168-5. Applicability.
§ 168-6. Repealer.
Any ordinance, ordinance provision(s), or regulation of West Hanover
Township inconsistent with any of the provision(s) of this chapter is hereby
repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
§ 168-7. Severability.
In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction declares any section(s) or
provision(s) of this chapter invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity
of any of the remaining section(s) or provision(s) of this chapter.
§ 168-8. Compatibility with other ordinance requirements.
of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended.52
A. This chapter shall apply to all areas of the Township, any regulated
activity within the Township, and all stormwater runoff entering into
the Township's separate storm sewer system from lands within the
boundaries of the Township.
B. Earth disturbance activities and associated stormwater management
controls are also regulated under existing state law and implementing
regulations. This chapter shall operate in coordination with those
parallel requirements; the requirements of this chapter shall be no less
restrictive in meeting the purposes of this chapter than state law.
C. See § 168-13 of this chapter for exemption/modification criteria.
A. Approvals issued and actions taken pursuant to this chapter do not
relieve the applicant of the responsibility to comply with or to secure
required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other
applicable codes, laws, rules, statutes, or ordinances. To the extent that
this chapter imposes more rigorous or stringent requirements for
stormwater management, the specific requirements contained in this
chapter shall be followed.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect any of the
Township's requirements regarding stormwater matters which do not
conflict with the provisions of this chapter, such as local stormwater
management design criteria (e.g., inlet spacing, inlet type, collection
system design and details, outlet structure design, etc.). Conflicting
provisions in other Township ordinances or regulations shall be
construed to retain the requirements of this chapter addressing state
water quality requirements.
52.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 168-4 PLUMBING § 168-8
144:175
§ 168-9. Duty of persons engaged in development of land.
Notwithstanding any provision(s) of this chapter, including exemptions, any
landowner or any person engaged in the alteration or development of land
which may affect stormwater runoff characteristics shall implement such
measures as are reasonably necessary to prevent injury to health, safety,
or other property. Such measures also shall include actions as are required
to manage the rate, volume, direction, and quality of resulting stormwater
runoff in a manner which otherwise adequately protects health, property,
and water quality.
§ 168-10. Other approvals.
Compliance with this chapter does not preclude the need to obtain other
permits and approvals as required by West Hanover Township, Dauphin
County, the Dauphin County Conservation District, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, the federal government and other agencies. Other permits
and approvals may include zoning and building permits from the Township,
an erosion and sedimentation pollution control plan, National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System permit (NPDES), water obstruction and
encroachment permit, dam safety permit, submerged lands license
agreement, Sections 401 and 404 of the Clean Water Act and others. The
most stringent of all pertinent requirements shall apply.
C. The degree of stormwater management sought by the provisions of this
chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of West Hanover Susquehanna
Township, any appointed or elected official of West Hanover Township,
the Dauphin County Conservation District or any officer, engineer or
employee thereof for any erosion, sedimentation or flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
§ 168-8 WEST HANOVER CODE § 168-10
144:176
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 168-11. Definitions; word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender, and
words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation, or any other
similar entity.
D. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
E. The words "used "or "occupied" include the words "intended, designed,
maintained, or arranged to be used, occupied or maintained."
F. Word list. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land
through the combined action of human activity and natural processes at
a rate greater than would occur because of the natural process alone.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES — Activities associated with agriculture
such as agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and animal
heavy use areas. This includes the work of producing crops, tillage,
land clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting crops,
or the pasturing and raising of livestock and installation of conservation
measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious area is not
considered an agricultural activity.
ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a result
of the moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another;
the changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be more or
less impervious; land disturbance.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer, or other person who has filed
an application for approval to engage in any regulated activities at a
project site within the Township.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS) — Activities, facilities,
designs, measures or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts
from regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to
§ 168-11 PLUMBING § 168-11
144:177
promote groundwater recharge and to otherwise meet the purposes
of this chapter. Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one
of two broad categories or measures: "nonstructural" or "structural."
Nonstructural BMPs are measures referred to as "operational" and/
or "behavior-related" practices that attempt to minimize the contact
of pollutants with stormwater runoff, whereas structural BMPs are
measures that consist of a physical device or practice that is installed
to capture and treat stormwater runoff. Structural BMPs include, but
are not limited to, a wide variety of practices and devices, from largescale
wet ponds and constructed wetlands, to small-scale underground
treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter strips, low-impact design,
bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, grassed swales, riparian
or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins, and manufactured
devices. "Structural" stormwater BMPs are permanent appurtenances
to the project site.
BMP MANUAL — The Pennsylvania Stormwater best management
practices Manual as published by the Department of Environmental
Protection, Bureau of Watershed Management, Document No.
363-0300-002, effective date December 30, 2006, and as revised.
CHANNEL — A passage for water (or other fluids) to flow through.
CHANNEL EROSION — The widening, deepening, and headward
cutting of small channels and waterways, due to erosion caused by
moderate to large floods.
CHANNEL, MAIN — The downstream water-receiving channel
designated in the Act 167 plan that accepts the discharge of undetained
post-development peak runoff without causing any harm for the given
design storm.
CISTERN — An underground reservoir or tank used for storing
rainwater.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Dauphin County Conservation
District (DCCD). The Dauphin County Conservation District has the
authority under a delegation agreement executed with the Department
of Environmental Protection to administer and enforce all or a portion
of the regulations promulgated under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
CULVERT — A structure with appurtenant works that carries a stream
and/or stormwater runoff under or through an embankment or fill.
DAM — An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another
fluid or semifluid, or a refuse bank, fill or structure for highway, railroad
or other purposes which does or may impound water or another fluid or
semifluid.
DESIGNEE — The agent of the Township and/or agent of the governing
body involved with the administration, review or enforcement of any
provisions of this chapter by contract or memorandum of
understanding.
§ 168-11 WEST HANOVER CODE § 168-11
144:178
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a twenty-five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in
the design and evaluation of stormwater management systems. Also see
"return period."
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment structure designed to manage
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at
a predetermined rate.
DETENTION FACILITIES, REGIONAL — A detention facility that
detains and treats stormwater runoff for two or more development
sites, where the development sites are generally considered to be
independent and typically contain their own separate detention
facilities.
DETENTION POND — A vegetated pond designed to collect water
runoff for a given storm event and release it at a predetermined rate;
also known as a "dry pond."
DETENTION VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured and
released during or after a storm event into waters of the commonwealth
at a controlled rate.
DEVELOPER — A person, partnership, association, corporation, or
other entity, or any responsible person therein or agent thereof, that
undertakes any regulated activity of this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
filling, grading, paving, excavating, earth disturbance activity, mining,
dredging or drilling operations, the placement of manufactured homes,
streets and other paving, utilities and the subdivision of land.
DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE) — The specific tract of land for which a
regulated activity is proposed. Also see "project site."
DISTURBED AREA — An unstabilized land area where an earth
disturbance activity is occurring or has occurred.
DOWNSLOPE PROPERTY LINE — That portion of the property line of
the lot, tract, or parcels of land being developed located such that all
overland or piped flow from the site would be directed toward it.
DRAINAGE CONVEYANCE FACILITY — A stormwater management
facility designed to convey stormwater runoff and shall include streams,
channels, swales, pipes, conduits, culverts, storm sewers, etc.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee,
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management, drainage,
or conveyance purposes.
DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Pipes, swales, natural features and man-made
improvements designed to carry drainage.
§ 168-11 PLUMBING § 168-11
144:179
DRAINAGEWAY — Any natural or artificial watercourse, trench, ditch,
pipe, swale, channel, or similar depression into which surface water
flows.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human
activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited
to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, land
development, agricultural plowing or tilling, timber harvesting
activities, road maintenance activities, mineral extraction, and the
moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock or earth
materials.
EROSION — The movement of soil particles by the action of water,
wind, ice, or other natural forces.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT POLLUTION CONTROL PLAN — A plan
which is designed to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation.
EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any
other similar material is dug into, cut, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated or bulldozed. It shall include the conditions
resulting therefrom.
EXCEPTIONAL VALUE WATERS — Surface waters of high quality,
which satisfies Pa. Code Title 25, Environmental Protection, Chapter
93, Water Quality Standards, § 93.4b(b) (relating to antidegradation).
EXISTING CONDITIONS — All existing pervious land cover shall be
considered as "meadow" unless the natural land cover is documented
to generate lower curve numbers or rational "C" coefficients, such as
forested lands.
FEMA — The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FILL — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material
is placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved to a new
location above the natural surface of the ground or on top of the
stripped surface and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom;
the difference in elevation between a point on the original ground and
a designated point of higher elevation on the final grade; the material
used to make a fill.
FLOOD — A general but temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of streams,
rivers, and other waters of the commonwealth.
FLOOD-FRINGE — The remaining portions of the one-hundred-year
floodplain outside of the floodway boundary.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water
from any natural source or delineated by applicable Department of
Housing and Urban Development Federal Insurance Administration
Flood Hazard Boundary Map as being a special flood hazard area.
Included are lands adjoining a river or stream that have been or may
be inundated by a one-hundred-year flood. Also included are areas that
§ 168-11 WEST HANOVER CODE § 168-11
144:180
comprise Group 13 Soils, as listed in Appendix A of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP) Technical Manual for
Sewage Enforcement Officers (as amended or replaced from time to
time by PADEP).
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of
the adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and
discharge the one-hundred-year frequency flood. Unless otherwise
specified, the boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and
flood insurance studies provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA
maps or studies have defined the boundary of the one-hundred-year
frequency floodway, it is assumed, absent evidence to the contrary, that
the floodway extends from the stream to 50 feet from the top of the
bank of the stream.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and
activities necessary for the management of forestland. These include
timber inventory and preparation of forest management plans,
silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and
construction, timber harvesting, site preparation and reforestation.
FREEBOARD — A vertical distance between the elevation of the design
high water and the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, or diversion ridge.
The space is required as a safety margin in a pond or basin.
GRADE — A slope, usually of a road, channel or natural ground,
specified in percent and shown on plans as specified herein.
GRADE, TO — To finish the surface of a roadbed, top of embankment or
bottom of excavation.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies.
HEC-HMS MODEL CALIBRATED (HYDROLOGIC ENGINEERING
CENTER HYDROLOGIC MODELING SYSTEM) — A computer-based
hydrologic modeling technique adapted to the watersheds in Dauphin
County for the Act 167 plan. The model has been calibrated by
adjusting key model input parameters.
HIGH-QUALITY WATERS — Surface water having quality which
exceeds levels necessary to support propagation of fish, shellfish, and
wildlife and recreation in and on the water by satisfying Pa. Code Title
25, Environmental Protection, Chapter 93, Water Quality Standards,
§ 93.4b(a).
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — Infiltration rates of soils vary
widely and are affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface
intake rates. Soils are classified into one of four HSG (A, B, C, and
D) according to their minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for
bare soil after prolonged wetting. The Natural Resource Conservation
Service (NRCS) of the U.S. Department of Agriculture defines the four
groups and provides a list of most of the soils in the United States
and their group classification. The soils in the area of interest may be
§ 168-11 PLUMBING § 168-11
144:181
identified from a soil survey report from the local NRCS office or the
Dauphin County Conservation District.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA) — A surface that
prevents the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surfaces
(or areas) shall include, but are not limited to, roofs, additional indoor
living spaces, patios, garages, storage sheds and similar structures,
streets, sidewalks and vehicle and pedestrian areas that are gravel and
crushed stone. Decks are not counted as impervious areas if they do
not prevent infiltration. Any surface area proposed to initially be gravel,
crushed stone or paving shall be assumed to be impervious, unless
designed as an infiltration BMP.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURES — A structure designed to direct runoff
into the ground (e.g., french drains, seepage pits, seepage trench, etc.).
INLET — A surface connection to a closed drain. A structure at the
diversion end of a conduit. The upstream end of any structure through
which water may flow.
KARST — A type of topography or landscape characterized by surface
depressions, sinkholes, rock pinnacles/uneven bedrock surface, steepsided
hills, underground drainage and caves. Karst is formed on
carbonate rocks, such as limestone or dolomites and sometimes
gypsum.
LAND DEVELOPMENT (DEVELOPMENT) — Any of the following
activities:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure; or
(a)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of,
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features.
(b)
(1)
(2) A subdivision of land.
The exclusion of certain land development from this definition of
"land development" is permitted only when such land development
involves:
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling
or single-family semidetached dwelling into not more that
three residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium.
(a)
(3)
§ 168-11 WEST HANOVER CODE § 168-11
144:182
LIMIT OF DISTURBANCE — A line provided on the SWM site plan
that indicates the total area to be disturbed during a proposed earth
disturbance activity.
MAIN STEM (MAIN CHANNEL) — Any stream segment or other runoff
conveyance facility used as a reach in the Dauphin County Act 167
watershed hydrologic model(s).
MANNING EQUATION (MANNING FORMULA) — A method for
calculation of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g.,
cubic feet per second) in open channels based upon channel shape,
roughness, depth of flow and slope. Open channels may include closed
conduits so long as the flow is not under pressure.
MINIMUM SEPARATION — The minimum distance between the
discharge or runoff from impervious surfaces and the receiving stream,
storm sewer or property line, whichever is smaller, whether the
discharge is point or nonpoint discharge. It is intended to provide
ample, natural undisturbed vegetated pervious areas to allow for the
infiltration of increased volumes of runoff.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM
(NPDES) — The federal government's system for issuance of permits
under the Clean Water Act, which is delegated to PADEP in
Pennsylvania.
NATURAL DRAINAGE FLOW — The pattern of surface and stormwater
drainage from a particular site before the construction or installation of
improvements or prior to any regrading.
NOAA ATLAS 14 — Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States,
Atlas 14, Volume 2, U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration, National Weather Service,
Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center, Silver Spring, Maryland
(2004). NOAA's Atlas 14 can be accessed at Internet address
http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution that enters a water
body from diffuse origins in the watershed and does not result from
discernible, confined, or discrete conveyances.
NRCS — Natural Resource Conservation Service [previously Soil
Conservation Service (SCS)].
OBSTRUCTION — Any wall, dam, wharf, embankment, levee, dike,
projection, excavation, channel, rectification, culvert, building, fence,
The addition of an accessory building, including farm
buildings, on a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal
building not to exceed 5,000 square feet of impervious
coverage.
(b)
An addition to a nonresidential building not to exceed 2,500
square feet. Files must be checked to be sure plan is
compatible with the original land development plan.
(c)
§ 168-11 PLUMBING § 168-11
144:183
stockpile, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along, across or projecting
into any channel, watercourse or flood-prone area which may impede,
retard or change the direction of the flow of water either in itself or by
catching or collecting debris carried by such water or is placed where
the flow of the water might carry the same downstream to the damage
of life and property.
OPEN CHANNEL — A drainage element in which stormwater flows
with an open surface. Open channels include, but shall not be limited to,
natural and man-made drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, canals,
and pipes not under pressure.
OUTFALL —
OUTLET — Points of water disposal from a stream, river, lake,
tidewater, or artificial drain.
PADEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
PARKING LOT STORAGE — Involves the use of impervious parking
areas as temporary impoundments with controlled release rates during
rainstorms.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, or a governmental unit, public utility or any other legal
entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights
and duties.
PERVIOUS AREA — Any area not defined as impervious.
PIPE — A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including
appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of West
Hanover Township.
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined, or discrete conveyance,
including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, or conduit
from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state
regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 92.1.53
POLLUTANT — Any introduced gas, liquid or solid that makes a
resource unfit for a specific purpose.
(1) Point where water flows from a conduit, stream, or drain;
"Point source" as described in 40 CFR § 122.2 at the point where
the Township's storm sewer system discharges to surface waters of
the commonwealth.
(2)
53.Editor's Note: Chapter 92 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code was rescinded 10-8-2010;
see now 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92a. For definitions, see 25 Pa. Code § 92a.2.
§ 168-11 WEST HANOVER CODE § 168-11
144:184
POLLUTION — The presence of matter or energy whose nature,
location or quantity produces undesired environmental effects.
PROBABLE MAXIMUM FLOOD (PMF) — The flood that may be
expected from the most severe combination of critical meteorological
and hydrologic conditions that are reasonably possible in any area.
The PMF is derived from the probable maximum precipitation (PMP)
as determined on the basis of data obtained from the National
Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated
activities in the Township are planned, conducted, or maintained.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — Any person licensed by the
Pennsylvania Department of State or otherwise qualified by law to
perform the work required by this chapter.
RATIONAL FORMULA — A rainfall-runoff relation used to estimate
peak flow.
REDEVELOPMENT — Earth disturbance activities on land which has
previously been developed.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Any earth disturbance activities or any
activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner
that may affect stormwater runoff. Regulated activities include, but are
not limited to, the following listed items:
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving
earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92,54
Chapter 102, or the Clean Streams Law.
(1) Earth disturbance activities.
(2) Land development.
(3) Subdivision.
Construction of new or additional impervious or semipervious
surfaces.
(4)
(5) Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
(6) Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel.
Installation of new or modification of existing stormwater
management facilities or appurtenances thereto.
(7)
(8) Installation of new or modification of existing stormwater BMPs.
Changes in soil absorption caused by compaction during
development or timber harvesting.
(9)
(10)Redirection or concentration of runoff to adjoining properties.
Modification in contours, including the filling and/or draining of
low areas.
(11)
§ 168-11 PLUMBING § 168-11
144:185
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of pre-development peak rate of
runoff from a site or subwatershed area to which the post-development
peak rate of runoff must be reduced to protect downstream areas.
RELEASE RATE DISTRICT — Those subwatershed areas in which postdevelopment
flows must be reduced to a certain percentage of predevelopment
flows as required to meet the plan requirements and the
goals of Act 167.
RETENTION BASIN — A pond containing a permanent pool of water
designed and/or constructed to store water runoff for a given storm
event and release it at a predetermined rate.
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF — The volume of runoff
that is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of this
commonwealth during or after a storm event.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a
storm event of a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For
example, the probability of a twenty-five-year storm occurring in any
one given year is 0.04 (i.e., a four-percent chance).
RIPARIAN BUFFER — A vegetated area bordering perennial and
intermittent streams and wetlands that serves as a protective filter to
help protect streams and wetlands from the impacts of adjacent land
uses.
RISER — A vertical pipe extending from the bottom of a pond that is
used to control the discharge rate from the pond for a specified design
storm.
ROAD MAINTENANCE — Earth disturbance activities within the
existing road right-of-way, such as grading and repairing existing
unpaved road surfaces, cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing
drainage ditches, and other similar activities. Road maintenance
activities that do not disturb the subbase of a paved road, such as
milling and pavement overlays, are not considered earth disturbance
activities.
ROOFTOP DETENTION — Temporary ponding and gradual release of
stormwater falling directly onto flat roof surfaces by incorporating
controlled-flow roof drains into building designs.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
RUNOFF CAPTURE VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured
(retained) and not released into surface waters of the commonwealth
during or after a storm event.
SEDIMENT — Soils or other materials transported by surface water as
a product of erosion.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by the movement of water.
54.Editor's Note: See now 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92a.
§ 168-11 WEST HANOVER CODE § 168-11
144:186
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier, dam, or detention basin located and
designed to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt, or other material transported
by stormwater runoff.
SEDIMENT POLLUTION — The placement, discharge, or any other
introduction of sediment into waters of the commonwealth occurring
from the failure to properly design, construct, implement or maintain
control measures and control facilities in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled
with loose stone or similar coarse material, into which surface water is
directed for infiltration into the ground.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.
SHEET FLOW — Runoff that flows over the ground surface as a thin,
even layer, not concentrated in a channel.
SLOPE — The face of an embankment or cut section; any ground whose
surface makes an angle with the plane of the horizon. Slopes are usually
expressed in a percentage based upon vertical difference in feet per
100 feet of horizontal distance.
SOIL COVER COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by the NRCS that is based on relating soil type and land use/
cover to a runoff parameter called "curve number" (CN).
SOIL STABILIZATION — The chemical or structural treatment of a
mass of soil to increase or maintain its stability or otherwise to improve
its engineering properties.
SPILLWAY (EMERGENCY) — A depression in the embankment of a
pond or basin, or other overflow structure, that is used to pass peak
discharges greater than the maximum design storm controlled by the
pond or basin.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory
requirements to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality
under Title 25 of that Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law,
including, but not limited to:
Each stream segment in Pennsylvania has a "designated use," such
as "cold-water fishery" or "potable water supply," which is listed in
Chapter 93. These uses must be protected and maintained, under
state regulations.
(1)
"Existing uses" are those attained as of November 1975, regardless
of whether they have been designated in Chapter 93. Earth
disturbance activities must be designed to protect and maintain
existing uses and maintain the level of water quality necessary to
(2)
§ 168-11 PLUMBING § 168-11
144:187
STORAGE INDICATION METHOD — A reservoir routing procedure
based on solution of the continuity equation (inflow minus outflow
equals the change in storage) with outflow defined as a function of
storage volume and depth.
STORM FREQUENCY — The number of times that a given storm
"event" occurs or is exceeded on the average in a stated period of years.
See also "return period."
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes and/or open channels that convey
intercepted runoff and stormwater from other sources, but excludes
domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land
resulting from precipitation, snow, or ice melt.
STORMWATER DETENTION — Any storm drainage technique that
retards or detains runoff, such as detention or retention basin, parking
lot storage, rooftop storage, porous pavement, dry wells or any
combination thereof.
STORMWATER DETENTION BASIN — A vegetated pond designed to
drain completely after storing runoff only for a given storm event and
release it at a predetermined rate; also known as a "dry pond."
STORMWATER HOTSPOT — A land use or activity that generates
higher concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals, or toxicants than
are found in typical stormwater runoff.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES — Any structure, natural
or man-made, that, due to its condition, design, or construction,
conveys, stores, or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical
stormwater management facilities include, but are not limited to,
detention basins, wet ponds, open channels, storm sewers, pipes and
infiltration facilities.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The Dauphin County
stormwater management plan for managing stormwater runoff in
protect those uses in all streams, and to protect and maintain water
quality in special protection streams.
Water quality involves the chemical, biological, and physical
characteristics of surface water bodies. After earth disturbance
activities are complete, these characteristics can be impacted by
addition of pollutants, such as sediment, and changes in habitat
through increased flow volumes and/or rates as a result of changes
in land surface area from those activities. Therefore, permanent
discharges to surface waters must be managed to protect the
stream bank, streambed, and structural integrity of the waterway,
to prevent these impacts.
(3)
Protection and maintenance of water quality in special protection
streams pursuant to 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93.
(4)
§ 168-11 WEST HANOVER CODE § 168-11
144:188
Dauphin County as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act
167) and known as the "Storm Water Management Act."55
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN (SWM site plan) — The
plan prepared by the applicant or his representative indicating how
stormwater runoff will be managed at the project site in accordance
with this chapter.
STREAM — A watercourse with definite bed and banks which confine
and convey continuously or intermittently flowing water.
STREAM ENCLOSURE — A bridge, culvert, or other structure in excess
of 100 feet in length upstream to downstream which encloses regulated
waters of the commonwealth.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition of the court for
distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or
lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of
land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not
involving any new street or easement of access, or any residential
dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBWATERSHED AREA — The smallest drainage unit of a watershed
for which stormwater management criteria has been established in the
stormwater management plan.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land that gathers or carries surface
water runoff.
TIMBER OPERATIONS — See "forest management."
TIME OF CONCENTRATION (TC) — The time for surface runoff to
travel from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to a
point of interest within the watershed. This time is the combined total
of overland flow time and flow time in pipes or channels, if any.
Minor Subdivision — The subdivision of a single lot, tract or parcel
of land into six or fewer lots, tracts or parcels of land, for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or
of building development, providing lots, tracts or parcels of land
thereby created having frontage on an improved public street or
streets, and providing, further, that there is not created by the
subdivision any new street, street easement, easements of access
or need therefor.
(1)
Major Subdivision — Any subdivision involving more than six lots,
parcels of land or other divisions of land, whether or not they
involve new streets, additional utilities or other facilities immediate
or future.
(2)
55.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 168-11 PLUMBING § 168-11
144:189
TOPOGRAPHIC MAP — A map showing the elevations of the ground by
contours or elevation.
TOPOGRAPHY — The configuration of a surface area showing relative
elevations.
TOPSOIL — Surface soils and subsurface soils which presumably are
fertile soils and soil material, ordinarily rich in organic matter or humus
debris. Topsoil is usually found in the uppermost soil layer called the "A
Horizon."
TOWNSHIP — West Hanover Township, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
UNDEVELOPED LAND — Any lot which has not been graded or in any
other manner prepared for the construction of a building.
USDA — The United States Department of Agriculture.
VEGETATIVE COVER — Such cover shall consist of trees, shrubs,
flowers, grass or similar natural cover.
WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water, such as
a stream or creek, having defined bed and banks, whether natural or
artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow.
WATER POLLUTION — The addition of pollutants to water in
concentrations or in sufficient quantities to result in measurable
degradation of water quality.
WATERSHED — Region or area drained by a river, watercourse, or
other surface water, whether natural or artificial.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Rivers, streams, creeks,
rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs and other bodies or channels
of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof,
whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
WATER TABLE — The upper surface of groundwater, or that level below
which the soil is seasonally saturated with water.
WETLAND — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface
water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support,
and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
including swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. (The term includes
but is not limited to wetland areas listed in the State Water Plan,
the United States Forest Service Wetlands Inventory of Pennsylvania,
the Pennsylvania Coastal Zone Management Plan and a wetland area
designated by a river basin commission. This definition is used by the
United States Environmental Protection Agency and the United States
Army Corps of Engineers.)
§ 168-11 WEST HANOVER CODE § 168-11
144:190
ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management Standards
§ 168-12. General requirements.
A. For all regulated activities, unless specifically exempted in § 168-13A:
(1) Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM site plan is
required.
(2) No regulated activities shall commence until the Township issues
written approval of a SWM site plan, which demonstrates
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
(3) The SWM site plan shall demonstrate that adequate capacity will
be provided to meet the Volume and Rate Control Requirements, as
described under §§ 168-14 and 168-15 of this chapter.
(4) The SWM site plan approved by the Township shall be on site
throughout the duration of construction of the regulated activities.
B. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and
maintained during the Regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g.,
during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this
chapter and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania
Code (including, but not limited to, Chapter 102, Erosion and sediment
control) and the Clean Streams Law. Various BMPs and their design
standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Program Manual (E&S Manual), No. 363-2134-008 (April 15, 2000), as
amended and updated.
C. For all regulated activities, stormwater BMPs shall be designed,
installed, implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes
and requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under
Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law, conform
to the state water quality requirements, meet all requirements under
the Storm Water Management Act56 and any more-stringent
requirements as determined by the Township.
D. The Township may, after consultation with PADEP and/or DCCD,
approve measures for meeting the state water quality requirements
other than those in this chapter, provided that they meet the minimum
requirements of, and do not conflict with, state law, including, but not
limited to, the Clean Streams Law.
E. All regulated activities shall include, to the maximum extent
practicable, measures to:
(1) Protect health, safety, and property.
56.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 168-12 PLUMBING § 168-12
144:191
(2) Meet the water quality goals of this chapter by implementing
measures to:
(a) Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, natural slopes,
existing native vegetation and woodlands.
(b) Create, maintain, or extend riparian buffers and protect
existing forested buffers.
(c) Provide trees and woodlands adjacent to impervious areas
whenever feasible.
(d) Minimize the creation of impervious surfaces and the
degradation of waters of the commonwealth and promote
groundwater recharge.
(e) Protect natural systems and processes (drainageways,
vegetation, soils, and sensitive areas) and maintain, as much as
possible, the natural hydrologic regime.
(f) Incorporate natural site elements (wetlands, stream corridors,
mature forests) as design elements.
(g) Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.
(h) Minimize soil disturbance and soil compaction.
(i) Minimize thermal impacts to waters of the commonwealth.
(j) Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious
areas wherever possible, and decentralize and manage
stormwater at its source.
(3) Applicants are encouraged to incorporate the techniques for lowimpact
development practices described in the "Pennsylvania
Stormwater best management practices Manual" (BMP Manual) to
reduce the costs of complying with the requirements of this chapter
and the state water quality requirements.
F. Impervious areas:
(1) The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the
impervious areas in the total proposed development, even if
development is to take place in stages.
(2) For development taking place in stages, the entire development
plan must be used in determining conformance with this chapter.
(3) For projects that add impervious area to a developed parcel, the
new impervious area is subject to the requirements of this chapter,
and any existing impervious area that is disturbed, except utilities,
is also subject to the requirements of this chapter.
§ 168-12 WEST HANOVER CODE § 168-12
144:192
G. Stormwater drainage systems shall be provided to permit unimpeded
flow along natural watercourses, except as modified by stormwater
management facilities or open channels consistent with this chapter.
H. If diffused flow is proposed to be concentrated and discharged onto
adjacent property, the applicant must document that adequate
downstream conveyance facilities exist to safely transport the
concentrated discharge, or otherwise prove that no erosion,
sedimentation, flooding, or other harm will result from the
concentrated discharge.
I. Easements shall be provided for drainage, stormwater facilities, and
watercourses (e.g., pipes, swales, ditches, BMP facilities, etc.) in
consultation with the Township Engineer.
J. When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural
drainageways on the site cannot adequately provide for drainage, open
channels may be constructed conforming substantially to the line and
grade of such natural drainageways. Work within natural drainageways
shall be subject to approval by PADEP under regulations at 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 105 through the joint permit application process or, where
deemed appropriate by PADEP, through the general permit process.
K. Any stormwater management facilities or any facilities that constitute
water obstructions (e.g., culverts, bridges, outfalls, or stream
enclosures, etc.) that are regulated by this chapter, that will be located
in or adjacent to waters of the commonwealth (including wetlands),
shall be subject to approval by PADEP under regulations at 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 105 through the joint permit application process, or, where
deemed appropriate by PADEP, the general permit process. When there
is a question whether wetlands may be involved, it is the responsibility
of the applicant or his agent to show that the land in question cannot be
classified as wetlands; otherwise, approval to work in the area must be
obtained from PADEP.
L. Should any stormwater management facility require a dam safety
permit under PADEP Chapter 105, the facility shall be designed in
accordance with Chapter 105 and meet the regulations of Chapter 105
concerning dam safety which may be required to pass storms larger
than one-hundred-year event.
M. Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this chapter that
will be located on or discharged onto state highway rights-of-ways shall
be subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation (PennDOT).
N. When stormwater management facilities are proposed within 1,000 feet
of a downstream municipality, the stormwater analysis shall be
submitted to the downstream municipality for review and comment.
O. Minimization of impervious surfaces and infiltration of runoff through
seepage beds, infiltration trenches, etc., are encouraged, where soil
§ 168-12 PLUMBING § 168-12
144:193
§ 168-13. Exemptions; modifications of requirement.
conditions and geology permit, to reduce the size or eliminate the need
for detention facilities.
P. Infiltration BMPs should be dispersed throughout the site, made as
shallow as practicable, and located to maximize use of natural on-site
infiltration features while still meeting the other requirements of this
chapter.
Q. The design of facilities over karst shall include an evaluation and
implementation of measures to minimize adverse effects.
R. Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers,
or roadside ditches in order to promote overland flow and infiltration/
percolation of stormwater where it is advantageous to do so. When it is
more advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm sewers, then
the Township may permit it on a case-by-case basis.
A. Under no circumstance shall the applicant be exempt from
implementing such measures as necessary to:
(1) Meet state water quality standards and requirements.
(2) Protect health, safety, and property.
(3) Meet special requirements for high quality (HQ) and exceptional
value (EV) watersheds.
B. The applicant must demonstrate that the following BMPs are being
utilized to the maximum extent practicable to receive consideration for
the exemptions:
(1) Design around and limit disturbance of floodplains, wetlands,
natural slopes over 15%, existing native vegetation, and other
sensitive and special value features.
(2) Maintain riparian and forested buffers.
(3) Limit grading and maintain nonerosive flow conditions in natural
flow paths.
(4) Maintain existing tree canopies near impervious areas.
(5) Minimize soil disturbance and reclaim disturbed areas with topsoil
and vegetation.
(6) Direct runoff to pervious areas.
C. The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed development/
additional impervious area will not adversely impact the following:
(1) Capacities of existing drainageways and storm sewer systems.
(2) Velocities and erosion.
§ 168-12 WEST HANOVER CODE § 168-13
144:194
(3) Quality of runoff if direct discharge is proposed.
(4) Existing known problem areas.
(5) Safe conveyance of the additional runoff.
(6) Downstream property owners.
D. Applicants proposing regulated activities, after demonstrating
compliance with § 168-13A, B, and C, are exempted from various
requirements of this chapter according to Option No. 1 or Option No. 2
below. [Amended 6-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-13; 5-5-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-03]
(1) Option No. 1.
New Impervious Area
(Since the Date of Adoption
of This Chapter)
(square feet)
Applicant Must Submit to the
Township
< 1,000 —
1,000 to 5,000 Volume controls and SWM site
plan and report
> 5,000 Rate controls, volume controls,
SWM site plan and report and
record drawings
(2) Option No. 2.
Minimum Separation Distances
New Impervious
Area
(square feet)
Minimum Separation Distance
(feet)
Sheet Flow Roof Drain
0 to 250 25 40
251 to 500 50 75
501 to 1,000 75 110
1,001 to 1,500 100 150
1,501 to 2,000 125 190
2,001 to 2,500 150 225
2,501 to 3,000 175 260
3,001 to 4,000 200 300
4,001 to 5,000 225 340
5,001 to 10,000 350 525
§ 168-13 PLUMBING § 168-13
144:195
Minimum Separation Distances
New Impervious
Area
(square feet)
Minimum Separation Distance
(feet)
A roof with no roof drain is sheet flow. Where the municipality
believes that conditions present in the receiving area (slope, soil
type, existing problems, etc.) warrant additional separation
distance, the municipality may require additional separation
distance or require stormwater management controls.
(a) Minimum separation.
[1] New impervious cover must be separated from the
features listed in § 168-13D(2)(a)[2] below and in
accordance with minimum separation distances listed in
the table above.
[2] Minimum separation distance is the shortest distance from
the edge of the proposed new impervious cover, or roof
drain discharge point, in the flow direction of runoff, to any
of the following:
[a] Perennial or intermittent streams or watercourses.
[b] Swales or ditches.
[c] Wetlands.
[d] Lakes, ponds and other surface water bodies.
[e] Storm sewer or combined sewer systems.
[f] Public roads.
[g] Property lines.
[h] Cropland, pasture land, manure storage areas and
other agricultural land unless the area meets the
requirements of § 168-13D(2)(d)[2]
[i] Other features deemed relevant by the municipality.
(b) Multiple impervious areas.
[1] If the proposed new impervious area receives runoff from
an existing contiguous impervious area or contributes
runoff to an existing contiguous impervious area, the total
impervious area to be considered for this exemption shall
be the new impervious area only.
[2] If the existing and proposed new impervious area are not
contiguous, the total impervious area to be considered for
§ 168-13 WEST HANOVER CODE § 168-13
144:196
this exemption shall be the new impervious area only.
In this case, the total separation area may include the
distance between the two impervious areas.
[3] Separation from the features listed in § 168-13D(2)(a)[2]
shall be determined from the edge or roof drain(s)
discharge, of either the existing or the proposed new
impervious area, whichever is most downslope.
[4] The municipality reserves the right to consider existing
conditions and runoff issues in determining the needed
separation area under this section.
(c) Discharge.
[1] With the exception of roof drains, runoff from the proposed
new impervious cover may not be concentrated. Roof
drains:
[a] Must discharge to a stabilized separation area
meeting the criteria in the above table for minimum
separation distance shown above and § 168-13D(2)(d).
[b] May not discharge to concentrated flow areas.
[c] Separation shall be determined from the roof drain
discharge point, unless the discharge is to an
impervious area. In this case the separation shall be
determined from the edge of the pervious area.
(d) Separation area.
[1] The area separating the proposed new impervious
discharge from any features such as those listed in
§ 168-13D(2)(a)[2] must at all times meet the following
criteria:
[a] Be maintained in stable vegetative cover.
[b] Eroded areas in the separation area must be
immediately repaired.
[c] No new impervious cover may be installed in the
separation areas unless the requirements of this
subsection are met.
[d] Runoff in the separation area must be maintained as
unconcentrated flow.
[2] The separation area may contain cropland, pasture land,
manure storage areas and other agricultural land,
provided that the land is in compliance with Title 25,
Section 102.4(a) (relating to erosion and sediment
pollution control on agricultural land) and Title 25, Section
§ 168-13 PLUMBING § 168-13
144:197
91.36(a) (relating to pollution control at agricultural
operations) of the Pennsylvania Code.
(3) Requirement for additional stormwater management controls. The
municipal governing body reserves the right to require additional
stormwater management controls if an exempted project is
determined to be causing adverse impacts of any kind.
(4) Obligation to meet other requirements. Nothing in this subsection
shall relieve the applicant of any responsibility under other
regulations, such as, but not limited to, municipal ordinances or
codes and state and federal regulations related to stormwater
management, NPDES permitting requirements for erosion and
sediment pollution control and post-construction stormwater
management, stream and wetland encroachment or floodplain
management.
E. The purpose of this section is to ensure consistency of stormwater
management planning with NPDES permitting (when required) and to
ensure that the applicant has a single and clear set of stormwater
management standards to which the applicant is subject. The Township
may accept alternative stormwater management controls, provided
that:
(1) The applicant, in consultation with the Township, PADEP and/or
DCCD, states that meeting the requirements of the volume controls
or Rate Controls of this chapter is not possible or creates an undue
hardship;
(2) The alternative stormwater management controls, proposed by the
applicant, are documented to be acceptable to the Township,
PADEP and/or DCCD for NPDES requirements pertaining to postconstruction
stormwater management requirements; and
(3) The alternative stormwater management controls are in
compliance with all other sections of this chapter, including but not
limited to § 168-13A, B, and C.
F. Forest management and timber operations are exempt from rate and
volume control requirements and SWM site plan preparation
requirement of this chapter, provided that the activities are performed
according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102. It should be
noted that temporary roadways are not exempt.
G. Agricultural activities are exempt from the requirements of this
chapter, provided that the activities are performed according to the
requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
H. Linear roadway improvement projects that create additional
impervious area are not exempt from the requirements of this chapter.
However, alternative stormwater management strategies may be
applied at the joint approval of the Township and the Dauphin County
§ 168-13 WEST HANOVER CODE § 168-13
144:198
§ 168-14. Volume controls.
Conservation District (if an NPDES permit is required) when site
limitations (such as limited right-of-way) and constraints (as shown
and provided by the applicant) preclude the ability of the applicant to
meet the enforcement of the stormwater management standards in this
chapter. All strategies must be consistent with PADEP's regulations,
including NPDES requirements.
I. Modification of requirements.
(1) The Township may, after an applicant has demonstrated
compliance with § 168-13A, B and C, grant a modification of the
requirements of one or more provisions of this chapter if the literal
enforcement will exact undue hardship because of peculiar
conditions pertaining to the land in question, provided that such
modification will not be contrary to the public interest and that the
purpose and intent of this chapter are observed.
(2) All requests for a modification shall be in writing and shall state in
full the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on
which the request is based, the provision or provisions of this
chapter involved, and the minimum modification necessary.
A. The low-impact development practices provided in the BMP Manual
and in Appendix B of this chapter shall be utilized for all regulated
activities to the maximum extent practicable.57
B. Stormwater runoff volume controls shall be implemented using the
Design Storm Method or the Simplified Method. Both methods are
described below. For regulated activities equal to or less than one acre,
this chapter establishes no preference for either method; therefore, the
applicant may select either method on the basis of economic
considerations, the intrinsic limitations on applicability of the analytical
procedures associated with each methodology, and other factors.
(1) The Design Storm Method (CG-1 in the BMP Manual) is applicable
to any-sized regulated activity. This method requires detailed
modeling based on site conditions.
(a) Do not increase the post-development total runoff volume
when compared to the pre-development total runoff volume for
the two-year/twenty-four-hour storm event.
(b) For hydrologic modeling purposes:
[1] Existing non-forested pervious areas must be considered
meadow (good condition) for pre-development hydrologic
calculations.
57.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 168-13 PLUMBING § 168-14
144:199
§ 168-15. Rate controls.
[2] Twenty percent of existing impervious area, when present
on the proposed project site, and contained within the new
proposed limit of disturbance, shall be considered meadow
(good condition) for pre-development hydrologic
calculations for redevelopment.
(2) The Simplified Method (CG-2 in the BMP Manual) is independent of
site conditions and should be used if the Design Storm Method is
not followed. This method is not applicable to regulated activities
greater than one acre. For new impervious surfaces:
(a) Stormwater facilities shall capture at least the first two inches
of runoff from all new impervious surfaces.
(b) At least the first one-inch of runoff from new impervious
surfaces shall be permanently removed from the runoff flow,
i.e., it shall not be released into surface waters of the
commonwealth. Removal options include reuse, evaporation,
transpiration, and infiltration.
(c) Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be designed to
accommodate infiltration of the entire permanently removed
runoff; however, in all cases at least the first 0.5 inch of the
permanently removed runoff should be infiltrated.
C. All applicable worksheets from Chapter 8 of the BMP Manual must be
used when establishing volume controls.
D. Actual field infiltration tests at the location of the proposed elevation of
the stormwater BMPs are required when 5,000 square feet or greater of
new impervious surface is added. Infiltration test shall be conducted in
accordance with BMP Manual. The Township shall be notified three
working days prior to infiltration tests being conducted as to provide an
opportunity for the Township to witness the tests.
A. Lands contained within West Hanover Township that have had release
rates established under an approved Act 167 stormwater management
plan:
(1) Post-development discharge rates shall not exceed the predevelopment
discharge rates for the one-year, fifty-year, and onehundred-
year storms.
(2) For the two-year, ten-year, and twenty-five-year storms, the postdevelopment
peak discharge rates shall be in accordance with the
approved release rate map for the individual watershed.
(3) Watersheds. West Hanover Township is divided into five
watersheds, including Beaver Creek, Manada Creek, Kellock Run
and Fishing Creek and Stony Creek. The map indicating the
§ 168-14 WEST HANOVER CODE § 168-15
144:200
watershed boundaries is available for inspection at the Township
office.
(4) Stormwater management districts.
(a) Specified release rate districts. For all districts in this category,
the future runoff must be controlled to the specified release
rate for the design storm. That is, the post-development runoff
rate must be less than or equal to the predevelopment rate
multiplied by the specified release rate for that district. The
stormwater management specified release rate districts for the
Fishing Creek, Beaver Creek, Manada Creek, Kellock Run and
Stony Creek watersheds are identified in their respective Act
167 stormwater management plans, as amended, and adopted
by Dauphin County and approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection. The maps indicating
the specified release rate districts are available for inspection
at the Township office.
(b) General criteria.
[1] The exact location of any given development site, or
activity regulated by this chapter, relative to the release
rate district boundaries shall be determined by mapping
the release rate district boundaries using two-foot
topographic contour mapping provided as part of the SWM
site plan and report.
[2] For a proposed development site located entirely within
one release rate district, the runoff from each discharge
point shall meet the required release rate criteria.
[3] For a proposed development site which is located within
two or more release rate districts, the maximum runoff
discharged at any point shall be equal to the release rate
for the district in which the discharge point is located.
[4] Each development site shall be considered separately and
shall conform to the criteria of the district in which it is
located. In no case may the release rate for an area be
exceeded as credit for a reduction below the criteria or
any other restrictions on a separate site.
[5] Regional detention facilities will be permitted, provided
that adequate conveyance is available or provided from
the site to the facility. The acceptability and discharge
characteristics of the facility will be reviewed on a case-bycase
basis.
B. Off-site areas that drain through a proposed development site are not
subject to release rate criteria when determining allowable peak runoff
§ 168-15 PLUMBING § 168-15
144:201
rate; however, on-site drainage facilities shall be designed to safely
convey off-site flows through the development site.
§ 168-15 WEST HANOVER CODE § 168-15
144:202
ARTICLE IV
E&S Standards
§ 168-16. Erosion and sedimentation requirements during earth
disturbance activities.
A. The applicant shall meet requirements as contained in 25 Pa. Code,
Chapters 9258 and 102, as required and applicable as follows:
(1) The implementation and maintenance of erosion and sediment
control BMPs.
(2) Development of written plans.
(3) Submission of plans for approval.
(4) Obtaining erosion and sediment control plan approval and NPDES
permits.
(5) Maintaining plans and permits on site.
B. Evidence of any necessary plan or permit approval for earth
disturbance activities from PADEP or the Dauphin County Conservation
District must be provided to the Township.
C. A copy of the approved erosion and sediment control plan and any other
permit, as required by PADEP or the Dauphin County Conservation
District, shall be available at the project site at all times if required
under Chapter 102.
D. Construction of temporary roadways (e.g., for utility construction,
timber harvesting, etc.) shall comply with all applicable standards for
erosion and sedimentation control and stream crossing regulations
under 25 Pa. Code Chapters 102 and 105. The erosion and sediment
control plan shall be submitted to the Dauphin County Conservation
District for approval and shall address the following, as applicable:
(1) Design of the roadway system, including haul roads, skid roads,
landing areas, trails, and storage and staging areas.
(2) Runoff control structures (e.g., diversions, culverts, detention
ponds, etc.).
(3) Stream crossings for both perennial and intermittent streams.
(4) Access to public roadways, including design of rock construction
entrance for mud and debris control.
(5) A remediation plan for restoring the disturbed area through
regrading, topsoil placement, reseeding, and other stabilization
techniques, as required.
58.Editor's Note: Chapter 92 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code was rescinded 10-8-2010;
see now 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92a.
§ 168-16 PLUMBING § 168-16
144:203
§ 168-17. Total maximum daily load (TMDL) requirements.
E. Additional erosion and sedimentation control design standards and
criteria that must be applied where infiltration BMPs are proposed
include the following:
(1) Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from
sedimentation and compaction during the construction phase, as to
maintain their maximum infiltration capacity.
(2) Infiltration BMPs shall be protected from receiving sediment-laden
runoff.
(3) The type of protection for infiltration BMPs shall be identified (i.e.,
orange construction fence surrounding the perimeter of the BMP).
F. Maintenance during development of a project shall be the responsibility
of the developer and/or landowner and shall include, but not be limited
to:
(1) Removal of silt and debris from basins, traps, inlet protection, silt
fencing, or other structures or measures when capacity of those
structures is reached.
(2) Periodic maintenance of temporary control facilities such as
replacement of straw bale dikes, straw filters or similar measures.
(3) Establishment or reestablishment of vegetation by seeding and
mulching or sodding of scoured areas or areas where vegetation
has not successfully been established.
(4) Installation of necessary controls to correct unforeseen problems
caused by storm events within design frequencies.
(5) The contractor or developer shall be responsible for removal of all
temporary measures and installation of permanent measures upon
completion of the project.
A. Agricultural activities contributory to a watershed within Dauphin
County containing an established nonpoint source (agricultural) TMDL
shall be conducted in compliance with Chapter 102 (erosion and
sediment control); Chapter 91, § 91.36 (general provisions related to
manure management); and Act 38 (Nutrient Management).59
B. This section shall apply to agricultural activities conducted in
watersheds where TMDLs are established in the future.
59.Editor's Note: See 3 Pa. C.S.A. § 501 et seq.
§ 168-16 WEST HANOVER CODE § 168-17
144:204
ARTICLE V
Design Criteria
§ 168-18. Design criteria for stormwater management and drainage
facilities.
A. General design guidelines:
(1) Stormwater shall not be transferred from one watershed to
another, unless:
(a) The watersheds are subwatersheds of a common watershed
which join together within the perimeter of the property;
(b) The effect of the transfer does not alter the peak rate discharge
onto adjacent lands; or
(c) Easements from the affected landowner(s) are provided.
(2) Consideration shall be given to the relationship of the subject
property to the drainage pattern of the watershed. A concentrated
discharge of stormwater to an adjacent property shall be within an
existing watercourse or confined in an easement or returned to a
pre-development flow type condition.
(3) Stormwater BMPs and recharge facilities are encouraged (e.g.,
rooftop storage, dry wells, cisterns, recreation area ponding,
diversion structures, porous pavements, holding tanks, infiltration
systems, stream channel storage, in line storage in storm sewers,
and grading patterns). They shall be located, designed, and
constructed in accordance with the latest technical guidance
published by PADEP, provided that they are accompanied by
detailed engineering plans and performance capabilities and
supporting site-specific soils, geology, runoff and groundwater and
infiltration rate data to verify proposed designs. Additional
guidance from other sources may be accepted at the discretion of
the Township Engineer (a preapplication meeting is suggested).
(4) All existing and natural watercourses, channels, drainage systems
and areas of surface water concentration shall be maintained in
their existing condition unless an alteration is approved by the
appropriate regulatory agency.
(5) No outlet structure from a stormwater management facility, or
swale, shall discharge directly onto a Township or state roadway.
(6) The invert of all infiltration/storage facilities shall be located a
minimum of two feet above the seasonal high groundwater table or
other soil limiting zone. The invert of stormwater facilities may be
lower if they do not adversely alter the existing water table level.
(7) Any stormwater management facility may be required to be fenced
with a minimum four-foot-high fence of material acceptable to the
§ 168-18 PLUMBING § 168-18
144:205
Township. Gates with a minimum opening of 10 feet shall be
provided for access.
(8) Stormwater management facilities excavated to carbonate rock
must either be fitted with an impervious clay liner or overexcavated
four feet and refilled with a suitable material mix. Suitable backfill
material is subject to the approval of the Township Engineer.
(9) The type, location, and number of landscaping and planting
specification shall be provided for all stormwater management
facilities and be specific for each type of facility.
B. Stormwater management facilities (with a depth of water equal to or
greater than three feet measured from the lowest point inside a facility
to the crest of the emergency spillway).
(1) Any stormwater management facility designed to store runoff and
requiring a berm or earthen embankment shall be designed to
provide an emergency spillway to handle peak rate of stormwater
runoff up to and including the one-hundred-year post-development
flow, with a blocked primary outlet structure. The height of
embankment must be set as to provide a minimum one foot of
freeboard through the spillway, above the maximum water surface
elevation, computed when the spillway functions for the onehundred-
year post-development inflow, with a blocked outlet
structure when no storage is available. The primary outflow
structure must be designed to pass all design storms (up to and
including the one-hundred-year event) without discharging through
the emergency spillway. The maximum water depth within any
stormwater management facility shall be no greater than eight feet
when functioning through the primary outlet structure.
(2) Emergency spillways shall be armored to prevent erosion during
the one-hundred-year post-development flow, with blocked primary
outlet structure. Synthetic liners or riprap may be used, and
calculations sufficient to support proposed armor must be
provided. An earthen plug must be used to accurately control the
spillway invert if riprap is the proposed armoring material.
Emergency spillway armor must extend up the sides of the spillway
and continue at full width to a minimum of 10 feet past the toe of
slope.
(3) A stormwater management facility berm cross sections must be at
least five feet wide at the top and eight feet wide through the
emergency spillway. For fill embankments, the side slopes shall be
no steeper then 3:1 on the inside of the facility and 2:1 on the
outside of the facility. For cut slopes, the side slopes shall be no
steeper than 2:1.
(4) A cutoff and key trench of impervious material shall be provided
under all embankments four feet or greater in height.
§ 168-18 WEST HANOVER CODE § 168-18
144:206
(5) Soils used for the construction of stormwater management
facilities shall have low-erodibility factors ("K" factors) (refer to
E&S Manual) and be identified on the SWM site plan.
(6) Trash racks must be provided to prevent clogging of primary
outflow structure stages for all orifices equivalent to 12 inches or
smaller in diameter.
(7) Antiseep collars must be provided on all outflow culverts in
accordance with the methodology contained in the latest edition of
the E&S Manual. An increase in seepage length of 15% must be
used in accordance with the requirements for permanent antiseep
collars.
(8) Conventional, non-BMP stormwater management facilities (i.e., dry
detention basins) must empty over a period of time not less than 24
hours and not more than 72 hours from the end of the facility's
inflow hydrograph. Infiltration tests performed at the facility
locations and proposed basin bottom depths, in accordance with
the BMP Manual, must support time-to-empty calculations if
infiltration is a factor in the sizing of the stormwater management
facility.
(9) Impervious low-flow channels are not permitted within stormwater
management facilities to promote water quality and groundwater
recharge for frequent storm events. Facilities designed as water
quality/infiltration BMPs may have a bottom slope of zero. Minimalmaintenance,
saturation-tolerant vegetation must be provided in
basins designed as water quality/infiltration BMPs. Water storage
below the lowest outlet structure stage (i.e., dead storage) is
permitted in stormwater management facilities designed as water
quality/infiltration BMPs.
(10) Stormwater management facilities' bottom elevations must be
greater than adjacent floodplain elevations (FEMA or HEC-RAS
analysis). If no floodplain is defined, bottom elevations must be
higher than existing ground elevations 50 feet from top of stream
bank in the facilities vicinity.
(11) Basin outflow culverts discharging into floodplains must account
for tailwater. Tailwater corresponding to the one-hundred-year
floodplain elevation may be used for all design storms, or the
applicant may elect to determine flood elevations of the adjacent
watercourse for each design storm. The floodplain is assumed to be
50 feet from top of stream bank in areas where a floodplain is not
designated or where no other evidence is provided.
(12) The riser pipe shall be designed to withstand buoyancy forces if it
becomes clogged.
(13) For stormwater detention ponds designed without infiltration or
without using vegetative means to improve water quality, the
§ 168-18 PLUMBING § 168-18
144:207
minimum slope of any surface on the bottom of the pond shall be
1.5%. Also, low-flow channels shall be constructed from any pipe or
swale leading into the pond to the principal spillway.
(14) The height of embankment shall not exceed 14 feet as measured
from the lowest point in the pond to the top of berm.
(15) Access. All facilities shall have stabilized access roads, gates,
fences and easements where necessary for the proper
maintenance, repair and utilization of the stormwater facilities.
(16) Seasonal high groundwater table. The invert of all stormwater
ponds and underground infiltration/storage facilities shall be
located a minimum of two feet above the seasonal high
groundwater table.
(17) Topsoil and seeding. All pond areas, including bottoms of nonwater
quality ponds, side slopes and top of berms, shall be provided
with a minimum four inches of topsoil and shall be mulched and
seeded with Formula B in accordance with PennDOT Publication
408, Section 804.
C. Storm sewer facilities.
(1) Pipes (concrete, metal or plastic) shall be constructed in
accordance with the specifications as set forth in the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Publication 408 or current edition.
All metal pipes, except for structural plate pipes, shall be
aluminum-coated (Type 2) and conform to the current AASHTO
M247 (and ASTM A819) material specification or equal or better as
approved by the Township Engineer. Structural plate pipes shall be
galvanized steel and conform to the current AASHTO M167 (and
ASTM A761) material specification or equal or better as approved
by the Township Engineer. Durability calculations that include
corrosiveness and abrasion must be supplied to assure an average
service life of at least 100 years for the galvanized structural plate
pipes.
(2) Pipes, trenching and backfill shall be in accordance with RC-30M of
Roadway Construction Standard Drawings, current edition, or
other detail approved by the Township Engineer.
(3) Pipe thickness and reinforcement shall be in accordance with
approved engineering calculations.
(4) Storm sewers must be able to convey post-development runoff from
the design storm based on the Manning equation and without
surcharging inlets. When connecting to an existing storm sewer
system, the applicant must demonstrate that the proposed system
will not exacerbate any existing stormwater problems and that
adequate downstream capacity exists. Provisions such as building
locations and easements shall be provided to convey storms in
§ 168-18 WEST HANOVER CODE § 168-18
144:208
excess of the design storm up to the one-hundred-year event. In
addition, provisions must be made to convey at least the onehundred-
year storm as surcharge flow to detention ponds that are
required as part of this chapter.
(5) Pipe sizes shall be in accordance with that shown on approved
drawings. A minimum pipe size for drainage facilities shall be 15
inches if specifying smooth-lined pipe or 18 inches if specifying
corrugated piping for on-site collection. Pipes utilized for upstream
conveyance of off-site flows shall have a minimum size of 18 inches.
Pipes shall be designed to provide a minimum velocity of 2 1/2 feet
per second when flowing full, but in all cases, the slope shall be no
less than 0.5%. Arch pipe of equivalent cross-sectional area may be
substituted in lieu of circular pipe where cover or utility conflict
conditions exist.
(6) Pipes shall be constructed and set to line and grade as shown on
approved drawings. Provide six inches minimum cover from top of
pipe to subgrade in roadways and one-foot minimum cover from top
of pipe to top of ground in lawn areas where there will be no
vehicular or similar loads.
(7) Endwalls or end sections shall be used at all pipe inlets and outlets
in accordance with RC-31M.
(8) In proposed curbed roadway sections, the maximum encroachment
of water on the roadway pavement shall not exceed half of a
through travel lane or one inch less than the depth of curb during
the ten-year design storm of five-minute duration. Gutter depth
shall be verified by inlet capture/capacity calculations that account
for road slope and opening area. The maximum distance between
inlets in curbed roadway sections shall be no more than 450 feet;
however, access to underground pipes shall be provided every no
more than 300 feet.
(9) Inlets shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications as
set forth in the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation,
Publication 408, current edition, and as detailed on the Roadway
Construction Standard Drawings (RC-45M) or other detail
approved by the Township Engineer.
(10) Inlet curbs shall be compatible with the type of curbing installed.
(11) Standard Type "C" inlets with eight-inch hoods shall be used along
vertical concrete curbs roadway networks. Type "C" inlets with teninch
hoods that provide a two-inch sump condition may be used
with direction from the Township Engineer when roadway
longitudinal slopes are 1.0% or less.
(12) For inlets containing a change in pipe size, the elevation for the
crown of the pipes shall be the same, or the smaller pipe's crown
shall be at a higher elevation.
§ 168-18 PLUMBING § 168-18
144:209
(13) All inlets shall provide a minimum two-inch drop between the
lowest inlet pipe invert elevation and the outlet pipe invert
elevation.
(14)On curbed sections, a double inlet shall be placed at the low point
of sag vertical curves, or an inlet shall be placed at the low point
and on each side of the low point at a distance not to exceed 100
feet, or at an elevation not to exceed 0.2 foot above the low point.
(15) At all roadway low points, swales and easements shall be provided
behind the curb or swale and through adjacent properties to
channelize and direct any overflow of stormwater runoff away from
dwellings and structures. The swales should be designed to
accommodate a flow equal to that being collected by the inlets at
the low point plus any additional drainage that may be directed to
or collected by the swale itself.
(16) Inlets shall be placed so drainage cannot cross intersections or
street center lines, taking into consideration inlet capacity and
bypass flow.
(17) All inlets in paved areas shall have heavy-duty bicycle-safe grating
consistent with PennDOT Publication 72M. A note to this effect
shall be added to the SWM site plan or inlet details therein.
(18) Inlets must be sized to accept the specified pipe sizes without
knocking out any of the inlet corners. All pipes entering or exiting
inlets shall be cut flush with the inlet wall. A note to this effect shall
be added to the SWM site plan or inlet details therein.
(19) Inlets shall have weep holes covered with geotextile fabric placed
at appropriate elevations to completely drain the subgrade prior to
placing the base and surface course on roadways.
(20) Inlets, junction boxes, or manholes greater than five feet in depth
shall be equipped with ladder rungs and shall be detailed on the
SWM site plan.
(21) Inlets shall not have a sump condition in the bottom (unless
designed as a water quality BMP). Pipes shall be flush with the
bottom of the box, or concrete channels shall be poured.
(22) Inlets, manholes, pipes, and culverts shall be constructed in
accordance with the specifications set forth in PennDOT's
Publication 408, latest edition, and as detailed in the PennDOT's
Publication 72M - Standards for Roadway Construction (RC), latest
edition, or as approved by the Township Engineer. All material and
construction details (inlets, manholes, pipes, pipe trenches and
miscellaneous structures, etc.), must be shown on the SWM site
plan, and a note added that all construction must be in accordance
with PennDOT's Publication 408 and PennDOT's Publication 72M,
latest edition. A note shall be added to the plan stating that all
§ 168-18 WEST HANOVER CODE § 168-18
144:210
frames, concrete top units, and grade adjustment rings shall be set
in a bed of full mortar according to Publication 408.
(23) Accessible drainage structures shall be located on continuous
storm sewer system at all vertical dislocations, at all locations
where a transition in storm sewer pipe size is required, at all
vertical and horizontal angle points exceeding 5°, and at all points
of convergence of two or more storm sewer pipes.
(24) Drainage structures shall be inspected by the Township Engineer
or his designated agent before backfilling.
(25) Outlet protection shall be provided at all surface discharge points
with storm drainage piping (equal to or greater than twelve inches)
in order to minimize erosion consistent with the E&S Manual.
(26) Pavement base drain shall be provided at all low points in cut
areas, toe of slope areas, and other areas as dictated by proven
engineering principles and design judgment. All base drain shall be
in accordance with PennDOT Publications 408 and 72M.
D. Swale conveyance facilities.
(1) Swales must convey post-development runoff from the design
storm with six inches of freeboard to top of the swale.
(2) Swales shall have side slopes no steeper than 2:1.
(3) All swales shall be designed, labeled on the SWM site plan, and
details provided to adequately construct and maintain the design
dimension of the swales.
(4) Swales shall be designed for stability using velocity or shear
criteria. Velocity criteria may be used for channels with less than
ten-percent slope. Shear criteria may be used for all swales.
Documentation must be provided to support velocity and/or shear
limitations used in calculations.
(5) Where swale bends occur, the computed velocities or shear
stresses shall be multiplied by the following factor for the purpose
of designing swale erosion protection:
(a) When swale bend is 30° to 60°: 1.75.
(b) When swale bend is 60° to 90°: 2.00.
(c) When swale bend is 90° or greater: 2.50.
(6) Swales must be designed for both temporary and permanent
conditions in accordance with the latest E&S Manual.
(7) The minimum longitudinal slope shall be 0.005 foot/foot.
§ 168-18 PLUMBING § 168-18
144:211
§ 168-19. Calculation methodology.
(8) All grass-lined swales shall be provided with a minimum of four
inches of topsoil. Swales shall be mulched and seeded with Formula
B in areas that will be mowed and Formula D in areas with limited
access that will not be mowed, in accordance with PennDOT
Publication 408, Section 804, or current edition.
A. All calculations shall be consistent with the guidelines set forth in the
BMP Manual.
B. Stormwater runoff from all development sites shall be calculated using
either the Rational Method or a Soil Cover Complex methodology.
Methods shall be selected by the qualified professional based on the
individual limitations and suitability of each method for a particular
site.
C. Rainfall values.
(1) Rational Method. The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Drainage Manual, Intensity-Duration-Frequency Curves,
Publication 584, Chapter 7A, latest edition, shall be used in
conjunction with the appropriate time of concentration and return
period.
(2) Soil Cover Complex Method. The Soil Conservation Service Type II,
twenty-four-hour rainfall distribution shall be used in conjunction
with rainfall depths from NOAA Atlas 14 or consistent with the
following table:
Return Interval
(year)
24-hour Rainfall Total
(inches)
1 2.40
2 2.90
10 4.36
25 5.43
50 6.38
100 7.48
D. Peak flow rates:
(1) Rational Method.
(a) May be used for drainage areas up to 20 acres for storage
facilities and up to 200 acres for conveyance facilities. Extreme
caution should be used by the qualified professional if the
watershed has more than one main drainage channel, if the
watershed is divided so that hydrologic properties are
significantly different in one versus the other, if the time of
§ 168-18 WEST HANOVER CODE § 168-19
144:212
concentration exceeds 60 minutes, or if stormwater runoff
volume is an important factor. The combination of Rational
Method hydrographs based on timing shall be prohibited.
(b) The use of the Modified Rational Method to design stormwater
management facilities must be approved by the Township
Engineer.
(2) Soil Cover Complex Method: May be used for drainage areas
greater than 20 acres. This method is recommended for design of
stormwater management facilities and where stormwater runoff
volume must be taken into consideration.
(3) For comparison of peak flow rates, flows shall be rounded to a tenth
of a cubic foot per second (cfs).
E. Runoff coefficients/curve numbers.
(1) Rational Method: Use Table C-1 (Appendix C).60
(2) Soil Cover Complex Method: Use Table C-2 (Appendix C).
(3) For the purposes of pre-development peak flow rate and volume
determination, existing non-forested pervious areas conditions
shall be considered open space or meadow (good condition).
(4) Any regulated activities submitted within five years of forest
management activities shall use pre-construction ground cover for
stormwater runoff based upon forested land in good condition.
(5) For the purposes of pre-development volume determination, 20% of
existing impervious area, when present on the project site, and
contained within the new proposed limit of disturbance, shall be
considered open space or meadow (good condition) for predevelopment
hydrologic calculations for redevelopment.
F. Design storm.
(1) All drainage facilities (inlets, pipes, and swales) shall be designed
to safely convey the ten-year storm.
(2) All stormwater management facilities shall be verified by routing
the proposed one-year, two-year, ten-year, twenty-five-year, fiftyyear,
and one-hundred-year hydrographs through the facility using
the storage indication (Modified Puls) method. The design storm
hydrograph shall be computed using a calculation method that
produces a full hydrograph.
(3) The stormwater management and drainage system shall be
designed to safely convey the post-development one-hundred-year
60.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 168-19 PLUMBING § 168-19
144:213
storm event to stormwater detention facilities, for the purpose of
meeting peak rate control.
(4) All structures (culvert or bridges) proposed to convey runoff under
a Township road shall be designed to pass the fifty-year design
storm with a minimum one foot of freeboard measured below the
lowest point along the top of the roadway.
(5) All design within state or federal rights-of-way or that falls under
the design criteria of any higher authority must meet the
requirements of that agency in addition to meeting the minimum
requirements of this chapter.
G. Time of concentration.
(1) Time of concentration shall be computed using the NRCS
Segmental Method as described in TR-55 (SCS 1986 or most
current update). The length of sheet flow shall be limited to
100-feet. The Manning's "n" roughness coefficient for TR-55 sheet
flow can be found in Table C-4 (Appendix C).61 The length of flow
path for sheet flow shall not exceed 100 feet and the length of flow
path for shallow concentrated flow shall not exceed 1,000 feet.
Time of concentration for channel and pipe flow shall be computed
using Manning's equation.
(2) For sites with insignificant channelized flow and less than twentypercent
imperviousness coverage, the time of concentration may
be computed using the NRCS equation for lag time:
Time of Concentration = Tc = [(Tlag/0.6) * 60] (minutes)
Where:
Tlag = Lag time (hours)
L = Hydraulic length of watershed (feet).
Y = Average overland slope of watershed (percent).
S = Maximum retention in watershed as defined by S =
[(1,000/CN) – 10].
CN = NRCS curve number for watershed as defined by the
NRCS Loss Method.
(3) Additionally, the following provisions shall apply to calculations for
time of concentration:
61.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 168-19 WEST HANOVER CODE § 168-19
144:214
(a) The post-development time of concentration shall never be
greater that the pre-development time of concentration for any
watershed or subwatershed.
(b) The minimum time of concentration for any watershed shall be
five minutes.
(c) The designer may choose to assume a five-minute time of
concentration for any post-development watershed or
subwatershed without providing any computations.
(d) The designer must provide computations for all predevelopment
time of concentration paths. A five-minute time of
concentration cannot be assumed for pre-development.
(e) Undetained fringe areas (areas that are not tributary to a
stormwater facility but where a reasonable effort has been
made to convey runoff from all new impervious coverage to
best management practices) may be assumed to represent the
pre-development conditions for purpose of time of
concentration calculations.
H. Drainage areas tributary to sinkholes or closed depressions in areas
underlain by limestone or carbonate geologic features shall be excluded
from the modeled point of analysis defining pre-development flows. If
left undisturbed during construction activities, areas draining to closed
depressions may also be removed from peak runoff rates in the postdevelopment
analysis. New, additional contributing runoff shall not be
directed to existing sinkholes or closed depressions.
I. Where uniform flow is anticipated, Manning's equation shall be used for
hydraulic computations and to determine the capacity of open
channels, pipes, and storm sewers. Manning's equation should not be
used for analysis of pipes under pressure flow or for analysis of
culverts. Manning's "n" values shall be obtained from Table C-3
(Appendix C).62 Inlet control shall be checked at all inlet boxes to
ensure the headwater depth during the ten-year design event is
contained below the top of grate for each inlet box.
J. The Township may approve the use of any generally accepted full
hydrograph approximation technique that shall use a total runoff
volume that is consistent with the volume from a method that produces
a full hydrograph.
K. The Township has the authority to require that computed existing
runoff rates be reconciled with field observations, conditions and site
history. If the designer can substantiate, through actual physical
calibration, that more appropriate runoff and time of concentration
values should be utilized at a particular site, then appropriate
variations may be made upon review and approval of the Township.
62.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 168-19 PLUMBING § 168-19
144:215

ARTICLE VI
SWM Site Plan and Report Requirements
§ 168-20. General requirements.
For any of the activities regulated by this chapter and not eligible for the
exemptions provided in § 168-13, the final approval of subdivision and/or
land development plans, the issuance of any building or occupancy permit,
or the commencement of any land disturbance activity may not proceed
until the applicant has received written approval of an SWM site plan from
the Township.
§ 168-21. Contents.
The SWM site plan and SWM site report shall consist of all applicable
calculations, maps, and plans prepared under the direction of a professional
engineer or land surveyor registered in Pennsylvania with experience in
drainage and stormwater management planning. All SWM site plan
materials shall be submitted to the Township in a format that is clear,
concise, legible, neat, physically bound, and well organized; otherwise,
the SWM site plan shall be rejected. Appropriate sections from the West
Hanover Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance,63 and
other applicable local ordinances, shall be followed in preparing the SWM
site plan.
A. SWM site plan shall include (but is not limited to):
(1) Plans no larger than 24-inch x 36-inch sheets and in a form that
meets the requirements for recording in the Office of the Recorder
of Deeds of Dauphin County.
(2) The name of the development; name and location address of the
property site; name, address, and telephone number of the
applicant/owner of the property; and name, address, telephone
number, e-mail address, and professional engineer or land surveyor
seal of the individual preparing the SWM site plan.
(3) The date of submission and dates of all revisions.
(4) A graphical and written scale on all drawings and maps.
(5) A North arrow on all drawings and maps.
(6) A location map using USGS topographic map or equivalent, at a
minimum scale of one inch equals 1,000 feet, showing the project
location with surrounding area for reference.
(7) Bearings and distance description of the entire tract perimeter.
(8) Existing and final contours at intervals of two feet.
63.Editor's Note: See Ch. 173, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 168-20 PLUMBING § 168-21
144:217
(9) Existing water bodies within the project area including streams,
lakes, ponds, field-delineated wetlands or other bodies of water,
sinkholes, flood hazard boundaries (FEMA-delineated floodplains
and floodways), areas of natural vegetation to be preserved, the
total extent of the upstream area draining through the site, and
overland drainage paths.
(10) The location of all existing and proposed utilities, on-lot
wastewater facilities, water supply wells, sanitary sewers, and
water lines on and within 50 feet of property lines.
(11) A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond the
property boundary that may be affected by the project.
(12) Soil names and boundaries with identification of the Hydraulic Soil
Group classification.
(13) The proposed limit of disturbance line and associated proposed
disturbed acres.
(14) Proposed structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings, including
plans and profiles of roads and paved areas and floor elevations of
buildings.
(15) Horizontal alignment, vertical profiles, and cross sections of all
open channels, pipes, swales and other BMPs.
(16) The location and clear identification of the nature of permanent
stormwater BMPs.
(17) The location of all erosion and sedimentation control facilities.
(18) A minimum twenty-foot-wide access easement around all
stormwater management facilities that would provide ingress to
and egress from a public right-of-way. In lieu of providing an
easement to the public right-of-way, a note may be added to the
plan granting the Township or its designees access to all easements
via the nearest public right-of-way.
(19) Construction details for all drainage and stormwater BMPs.
(20) Construction details of any improvements made to sinkholes.
(21) Identification of short-term and long-term ownership, operations,
and maintenance responsibilities.
(22) Notes and statements:
(a) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging that the
stormwater BMPs are fixtures that cannot be altered or
removed without prior approval by the Township.
§ 168-21 WEST HANOVER CODE § 168-21
144:218
(b) A statement referencing the operation and maintenance
(O&M) agreement and stating that the O&M agreement is part
of the SWM site plan.
(c) A note indicating that record drawings will be provided for all
stormwater management facilities prior to occupancy or the
release of financial security.
(d) The following signature block for the qualified professional
preparing the SWM site plan:
"I, __________________________, hereby certify that the
stormwater management plan meets all design standards and
criteria of the West Hanover Township Stormwater
Management Ordinance."
(e) Place the following as a conspicuous stand-alone note on the
first plan sheet: "The owner or contractor must schedule a
preconstruction conference with the Township Engineer to be
held at least four working days prior to the start of any site
construction, earth disturbance, clearing or grubbing. Also,
the owner or contractor shall contact the Township Engineer at
least four working days prior to the start of any site
construction, earth disturbance, clearing or grubbing to
facilitate construction observation."
B. SWM site report shall include (but not be limited to):
(1) The name of the development; name and location address of the
property site; name, address, and telephone number of the
applicant/owner of the property; and name, address, telephone
number, e-mail address, and engineering seal of the individual
preparing the SWM site report.
(2) Project description narrative, including expected project time
schedule.
(3) Location map showing the project site and its location relative to
release rate districts.
(4) Drainage area maps for all watersheds and inlets depicting the
time-of-concentration paths.
(5) A detailed description of the existing site conditions. A detailed site
evaluation shall be completed for projects proposed in areas of
carbonate geology or karst topography and other environmentally
sensitive areas such as brownfields.
(6) Complete hydrologic, hydraulic and structural computations,
calculations, assumptions, and criteria for the design of all
stormwater BMPs.
§ 168-21 PLUMBING § 168-21
144:219
(7) Description of, justification for, and actual field results for
infiltration testing with respect to the type of test and test location
for the design of infiltration BMPs.
(8) Calculations showing the total drainage area and impervious area
loading rates to each BMP.
(9) The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes, water quality,
and peak flows) on surrounding properties and aquatic features
and on any existing Township stormwater collection system that
may receive runoff from the project site. Conclusions shall include
a comparison of existing and proposed peak rates of runoff.
(10) Description of the proposed changes to the land surface and
vegetative cover, including the type and amount of impervious area
to be added.
(11) All applicable worksheets from Chapter 8 of the BMP Manual when
establishing volume controls.
(12) Identification of short-term and long-term ownership, operation,
and maintenance responsibilities as well as schedules and costs for
inspection and maintenance activities for each permanent
stormwater or drainage BMP, including provisions for permanent
access or maintenance easements. The identity of the person(s)
responsible for the operation and maintenance shall be stated.
(13) Facility ownership/maintenance acknowledgment: a separate page
with a signature block and statement, signed by the landowner,
acknowledging that all stormwater BMPs are fixtures that can be
altered or removed only after approval by the Township.
(14) Date of visit by the design professional.
C. Supplemental information to be provided prior to recording of the SWM
site plan, as applicable:
(1) Signed and executed operation and maintenance agreement
(Appendix A).64
(2) Signed and executed easements, as required for all on-site and offsite
work.
(3) An erosion and sedimentation control plan and approval letter from
the Dauphin County Conservation District.
(4) An NPDES permit.
(5) Permits from PADEP and USACE.
(6) A geologic assessment.
64.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 168-21 WEST HANOVER CODE § 168-21
144:220
§ 168-22. Submission.
§ 168-23. SWM site plan and report review.
(7) A wetland delineation report.
(8) A highway occupancy permit from PennDOT when utilization of a
PennDOT storm drainage system is proposed or when proposed
facilities would encroach onto a PennDOT right-of-way.
A. The applicant shall submit the SWM site plan and report for the
regulated activity.
B. Three copies of the SWM site plan and report shall be submitted to the
Township and may be distributed as follows:
(1) Two copies for the Township accompanied by the required
Township review fee, as specified in this chapter.
(2) One copy for the Township Engineer.
C. Additional copies shall be submitted as requested by the Township, Tri-
County Regional Planning Commission, Dauphin County Conservation
District or PADEP.
A. The Township shall require receipt of a complete SWM site plan and
report as specified in this chapter. The Township shall review the SWM
site plan and report for consistency with the purposes, requirements,
and intent of this chapter.
B. The Township shall not approve any SWM site plan and report that is
deficient in meeting the requirements of this chapter. At its sole
discretion and in accordance with this article, when an SWM site plan
and report is found to be deficient, the Township may disapprove the
submission and require a resubmission, or in the case of minor
deficiencies, the Township may accept submission of modifications.
C. The Township shall notify the applicant in writing within 45 calendar
days whether the SWM site plan and report is approved or disapproved
if the SWM site plan and report is not part of a subdivision or land
development plan. If the SWM site plan and report involves a
subdivision or land development plan, the timing shall following the
subdivision and land development process according to the
Municipalities Planning Code.65
D. The West Hanover Township Building Permit Office shall not issue a
building permit for any regulated activity if the SWM site plan and
report has been found to be inconsistent with this chapter, as
determined by the Township. All required permits from PADEP must be
obtained prior to issuance of a building permit.
65.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 168-21 PLUMBING § 168-23
144:221
§ 168-24. Modification of plans.
A modification to a submitted SWM site plan and report for a development
site that involves a change in stormwater management facilities or
techniques, that involves the relocation or redesign of stormwater
management facilities, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions
are not as stated on the SWM site plan as determined by the Township shall
require a resubmission of the modified SWM site plan in accordance with
this chapter.
§ 168-25. Resubmission of disapproved SWM site plan and report.
A disapproved SWM site plan and report may be resubmitted, with the
revisions addressing the Township's concerns documented in writing, to the
Township in accordance with this chapter. The applicable township review
fee must accompany a resubmission of a disapproved SWM site plan and
report.
§ 168-26. Authorization to construct and term of validity.
The Township's approval of an SWM site plan and report authorizes the
regulated activities contained in the SWM site plan for a maximum term
of validity of five years following the date of approval. The Township may
specify a term of validity shorter than five years in the approval for any
specific SWM site plan. Terms of validity shall commence on the date
the Township signs the approval for an SWM site plan. If stormwater
management facilities included in the approved SWM site plan have not
been constructed, or if a record drawing of these facilities has not been
E. As part of any applicable activity identified as a regulated activity or for
any required zoning permit related to construction and other regulated
earth disturbance activities applicable under § 195-97 or 195-101 of the
Township Zoning Ordinance, the Township shall review the drainage
and stormwater management plan (SWM site plan and report) for
consistency with the purposes and requirements of this chapter and any
permits issued by DEP.
F. All SWM site plan and reports shall be deemed approved by the
issuance of the required SWM permit or the approval of the subdivision
and land development plan. For SWM permits reviewed during the
subdivision and land development review process, the SWM site plan
and report will be reviewed by the Township with comments and
technical deficiencies indicated during the plan review process.
G. The Township shall require a record plan prepared and/or certified by a
professional engineer or professional land surveyor licensed in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania indicating all stormwater BMPs and
facilities that are interconnected with existing public facilities, located
in the public right-of-way or on public property and/or to be dedicated
to the Township. The record plan will also include an explanation of any
discrepancies with the SWM site plan and report.
§ 168-23 WEST HANOVER CODE § 168-26
144:222
approved within this time, then the Township may consider the SWM site
plan disapproved and may revoke any and all permits or approvals.
§ 168-27. Record drawings; completion certificate; final inspection.
A. The applicant shall be responsible for providing record drawings of all
stormwater BMPs included in the approved SWM site plan. The record
drawings and an explanation of any discrepancies with the approved
SWM site plan shall be submitted to the Township.
B. The record drawings shall include a certification of completion signed
by a qualified professional verifying that all permanent stormwater
BMPs have been constructed according to the approved SWM site plan
and report.
C. After receipt of the record drawings and certification of completion, the
Township may conduct a final inspection.
§ 168-26 PLUMBING § 168-27
144:223

ARTICLE VII
Easements
§ 168-28. Easements.
A. Easements shall be established to accommodate the existing
drainageways and all on-site and off-site stormwater management or
drainage facilities, including but not limited to detention facilitates
(above or below the ground), infiltration facilities, all stormwater BMPs,
drainage swales, and drainage facilities (inlets, manholes, pipes, etc.).
B. Stormwater management facility and BMP-related drainage easements
are required for all areas used for off-site stormwater control unless a
waiver is granted by the Board of Supervisors.
C. Stormwater management facility and BMP-related easements shall be
provided by the property owner if necessary for access for inspections
and facility maintenance or preservation of stormwater runoff
conveyance, infiltration and detention areas and other BMPs by persons
other than the property owner. The purpose of the stormwater
management facilities and BMP-related easement shall be specified in
an agreement.
D. The applicant must provide an executed easement for newly
concentrated flow across adjacent and downstream properties to the
point where flow is concentrated in an existing conveyance feature.
E. Where watercourses traverse a development site, drainage easements
(with a minimum width of 25 feet) shall be provided conforming to the
line of such watercourses. The terms of the easement shall prohibit
excavation, the placing of fill or structures, and any alterations that may
adversely affect the flow of stormwater within any portion of the
easement. Also, maintenance, including the mowing of vegetation
within the easement, may be required, except as approved by the
appropriate governing authority. Access easements shall also be
required.
F. All drainage easements shall be described by bearings and distances
and tied to a known point. Additional width may be required by the
Township.
G. Easements are required for all areas used for off-site stormwater
control.
H. All easements shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide. Additional width may
be required by the Township.
I. Easements shall provide ingress to and egress from a public right-ofway.
In lieu of providing an easement to the public right-of-way, a note
may be added to the plan granting the Township or its designee access
to all easements via the nearest public right-of-way.
§ 168-28 PLUMBING § 168-28
144:225
J. Where possible, easements shall be centered on side and/or rear lot
lines.
K. The following note shall be placed on the recorded plan: "Nothing shall
be planted or placed within the easement which would adversely affect
the function of the easement, or conflict with any conditions associated
with such easement."
L. A note shall be placed on the SWM site plan identifying the party
responsible for assuring the continued functionality and required
maintenance of any easement.
M. Recording of easement/deeds descriptions. The applicant/owner of any
land upon which permanent stormwater management facilities or BMPrelated
facilities will be placed or implemented shall be required to
prepare all legal descriptions and record with the Dauphin County
Recorder of Deeds office all relevant easements and legal documents
required and described in the SWM site plan and report. Easements
which are related to a subdivision/land development application shall
be recorded within 90 days from the date of final plan approval. If a
subdivision/land development is not required, any easements and
similar documents shall be described and recorded within 15 days from
the date of approval of the SWM site plan and report and prior to the
issuance of the SWM permit.
§ 168-28 WEST HANOVER CODE § 168-28
144:226
ARTICLE VIII
Maintenance Responsibilities
§ 168-29. Financial guarantee.
§ 168-30. Maintenance responsibilities.
A. The applicant shall provide a financial guarantee to the Township for
the timely installation and proper construction of all stormwater
management controls as required by the approved SWM site plan and
this chapter, equal to 110% of the full construction cost of the required
controls in accordance with the Municipalities Planning Code.66
B. At the completion of the project and as a prerequisite for the release of
the financial guarantee, the applicant shall:
(1) Provide a certification of completion from an engineer, architect,
surveyor or other qualified professional, verifying that all
permanent facilities have been constructed according to the SWM
site plan and report and approved revisions thereto.
(2) Provide a set of record drawings.
(3) Request a final inspection from the Township to certify compliance
with this chapter, after receipt of the certification of completion
and record drawings by the Township.
A. The SWM site plan and report for the project site shall describe the
future operation and maintenance responsibilities. The operation and
maintenance description shall outline required routine maintenance
actions and schedules necessary to ensure proper operation of the
stormwater control facilities.
B. The SWM site plan and report for the project site shall establish
responsibilities for the continuing operation and maintenance of all
proposed stormwater control facilities, consistent with the following
principles:
(1) If a development consists of structures or lots that are to be
separately owned and in which streets, sewers, and other public
improvements are to be dedicated to the Township, stormwater
control facilities/BMPs may also be offered for dedication to and
maintained by the Township.
(2) If a development site is to be maintained in a single ownership or if
streets, sewers and other public improvements are to be privately
owned and maintained, then the ownership and maintenance of
stormwater control facilities/BMPs shall be the responsibility of the
owner or private management entity.
66.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 168-29 PLUMBING § 168-30
144:227
(3) Facilities, areas, or structures used as stormwater BMPs shall be
enumerated as permanent real estate appurtenances and recorded
as deed restrictions or easements that run with the land.
(4) The SWM site plan and operation and maintenance (O&M)
agreement shall be recorded as a restrictive deed covenant that
runs with the land.
(5) The Township may take enforcement actions against an applicant
for failure to satisfy any provision of this chapter.
C. Maintenance of existing stormwater management facilities. The
Township of West Hanover requires all structural detention basins,
retention ponds, reservoirs and similar stormwater management
facilities; water quality, groundwater recharge and similar BMPs; and
all nonstructural BMPs be properly maintained by the property owner
in order to ensure that they are functioning as originally designed.
Maintenance of all approved structural detention basins, retention
ponds and reservoirs and similar structural stormwater management
and water quality facilities shall be required to ensure that they are
continuously functioning as originally designed. The minimum
maintenance standards shall be as follows:
(1) No obstructions of foreign material shall be permitted at any and
all outlet spillways, piping or other configurations that would cause
disruption of water flow in a manner not designed for the facility.
(2) All inlets and inlet swales and structures shall be free of any and all
obstructions, spent liquids such as oils, fuels, petroleum products,
antifreeze, sediment, vegetation, wood, grease, sand, rocks, trash
and debris.
(3) No growth of trees or brush shall be permitted in approved
detention basins, retention ponds and reservoirs or upon any pond
or reservoir embankment, unless required for screening purposes
per § 195-124 of the West Hanover Zoning Ordinance. However, in
no case shall trees or brush be permitted in areas that would
threaten the integrity of the pond.
(4) All piping inlet and outlet structures shall be free of burrowing
animals in approved detention basins, retention ponds, reservoirs
and surrounding areas in order to protect the structural integrity of
the stormwater facility.
(5) All piping inlet and outlet structures shall be free of holes,
burrowing animals, depressions, cracks, seepage, leakage or other
defects that may cause infiltration to the surrounding substrata.
(6) All required fencing around an approved detention basin, retention
pond and reservoir shall be structurally sound and without defects.
§ 168-30 WEST HANOVER CODE § 168-30
144:228
(7) The base and bottom of all retention ponds, detention basins,
reservoirs, outflow swales and the immediate surrounding area
outside of the retention pond, detention basin, and reservoir shall
be free of all brush, trash, oil, fuels, petroleum products and
residue, antifreeze, wood, appliances, building materials and other
debris.
(8) All approved retention ponds, detention basins, reservoirs and
surrounding areas shall be free of vegetation growth in excess of 12
inches unless otherwise landscaped and designed as part of the
facility.
D. Facilities dedicated to Township D/SWM-BMP Fund. If stormwater
management facilities and related BMPs are offered and accepted by
the Township for dedication, the Township shall require persons
installing stormwater BMPs to pay a specified amount to the Municipal
Stormwater D/SWM-BMP Fund to help defray costs of operations and
maintenance activities. The amount may be determined as follows:
(1) The applicant's engineer shall determine and calculate the
maintenance costs on an annual basis of all stormwatermanagement-
related facilities to be dedicated.
(2) The applicant's engineer shall also calculate the amount of money
(the deposit amount) that, if invested at an interest rate of 3% per
annum, would produce sufficient interest income per year to pay
the annual operations and maintenance costs of the facilities for 10
years. The deposit amount shall then be converted to present worth
of the annual series values. The applicant shall provide the deposit
amount and the basis of the calculation to the Township Engineer
for review and approval.
(3) As a condition of approval of the subdivision or land development
and approval of any SWM permit, the Township may require the
applicant or developer, within seven days of approval of the amount
of deposit, to pay the Township the approved amount. If the
Township requires this payment, it is obliged to accept the
dedicated drainage and stormwater facilities when all other
improvements of the plan have been completed and provided that
the owner has dedicated to the Township a minimum twenty-foot
right-of-way to provide a means of ingress and egress to said
facilities where such ingress and egress is not otherwise practically
available.
(4) If a BMP is proposed that also serves as a recreation facility (e.g.,
ball field, lake), the Township may adjust the amount due
accordingly upon approval by the Board of Supervisors.
E. Facilities maintained by private organization. In the event that the
Township does not require dedication of drainage and stormwater
facilities to the Township, the applicant shall provide for and establish
an entity for the ownership and maintenance of the drainage and
§ 168-30 PLUMBING § 168-30
144:229
stormwater facilities, and such organization shall not be dissolved nor
shall it dispose of drainage facilities owned by it by sale or otherwise
(except to an organization conceived and established to own and
maintain the drainage and stormwater facilities).
(1) The organization for the ownership and maintenance of drainage
and stormwater facilities shall be a nonprofit homeowners'
organization operating under recorded land agreements that are
covenants running with all the land encompassed within the
development and shall be governed according to the following
regulations:
(a) The organization is organized by the developer and operating
with financial subsidization by the developer, if necessary,
before the sale of any lots within the development.
(b) Membership in the organization is mandatory for all
purchasers of lots therein and their successors.
(c) The organization shall be responsible for maintenance of said
drainage and stormwater facilities and insurance and taxes on
drainage and stormwater facilities owned by the organization.
(d) The members of the organization shall share equitably the
costs of maintaining and developing drainage and stormwater
facilities in accordance with the terms set forth in the
documents establishing the organization and the covenants
running with the land.
(e) The organization shall have or hire adequate staff to
administer common facilities and maintain the drainage and
stormwater facilities.
(f) The Board of Supervisors shall retain the right to review and
approve the articles of incorporation or other documents
creating the organization and bylaws and all declaration of
covenants, conditions and restrictions of the homeowners'
organization as the same relates to the responsibility for
ongoing ownership and maintenance. Additionally, the
Township shall have a right of inspection of drainage and
stormwater facilities.
(2) Failure to maintain.
(a) In the event that the organization established to own and
maintain drainage and stormwater facilities or any successor
organization shall, at any time, fail to maintain the drainage
and stormwater facilities in reasonable order and condition in
accordance with the development or subdivision plan, the
Township may serve written notice on such organization or on
the residents and owners of the development setting forth the
manner in which the organization has failed to maintain the
§ 168-30 WEST HANOVER CODE § 168-30
144:230
drainage and stormwater facilities in reasonable condition, and
said notice shall include a demand that such deficiencies of
maintenance be cured within 30 days thereof and shall state
the date and place of a hearing hereon which shall be held
within 14 days of the notice.
(b) At such hearing, the Township may modify the terms of the
original notice as to the deficiencies and may give an extension
of time within which the same shall be cured.
(c) If the deficiencies set forth in the original notice or the
modifications thereof shall not be cured within said 30 days or
any extension thereof, the Township, in order to preserve the
taxable values of the properties within the development and
prevent the drainage and stormwater facilities from becoming
a public nuisance, may enter upon said drainage and
stormwater facilities and maintain the same for a period of one
year. Said entry and maintenance shall not vest in the public
any rights to use the drainage and stormwater facilities except
when the same is voluntarily dedicated to the public by the
residents and owners.
(d) Before the expiration of said year, the Township shall, upon its
initiative or upon the request of the organization theretofore
responsible for the maintenance of the drainage and
stormwater facilities, call a public hearing upon notice to such
organization or to the residents and owners of the
development, at which hearing such organization or the
residents and owners of the development shall show cause why
such maintenance by the Township shall not, at the election of
the Township, continue for a succeeding year. If the Township
shall determine that such organization is ready and able to
maintain said drainage and stormwater facilities in reasonable
condition, the Township shall cease to maintain said drainage
and stormwater facilities at the end of said year. If the
Township shall determine such organization is not ready and
able to maintain said drainage and stormwater facilities in a
reasonable condition, the Township may, at its discretion,
continue to maintain said drainage and stormwater facilities
during the next succeeding year and, subject to a similar
hearing and a determination, in each year thereafter. The
decision of the Township in any such case shall constitute a
final administrative decision subject to judicial review.
(3) The costs of such maintenance by the Township shall be assessed
ratably against the properties within the development and shall
become a lien on said properties. The Township, at the time of
entering on said drainage and stormwater facilities for the purpose
of maintenance, shall file a notice of such lien in the office of the
Prothonotary of Dauphin County, Pennsylvania, upon the properties
affected by the lien within the development.
§ 168-30 PLUMBING § 168-30
144:231
§ 168-31. Maintenance agreement for privately owned stormwater
facilities.
F. Facilities maintained by individual lot owner.
(1) Where the plan indicates that the drainage and stormwater
facilities are to be located on an individual lot and are to be
maintained by the owner of the lot, the plan shall contain language
in a form satisfactory to the Township Solicitor that the owner of
the lot, or any succeeding owner or any succeeding owner(s), has a
legal duty to maintain the stormwater and drainage facilities in
accordance with the standards of the Township and that the legal
duty to maintain the drainage and stormwater facilities may be
enforced at law or in equity by the Township or by owners of other
lots on the plan.
(2) In the event that the owner fails to maintain the facilities in
reasonable order and condition in accordance with the
development or subdivision plan, the Township may serve the
owner of the lot on which the facilities are located a notice setting
forth the deficiencies in maintenance and giving the owner 30 days
within which to cure said deficiencies. If the owner fails to cure
said deficiencies within the 30 days or any extension thereof
granted by the Township, the Township may enter upon the
property and remedy the deficiencies. The costs of remedying the
deficiency shall be a lien on the lot upon which the facilities are
located.
G. The Township, upon recommendation of the Township Engineer, shall
make the final determination on the continuing maintenance
responsibilities prior to final approval of the SWM site plan and report.
The Township may require an offer of dedication of such facilities as
part of the requirements for approval of the SWM site plan. Such a
requirement is not an indication that the Township will accept the
facilities. The Township reserves the right to accept or reject the
ownership and operating responsibility for any portion of the
stormwater management controls.
H. If the Township accepts ownership of stormwater BMPs, the Township
may, at its discretion, require a fee from the applicant to the Township
to offset the future cost of inspections, operations, and maintenance.
I. It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any permanent stormwater BMP
required by an approved SWM site plan, or to allow the property to
remain in a condition, which does not conform to an approved SWM site
plan, unless the Township grants an exception in writing.
A. Prior to final approval of the SWM site plan and report, the applicant
shall sign the operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement (Appendix
A67) covering all stormwater control facilities that are to be privately
§ 168-30 WEST HANOVER CODE § 168-31
144:232
owned. The operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement shall be
recorded with the SWM site plan and made a part hereto.
B. Other items may be included in the operation and maintenance (O&M)
agreement where determined necessary to guarantee the satisfactory
operation and maintenance of all BMP facilities. The operation and
maintenance (O&M) agreement shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Township and the Township Solicitor.
C. The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance of the
stormwater BMPs. If the owner fails to adhere to the operation and
maintenance (O&M) agreement, the Township may perform the
services required and charge the owner appropriate fees. Nonpayment
of fees may result in a lien against the property.
67.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 168-31 PLUMBING § 168-31
144:233

ARTICLE IX
Inspections
§ 168-32. Schedule of inspections.
A. PADEP or its designees normally ensure compliance with any permits
that they issue, including those for stormwater management. In
addition to PADEP compliance programs, the Township or its assignee
may inspect all phases of the installation of temporary or permanent
stormwater management facilities.
B. The owner or contractor must schedule a pre-construction conference
with the Township Engineer to be held at least four working days prior
to the start of any site construction, earth disturbance, clearing or
grubbing. Also, the owner or contractor shall contact the Township
Engineer at least four working days prior to the start of any site
construction, earth disturbance, clearing or grubbing to facilitate
construction observation.
C. For stormwater improvements that are not part of a subdivision or land
development plan, stormwater BMPs shall be inspected by the
landowner, or the landowner's designee, according to the inspection
schedule described on the SWM site plan for each BMP.
(1) The Township may require copies of the inspection reports, in a
form as stipulated by the Township.
(2) Inspections by Township; charges.
(a) If such inspections are not conducted or inspection reports not
submitted as scheduled, the Township, or its designee, may
conduct such inspections and charge the owner appropriate
fees. Nonpayment of fees may result in a lien against the
property.
(b) Prior to conducting such inspections, the Township shall
inform the owner of its intent to conduct such inspections. The
owner shall be given 30 days to conduct required inspections
and submit the required inspection reports to the Township.
D. During any stage of earth disturbance activities, if the Township
determines that the temporary or permanent stormwater management
facilities are not being installed in accordance with the approved SWM
site plan, the Township may suspend or revoke any existing Township
permits or approvals until a revised SWM site plan is submitted and
approved as specified in this chapter.
E. A set of design plans approved by the Township shall be on file at the
site throughout the duration of the construction activity. Periodic
inspections may be made by the Township or designee during
construction.
§ 168-32 PLUMBING § 168-32
144:235
§ 168-33. Right of entry.
F. Adherence to approved plan. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to undertake any regulated activity on any property except
as provided for in the approved drainage plan and pursuant to the
requirements of this chapter. It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any
control structure required by the drainage plan pursuant to this chapter
or to allow the property to remain in a condition which does not
conform to the approved drainage plan.
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of the Township may enter at reasonable times, upon
any property within the Township, to inspect the implementation,
condition, or operations and maintenance of the stormwater BMPs in
regard to any aspect governed by this chapter.
B. Stormwater BMP owners and operators shall allow persons working on
behalf of the Township ready access to all parts of the premises for the
purposes of determining compliance with this chapter.
C. Persons working on behalf of the Township shall have the right to
temporarily locate on any stormwater BMP in the Township such
devices, as are necessary, to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the
discharges from such stormwater BMP.
D. Unreasonable delay in allowing the Township access to a stormwater
BMP is a violation of this chapter.
§ 168-32 WEST HANOVER CODE § 168-33
144:236
ARTICLE X
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 168-34. Notification.
§ 168-35. Enforcement.
§ 168-36. Public nuisance.
§ 168-37. Suspension and revocation of approval or permit.
A. In the event that a person fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter, an approved SWM site plan, or fails to conform to the
requirements of any permit or approval issued hereunder, the Township
shall provide written notification, via certified mail, of the violation to
the landowner indicated on the O&M agreement. Such notification shall
set forth the nature of the violation(s) and establish a time limit for
correction of these violation(s).
B. Failure to comply within the time specified shall subject such person to
the penalties provisions of this chapter. All such penalties shall be
deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the Township from pursuing
any and all other remedies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of
the real property on which any regulated activity is proposed to occur,
is occurring, or has occurred to comply with the terms and conditions of
this chapter.
A. West Hanover Township is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all
of the provisions of this chapter. The approved SWM site plan shall be
on file at the project site throughout the duration of the construction
activity. The Township or its designee may make periodic inspections
during construction.
B. Adherence to approved SWM site plan:
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
undertake any regulated activity on any property except as
provided for by an approved SWM site plan and pursuant to the
requirements of this chapter.
(2) It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any control structure
required by the SWM site plan pursuant to this chapter.
(3) It shall be unlawful to allow a property to remain in a condition that
does not conform to an approved SWM site plan.
A. A violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 168-34 PLUMBING § 168-37
144:237
§ 168-38. Notification of violation.
A. Any approval or permit issued by the Township may be suspended or
revoked for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
approved SWM site plan or operation and maintenance (O&M)
agreement.
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to the regulated activity.
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act, during
the regulated activity, which constitutes or creates a hazard or
nuisance, pollution, or which endangers the life or property of
others.
B. A suspended approval or permit may be reinstated by the Township
when:
(1) The Township or its designee has inspected and approved the
corrections to the violation(s) that caused the suspension.
(2) The Township is satisfied that the violation(s) has been corrected.
C. An approval that has been revoked by the Township cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new approval under the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Occupancy permit. An occupancy permit shall not be issued unless the
certification of compliance has been secured. The occupancy permit
shall be required for each lot owner and/or developer for all
subdivisions and land development in the Township.
A. Whenever the Township finds that a person has violated a prohibition or
failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the Township may order
compliance by written notice to the responsible person. Such notice
may require, without limitation, any of the following:
(1) The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;
(2) The elimination of prohibited connections or discharges;
(3) Cessation of any violating discharges, practices or operations;
(4) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
(6) The implementation of stormwater BMPs; and
(7) Operation and maintenance of stormwater BMPs.
§ 168-37 WEST HANOVER CODE § 168-38
144:238
§ 168-39. Violations and penalties.
§ 168-40. Appeals.
B. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and
establish a time limit for correction of the violation(s). Said notice may
further advise that, if applicable, should the violator fail to take the
required action within the established deadline, the work will be done
by the Township or designee and the expense thereof shall be charged
to the violator.
C. Failure to comply within the time specified shall also subject such
person to the penalty provisions of this chapter. All such penalties shall
be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the Township from
pursuing any and all other remedies available in law or equity.
A. Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $ 1,000 for each violation, recoverable with costs, or
imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both. Each day that the
violation continues shall be a separate offense, and penalties shall be
cumulative.
B. In addition, the Township, through its solicitor, may institute injunctive,
mandamus, or any other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in
equity for the enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent
jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary
or permanent injunctions, mandamus, or other appropriate forms of
remedy or relief.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the Township, or its designee,
relevant to the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the Township
Board of Supervisors within 30 days of that action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Township Board of
Supervisors, relevant to the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to
the Dauphin County Court of Common Pleas within 30 days of the
Township's decision.
§ 168-38 PLUMBING § 168-40
144:239

ARTICLE XI
Prohibitions
§ 168-41. Prohibited discharges and connections.
A. Any drain (including indoor drains and sinks) or conveyance, whether
on the surface or underground, that allows any nonstormwater
discharge, including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water, to
enter the Township's separate storm sewer system or waters of the
commonwealth is prohibited.
B. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the Township's separate storm sewer system which has not
been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved
by the Township is prohibited.
C. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into the Township's
separate storm sewer system or into surface waters of the
commonwealth, which are not composed entirely of stormwater, except:
(1) As provided in Subsection D below; and
(2) Discharges allowed under a state or federal permit.
D. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution to the waters of the
commonwealth:
(1) Discharges from fire-fighting activities.
(2) Potable water sources, including dechlorinated water line and fire
hydrant flushings.
(3) Irrigation drainage.
(4) Air-conditioning condensate.
(5) Springs.
(6) Water from sump pumps.
(7) Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) or have been processed through an oil/water separator
and where detergents are not used.
(8) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(9) Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains.
(10) Lawn watering.
(11) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
(12) Uncontaminated groundwater.
§ 168-41 PLUMBING § 168-41
144:241
§ 168-42. Roof drains.
Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration areas, vegetative
BMPs, or pervious areas to the maximum extent practicable.
§ 168-43. Alteration of BMPs.
(13)Water from individual residential car washing.
(14) Routine external building washdown (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
E. In the event that the Township or PADEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in Subsection D, significantly contribute to
pollution of waters of the commonwealth or is so notified by PADEP, the
Township will notify the responsible person(s) to cease the discharge.
F. Upon notice provided by the Township or PADEP under Subsection E,
the discharger will have a reasonable time, as determined by the
Township or PADEP, to cease the discharge, consistent with the degree
of pollution caused by the discharge.
G. Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities under
Commonwealth Law.
A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any existing
stormwater BMP, facilities, areas, or structures unless it is part of an
approved maintenance program, without the written approval of the
Township.
B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping, or vegetation into
a stormwater BMP, facilities, areas, structures, or within a drainage
easement which would limit or alter the functioning of the BMP without
the written approval of the Township.
§ 168-41 WEST HANOVER CODE § 168-43
144:242
ARTICLE XII
Fees and Expenses
§ 168-44. General provisions.
The fee required by this chapter is the Township Review and Inspection Fee
(fee). The fee shall be established by the Township to defray review costs
incurred by the Township and the Township Engineer. The applicant shall
pay all fees.
§ 168-45. Expenses covered by fee.
§ 168-46. Filing fee.
At the time of filing, all plans shall be accompanied by a check, payable to
West Hanover Township, for processing the application and plan review to
defray the cost of reviewing the proposed plans and required data.
§ 168-47. Fee schedule and payment.
The Board of Supervisors shall establish by resolution a fee schedule to be
paid by the permit applicant or developer at the time of filing for SWM site
plan and report and/or SWM permit for all applicable activities within the
Township.
A. The fee required by this chapter shall, at a minimum, cover:
(1) Administrative and clerical costs.
(2) Review of the SWM site plan and report.
(3) Pre-construction meetings.
(4) Reviewing and preparing cost estimates for the maintenance of
stormwater management facilities and BMP-related facilities.
(5) Inspection of stormwater management facilities/BMPs and
drainage improvements during construction.
(6) Final inspection upon completion of the stormwater management
facilities/BMPs and drainage improvements presented in the SWM
site plan.
(7) Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions
regulated by this chapter, correct violations, and assure proper
completion of stipulated remedial actions.
A. Such fee shall include the reasonable and necessary charges by the
Township's professional consultants or Engineer for the review and
report to West Hanover Township. Such fee shall be reasonable and in
accordance with the ordinary and customary charges by the consultant
or Township Engineer for similar service in the Township, but in no
event shall the fee exceed the rate or cost charged by the consultant or
§ 168-44 PLUMBING § 168-47
144:243
§ 168-48. Recording of approved SWM site plan and related
agreements.
Township Engineer to the Township when fees are not reimbursed or
otherwise imposed on applicants.
B. The engineering review fee required to be paid shall be promptly paid
to the Township by the applicant, upon the submission of bills to the
applicant from time to time, as such fees are billed to the Township. An
applicant who disputes the fee shall have 14 days from receipt of the
bill to notify the Township that the fee is being disputed, in which case
the Township shall not delay or disapprove a subdivision or land
development application due to the applicant's request over disputed
fees.
C. In the event that the Township and the applicant cannot agree that the
review fee is reasonable and necessary, then the fee shall be
recalculated and recertified by another professional engineer licensed
as such in this commonwealth or consultant and chosen mutually by the
Township and the applicant. The estimate certified by the third
engineer or consultant shall be presumed fair and reasonable and shall
be the final estimate. In the event that a third engineer or consultant is
so chosen, fees for the services of said engineer or consultant shall be
paid equally by the Township and the applicant.
D. No SWM site plan and report for regulated earth disturbance activities
shall be considered by the Township and approved unless the fee is paid
in full.
A. The owner of any land upon which permanent BMPs will be placed,
constructed, or implemented, as described in the SWM site plan, shall
record the following documents in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds
of Dauphin County, within 30 days of approval of the SWM site plan by
the Township:
(1) The SWM site plan.
(2) Operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement (Appendix A).68
(3) Easements under § 168-28.
B. The Township may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the
project site upon discovery of the failure of the owner to comply with
this section.
68.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 168-47 WEST HANOVER CODE § 168-48
144:244
Chapter 170
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 88.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 148.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
173.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 168-48 PLUMBING § 168-48
144:245

ARTICLE I
Street Excavations
[Adopted 1-20-1986 as Ch. 21, Part 1, of the 1986 Code; amended in
its entirety 9-5-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-10]
§ 170-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to protect and preserve the health, safety
and welfare of residents of the township by requiring all persons who wish
to install any utility within township streets or open cut or bore under
any township street to first obtain a township road occupancy permit from
the township regulating the manner of street disturbance by boring or
open cutting and restoring; setting forth related matters; and prescribing
penalties for violation.
§ 170-2. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context
clearly indicates otherwise:
APPLICANT — Any person who makes application for a permit.
ENGINEER — The Township Engineer of West Hanover Township or his
authorized deputy, representative or inspector.
EMERGENCY — Any unforeseen circumstance which calls for immediate
action.
PERMITTEE — Any person who has been issued a permit and has agreed to
fulfill all the terms of this article.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society,
corporation, utility or other group or entity, including a municipality or
municipal authority.
STREET — The entire right-of-way of a public street, public highway, public
alley, public way, public road or public easement within the township.
STREET OPENING — Any ditch, excavation, tunnel or opening in or under
the surface of any street, or within any street right-of-way, excepting,
however, work performed by any property owner or his agent or contractor
within that portion of the street right-of-way abutting his property and lying
between the curbline and the property line, or a line 12 inches beyond the
curbline in the case of construction or repair of curbs.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of West Hanover, Dauphin County,
Pennsylvania, a municipality acting by and through its Board of Supervisors
or, in appropriate cases, acting by and through its authorized
representatives.
§ 170-3. Permit required; terms and conditions.
§ 170-1 PLUMBING § 170-3
144:247
§ 170-4. Street openings prior to reconstruction or resurfacing.
A. Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to make any street
opening without first securing a permit therefor from West Hanover
Township; provided, however, that any person maintaining pipes, lines
or underground conduits, in or under the surface of any street by virtue
of any law, ordinance or franchise, may proceed with an excavation or
opening without a permit when emergency circumstances demand the
work be done immediately for the preservation of the public health,
safety or welfare, or provided that the permit could not reasonably and
practically have been obtained beforehand. Such person, however, shall
thereafter apply for a permit on the first regular business day on which
the office of the township is open for business, and said permit shall be
retroactive to the date when work was begun.
B. Conditions of approval. The approval of any street opening permit shall
confer a right upon the permittee, subject to the terms and conditions
of the permit, to temporarily occupy and use the street surface during
the course of construction work covered by the permit and to thereafter
occupy the space within which the work is to be located, subject in
every case to the specific right of the township to require temporary or
permanent relocation or removal of any of the facilities entirely at the
permittee's expense in the event that said facilities are in conflict with
the township's interest or the public interest in the use of the street.
C. Special conditions. In approving any permit, the township may attach
such special conditions thereto as may be reasonably necessary to
protect the public and private property.
D. Acceptance of permit. By accepting the permit, the applicant agrees to
perform the work in accordance with the terms and conditions of the
permit, and of any special conditions which way be attached thereto,
and to save the township, its officers, employees and agents from any
costs, damages and liabilities which may accrue by reason of the work.
E. Expiration of permit. Every permit issued hereunder shall expire within
one year from the date of issuance. If the permittee shall be unable to
complete the work within one year from the date of issuance, he shall,
prior to expiration of the permit, present, in writing, to the township a
request for an extension of time, setting forth therein the reasons for
the requested extension. If in the opinion of the township such an
extension is necessary, the permittee may be granted additional time
for the completion of the work.
F. Revocation of permits. The township may revoke any permit issued
hereunder after notice of violation of any condition of the permit.
A. When the township reconstructs or resurfaces any street, the township
shall first serve written notice by certified mail of such improvements to
all persons owning property abutting the street about to be improved
and to all public utilities companies operating within the township.
§ 170-3 WEST HANOVER CODE § 170-4
144:248
§ 170-4.1. Application; fees; insurance.
Within 60 calendar days from receipt of such notice, all notified persons
shall complete all necessary and replacement of utility mains, service
connections and/or laterals existing under the street and designated
curb and sidewalk areas. Notified persons shall also complete or cause
to be completed any new installations, under the street and designed
curb and sidewalk areas, required for use within a two-year period
thereafter.
B. This section shall not forbid the installation of new pipes, conduits or
other services or structures, or the repair or replacement of those
already existing, in or under the portions of such highways improved as
aforesaid; by penetrating the subsurface beneath paving in accordance
with township ordinances and the direction of the Township Public
Works Department or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation,
upon obtaining a permit therefor from the township and upon payment
to the township of the same fees as prescribed by the provisions of this
article, except for the degradation fee for making a surface opening in
the highway of the same dimensions.
A. Application. Any person intending to make a street opening on a
township street shall make written application therefor to the township.
The application for a permit shall be on a form provided by the township
and submitted to the township in triplicate. No work shall be
commenced until the township has approved the application and issued
a permit, excepting emergency work, as provided under § 170-3A
hereof. Three copies of an accurate drawing clearly showing the
following shall accompany each application:
(1) Extent of the proposed street opening.
(2) Width of the traveled roadway.
(3) Right-of-way lines.
(4) Dimension to the nearest intersecting street.
(5) Construction details.
(6) When required by the township, the location and depth of all other
subsurface facilities in the vicinity of the work.
B. Fees. A basic fee, improvement guarantee and/or maintenance
guarantee shall accompany the application, if applicable, as follows:
[Amended 5-3-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-4]
(1) Basic fee: the basic fee established by PennDOT/PSATS fee
schedule for road cuts and road openings.
(2) Improvement/performance guarantee. The Township shall require
financial security for an improvement guarantee in accordance
with § 170-4.3 prior to the start of work. For road cuts and openings
§ 170-4 PLUMBING § 170-4.1
144:249
§ 170-4.2. Specifications.
of a nature that will not directly impact or cause damage to the
macadam road surface, curbing, drainage systems, signage, or
other public improvements in the right-of-way, the improvement/
performance guarantee may be reduced or not required at the
discretion of the Road Master and Township Engineer.
(3) Maintenance guarantee. The Township shall require the filing of a
maintenance guarantee and in a form according to § 170-4.3B
herein to cover repair of street opening work performed that shall
take effect beginning on the date of project completion. The
maintenance guarantee shall be in effect for a two-year period (24
months) following the notice of completion of work. The amount of
the maintenance guarantee shall be $1,000 or equal to 20%,
whichever is greater, of the actual costs or estimated improvement
guarantee amount of any sheet excavation and restoration work for
a single project as determined by the Township Engineer. For road
cuts and openings of a nature that will not directly impact or cause
damage to the macadam road surface, curbing, drainage systems,
signage, or other public improvements in the right-of-way, the
maintenance guarantee may be reduced or not required at the
discretion of the Road Master and Township Engineer.
C. Insurance. The applicant shall furnish certificates of liability and
workers' compensation insurance.
A. General. Unless specifically permitted by the township:
(1) No street opening shall extend across more than 1/2 of the cartway
at one time.
(2) Two-way traffic shall be maintained.
(3) Access to driveways and/or buildings abutting the street shall be
maintained.
(4) All trenches shall be filled and closed overnight or covered with a
steel plate. The steel plate shall be adequate for HS-25 loading and
shall safely convey all vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
(5) Disturbed portions of the roadway, including but not limited to
slopes and appurtenances and structures such as guiderails, curbs,
signs, markings, drain pipes, driveways and vegetation, shall be
restored by the permittee to a condition at least equal to that which
existed before the start of work authorized by the permit,
consistent with other township ordinances, or consistent with the
PennDot Standards for Roadway Construction, whichever is the
higher standard. Additional restoration may also be required, upon
written notification, to restore the structural integrity of the
pavement or shoulder.
§ 170-4.1 WEST HANOVER CODE § 170-4.2
144:250
B. Special.
(1) The permittee shall locate in advance of excavation all surface and
subsurface utility lines and structures and shall take all
precautions necessary to avoid damage to other utility lines and to
public or private property. In the event that damage does occur to
property of others, the permittee shall promptly and satisfactorily
repair all damage and restore the property to a satisfactory
condition.
(2) Provisions shall be made to accommodate the flow of storm
drainage, and no excavated material or trench shall be permitted to
interfere with the normal flow of surface water.
(3) Traffic control shall be maintained in accordance with Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Publication 203, and the permittee
shall furnish and maintain such signs, barricades, lights and
flagmen as may be necessary to properly protect the public.
(4) If blasting is performed, such operations shall be in charge by
licensed persons only and shall be carried out in strict conformance
with federal, state, county or municipal laws or regulations
governing the same.
(5) The permittee shall be responsible to notify the Township Fire and
Police Departments and other public utility companies of the
proposed work, stating the nature and location of the work to be
done, and shall keep all said parties informed of the progress of the
work. When access to abutting properties is to be denied, the
permittee shall notify the affected parties in advance.
C. Pavement cuts, excavation and backfill.
(1) The permittee shall avoid disturbing roadways or shoulders by
limiting work areas to outside of roadways and shoulders unless
approved by the Township. [Amended 5-3-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-4]
(2) Disturbed portions of the roadway, including but not limited to
slopes and appurtenances and structures such as guiderails, curbs,
signs, markings, drain pipes, driveways and vegetation, shall be
restored by the permittee to a condition at least equal to that which
existed before the start of work authorized by the permit,
consistent with other township ordinances, or consistent with the
PennDOT Standards for Roadway Construction, whichever is the
higher standard. Additional restoration may also be required, upon
written notification, to restore the structural integrity of the
pavement or shoulder.
(3) If the permittee wishes to open pavement having a bituminous
concrete surface and the township's wearing course is less than 10
years old, the permittee shall, in addition to the restoration
§ 170-4.2 PLUMBING § 170-4.2
144:251
conditions outlined in the permit and in this article, bore under
the street if required by the township or overlay the pavement in
accordance with the following conditions:
(a) When a longitudinal opening longer than 100 linear feet has
been made in the pavement, the permittee shall mill and
overlay the traffic lanes in which the opening was made, for the
entire length of roadway that was opened, in a manner
authorized by the township.
(b) When two or more transverse openings have been made within
100 linear feet of pavement, the permittee shall mill and
overlay traffic lanes in which the openings were made, for the
entire length of roadway between the openings, in a manner
authorized by the township.
(c) If disturbed lanes adjacent to the undisturbed lanes are
overlayed, the edge of the disturbed lane shall be saw cut or
milled to a depth of 1.5 inches or the depth of the existing
surface course, whichever is less, for the length of the opening
to ensure a smooth joint, with proper elevation and cross
section. A full width overlay may be authorized on various
roadways instead of saw cutting or milling the disturbed land.
(d) If disturbed lanes adjacent to shoulders are overlayed, the
shoulder shall be raised, with material and in a manner
authorized by the township for the type of existing shoulder, so
that the overlaid pavement and shoulder edges are at the same
elevation.
(4) Regardless of the age of the wearing course, the township may
require the following restoration:
(a) If more than 100 linear feet of longitudinal or transverse
openings, or both, are made in the pavement, the township
may require the permittee to overlay traffic lanes in which the
openings were made, for the entire length of highway that was
opened, if the township determines that the rideability or
structural integrity of the pavement has been impaired by the
openings.
(b) If four or more openings are made by the same permittee
within 100 linear feet of pavement, the township may require
the permittee to restore the entire disturbed pavement
between the openings by milling, planing or other authorized
method and overlaying the entire disturbed pavement.
(c) If future settlement of the trench is possible, the township may
require a temporary restoration of the pavement for up to a sixmonth
period in accordance with § 170-4.2C(13).
§ 170-4.2 WEST HANOVER CODE § 170-4.2
144:252
(5) If an opening is made in a bituminous concrete pavement within
three feet from the edge of pavement or other longitudinal joint or
opening, the surface restoration shall be extended to the edge of
pavement or other longitudinal joint or opening.
(6) At each end of an overlay, the permittee shall install a paving notch,
under Standards for Roadway Construction RC-28, by milling,
planing or other authorized method and provide a minimum tenfoot
transition.
(7) The transition areas at each end of an overlay shall follow the
contour of the surrounding surface.
(8) When pavements are covered or destroyed by the permitted work,
including overlays, they shall be replaced with temporary
pavement markings, before opening the disturbed pavement to
traffic. When the pavement surface is restored, all pavement
markings that were covered or destroyed shall be replaced in their
former location. [Amended 5-3-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-4]
(9) Restored openings in the pavement or opened shoulder shall be
sealed under Section 401.3(j)(3) of Publication 408 in the case of
bituminous concrete.
(10) All trenching and backfill shall be in accordance with a
construction detail approved by the township. All backfill shall be
comprised of clean type 2A aggregate and compacted in
accordance with Publication 408. [Amended 5-3-2004 by Ord.
No. 2004-4]
(11) Subbase, base and surface restoration of flexible base pavements
shall be performed under this section and as specified in the
permit. [Amended 6-1-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-12]
(a) Prior to replacement of the base course, one foot outside of
each edge of the opening shall be sawed, in a neat straight line,
to the top elevation of the existing aggregate subbase or stone
base course, and the detached material shall be removed.
(b) The subbase shall consist of No. 2A aggregate meeting the
requirements of Section 350 of Publication 408. The subbase
shall have a minimum depth of six inches or a depth equal to
the existing subbase, whichever is greater.
(c) Exposed vertical and horizontal surfaces shall be prepared
under Section 401.3(f) of Publication 408.
(d) The base course shall consist of bituminous concrete meeting
the requirements of Section 305 of Publication 408 or other
base course material authorized by the Township. The base
course material shall have a minimum depth of five inches or a
depth equal to the existing base course, whichever is greater,
§ 170-4.2 PLUMBING § 170-4.2
144:253
and shall be SAMD HMA base course, PG 64-22, 0.3 to less
than three million ESALS, 25.0 mm mix.
(e) The binder course shall consist of ID-2 material meeting the
requirements of Section 421 of Publication 408. The binder
course shall have a minimum depth of two inches or a depth
equal to the existing binder course, whichever is greater, and
shall be SAMD binder course, PG 64-22, 0.3 to less than three
million ESALS,12.5 mm mix.
(f) The wearing course shall consist of ID-2 material meeting the
requirements of Section 420 of Publication 408. The wearing
course shall have a minimum depth of 1.5 inches ID-2 or a
depth equal to the existing wearing course, whichever is
greater, and shall be SAMD HMA wearing course, PG 64-22,
0.3 to less than three million ESALS, 9.5 mm mix.
(g) Pavement design.
[1] A pavement design, in accordance with PennDOT
Publication 242, shall be required for all facilities or
developments that will generate a total of 100 or more
equivalent 18-kip single-axle loads (ESALS) in a given
weekday in all directions. The pavement design
requirements will take into account the supporting road
networks' capacity to handle additional heavy vehicle
loading. No proposed pavement section determined by the
pavement design may be less that the minimum
requirements of § 170-4.2C(11)(d), (e) and (f).
[2] A pavement design, in accordance with PennDOT
Publication 242, may be submitted for facilities or
developments that will generate less than 100 or more
equivalent 18-kip single-axle loads (ESALS) in a given
weekday in all directions. The pavement design
requirements will take into account the supporting road
networks' capacity to handle additional heavy vehicle
loading. The design will assume 300,000 equivalent 18-kip
single-axle loads (ESALS) over 20 years. Also, the
California bearing ration (CBR) determined in laboratory
testing shall not exceed a value of 10.
(12) Subbase, base and surface restoration of rigid base pavements
(with or without bituminous overlay) shall be performed under this
section and as specified in the permit. [Amended 6-1-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-12]
(a) Prior to replacement of base course, one foot outside of each
edge of the opening shall be sawed, in a neat straight line, to
the top elevation of the existing aggregate subbase or stone
base course, and the detached material shall be removed.
§ 170-4.2 WEST HANOVER CODE § 170-4.2
144:254
(b) The subbase shall consist of No. 2A aggregate meeting the
requirements of Section 350 of Publication 408. The subbase
shall have a minimum depth of six inches or a depth equal to
the existing subbase, whichever is greater.
(c) The base course shall consist of reinforced high early strength
(HES) concrete meeting the requirements of Section 501 of
Publication 408. The base course material shall have a
minimum depth of eight inches or a depth equal to the existing
base course, whichever is greater.
(d) For those roads with an existing bituminous surface, the
wearing course shall consist of ID-2 material meeting the
requirements of Section 420 of Publication 408. The wearing
course shall have a minimum depth of two inches ID-2 or a
depth equal to the existing wearing course, whichever is
greater, and shall be SAMD HMA wearing course, PG 64-22,
0.3 to less than three million ESALS, 9.5 mm mix.
(e) Pavement design.
[1] A pavement design, in accordance with PennDot
Publication 242, shall be required for all facilities or
developments that will generate a total of 100 or more
equivalent 18-kip single-axle loads (ESALS) in a given
weekday in all directions. The pavement design
requirements will take into account the supporting road
networks' capacity to handle additional heavy vehicle
loading. No proposed pavement section determined by the
pavement design may be less that the minimum
requirements of § 170-4.2C(11)(d), (e) and (f).
[2] A pavement design, in accordance with PennDot
Publication 242, may be submitted for facilities or
developments that will generate less than 100 or more
equivalent 18-kip single-axle loads (ESALS) in a given
weekday in all directions. The pavement design
requirements will take into account the supporting road
networks' capacity to handle additional heavy vehicle
loading. The design will assume 300,000 equivalent 18-kip
single-axle loads (ESALS) over 20 years. Also, the
California bearing ratio (CBR) determined in laboratory
testing shall not exceed a value of 10.
(f) For those roads without an existing bituminous surface, the
eight-inch HES concrete shall be installed flush with the
existing concrete surface.
§ 170-4.2 PLUMBING § 170-4.2
144:255
NOTES
1. Use 1 1/4 inches diameter x 18 inches long dowel bars
for pavement depths 10 inches or less and 1 1/2 inches
diameter x 18 inches long dowel bars for pavement depths
greater than 10 inches.
2. Place the dowel bars parallel to the center line and surface
of the slab. The vertical or horizontal skew from one end of
the dowel bar to the other end is not to exceed 1/4 inch.
3. Transverse pavement joints shall be constructed at a 6:1 or
flatter skew.
4. All construction shall conform to PennDot Publication 408
and roadway construction drawings, current editions.
RIGID PAVEMENT TRENCH RESTORATION
Not to scale
(13) Temporary restoration of a pavement may be required by the
township prior to pavement restoration in accordance with the
following:
(a) The base shall consist of compacted select granular material
with a surface of two-inch bituminous material. If the existing
pavement structure includes a course of subbase material, it
shall be replaced to a depth equal to the existing course depth
with material meeting the requirements of Section 350.2 of
Publication 408.
§ 170-4.2 WEST HANOVER CODE § 170-4.2
144:256
(b) Temporary pavement restoration shall be completed before
traffic is allowed to travel on the disturbed area.
(c) The temporary pavement shall be immediately removed and
permanent restoration performed as soon as possible. The
temporary pavement may be kept in place for up to six months
or as specified in the permit, if it is properly maintained.
(14) In all cases where the application for a permit proposes
construction or installation of electric wires across a public rightof-
way, the application shall show that the electrical wires are to be
contained in an approved electrical conduit.
D. Special restoration requirements. Whenever unusual conditions exist,
or arise during construction, the township may change the permanent
restoration requirements from those given therein. In all cases, marks
of construction beyond the area of actual trench shall be satisfactorily
restored. In cases where a substantial portion of the original street
paving is removed or damaged, the township may require the permittee
to resurface the entire street area, in addition to constructing the final
paving repairs over trench areas. The township may also elect to accept
payment from the permittee to the township for final paving repairs, in
a sum to be determined by the township based upon then current costs
for such work plus 15%, and to apply the sum so paid toward the cost of
reconstruction of the entire street.
E. Inspection during construction. [Amended 5-3-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-4]
(1) The Township Road Master and the Township Engineer shall be
notified by the permittee four working days in advance of any
intended date of construction. The provisions stated herein shall be
construed as mandating periodic inspections, and the undertaking
of periodic inspections shall not be construed as an acceptance of
the work during construction or as a final inspection of the
construction.
(2) The applicant shall reimburse the township for the reasonable and
necessary expense incurred for the inspection of improvements by
the township or Township Engineer. Such reimbursement shall be
based upon time and material costs for the referenced inspections.
Such expense shall be reasonable and in accordance with the
ordinary and customary fees charged by the Township Engineer for
work performed for similar services in the community, but in no
event shall the fees exceed the rate or cost charged by the
Township Engineer to the township when fees are not reimbursed
or otherwise imposed on applicants. If the inspection fees exceed
the basic fee established in § 170-4.1B(1), then the Township may
invoice the permittee for costs incurred by the Township for the
Inspection of improvements. Improvements shall not be finally
approved until the invoice is paid.
§ 170-4.2 PLUMBING § 170-4.2
144:257
§ 170-4.3. Administration. [Amended 5-3-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-4]
(3) The Township, at the expense of the permittee, reserves the right to
require tests of the improvement to determine whether the
improvement complies in all respects with the requirements of the
Township.
F. Future maintenance. The permittee shall be responsible to correct any
trench settlement or deterioration in the final paving work or failure of
any other work associated with the permit. Such responsibility is
without limitation during the first two years after the date of the final
completion certificate. Thereafter, settlement of the trench area and
any other repair work shall remain the responsibility of the permittee to
repair, unless the Township gives a specific release. [Amended
5-3-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-4]
A. Computation of improvement financial guarantee.
(1) The amount of improvement guarantee shall be equal to 110% of
the cost of completion of street improvements estimated as of 90
days following the date scheduled for completion by the permittee.
Annually, the township may adjust the amount of the financial
security by comparing the actual cost of the improvements which
have been completed and estimated cost for the completion of the
remaining improvements as of the expiration of the 90th day after
either the original date scheduled for completion or a rescheduled
date of completion. Subsequent to said adjustment, the township
may require the permittee to post additional security in order to
assure that the financial security equals said 110%. Any additional
security shall be posted by the permittee in accordance with this
article.
(2) The amount of financial guarantee required shall be based upon an
estimate of the cost of completion of the required street
improvements, submitted by the applicant. The township, upon the
recommendation of the Township Engineer, may refuse to accept
such estimate for good cause shown. If the applicant and the
township are unable to agree upon an estimate, the estimate shall
be recalculated and recertified by another professional engineer
licensed as such in this commonwealth and chosen mutually by the
township and the applicant. The estimate certified by the third
engineer shall be presumed fair and reasonable and shall be the
final estimate. In the event that a third engineer is so chosen, fees
for the services of said engineer shall be paid equally by the
township and the applicant or permittee.
(3) If the party posting the financial guarantee requires more than one
year from the date of posting of the financial guarantee to complete
the required improvements, the amount of financial security may
be increased by an additional 10% for each one-year period beyond
the first anniversary date from posting of financial security to an
§ 170-4.2 WEST HANOVER CODE § 170-4.3
144:258
amount not exceeding 110% of the cost of completing the required
improvements as reestablished on or about the expiration of the
preceding one-year period by using the above procedure.
B. Form of financial security for improvement/performance and/or
maintenance guarantee. The financial security may be in the form of
cash, certified treasurer's or cashier's check, letter of credit or surety
bond made payable to the township. Although the township may accept
an alternative type of financial security, commonly used forms such as
irrevocable letters of credit and escrow accounts will be accepted. Such
financial security shall be posted with a bonding company or federal or
commonwealth chartered lending institution chosen by the party
posting the financial security, provided that said bonding company or
lending institution is authorized to conduct such business in the
commonwealth, subject to review by the Township Solicitor for
adequacy.
C. Release of improvement/performance financial security.
(1) As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the
party posting the financial security may request the Board of
Supervisors to release or authorize the release, from time to time,
such portions of the financial security necessary for payment to the
contractor or contractors performing the work. Any such requests
shall be in writing addressed to the Township, and the Township
shall have 45 days from receipt of such request within which to
allow the Township Road Master or Township Engineer to certify
that such portion of the work upon the improvements has been
completed in accordance with the approval of the road cut/street
opening permit or amendments and adjustments approved by the
Township. Upon such certification, the township shall authorize
release by the bonding company or lending institution of an amount
as estimated by the Township Engineer fairly representing the
value of the improvements completed or, if the Township fails to act
within said forty-five-day period, the Township shall be deemed to
have approved the release of funds as requested. The Township
may, prior to final release at the time of completion and
certification by its engineer, require retention of 10% of the
estimated cost of the aforesaid improvements.
(2) When the permittee has completed all of the necessary and
appropriate improvements, the permittee shall notify the Township,
of the completion of the aforesaid improvements and shall send a
copy thereof to the Township Engineer. The Township shall, within
10 days after receipt of such notice, direct and authorize the Road
Master and/or the Township Engineer to inspect all of the aforesaid
improvements. The Township Road Master and/or Township
Engineer shall, thereupon, file a report, in writing, with the
township and shall promptly mail a copy of the same to the
permittee. The report shall be detailed and shall indicate approval
or rejection of said improvements, either in whole or in part and, if
§ 170-4.3 PLUMBING § 170-4.3
144:259
said improvements, or any portion thereof, shall not be approved
or shall be rejected by the Road Master Township Engineer, said
report shall contain a statement of reasons for such nonapproval or
rejection.
(3) If any portion of said improvement shall not be approved or shall be
rejected by the township, the permittee shall proceed to complete
the same and, upon completion, the same procedure of notification,
as outlined herein, shall be followed.
(4) If any portion of said improvements are not approved or are
rejected by the township, the applicant shall proceed to complete
the same and, upon completion, the same procedure of notification
outlined herein shall be followed.
D. Final completion certificate. After final inspection and acceptance of
the work, and after payment of any release or collection of any
insufficiency due, the township shall issue a final completion certificate.
The date of such final completion certificate shall fix the two-year time
period during which the permittee absolutely is responsible for
maintenance of permanent pavement repairs and trenches.
E. Release of financial guarantee for maintenance.
(1) Following the completion of the project and final inspection, all
financial guarantee for maintenance will remain in place and will
be returned to the permittee upon reinspection of the work by the
Township in two years, or 24 months from the time of issuing the
final completion certificate when all work was satisfactorily
completed.
(2) Procedure for release of maintenance guarantee or deposit. In the
event that any improvements which may be required have not been
installed or corrected as provided in this article or in accordance
with the approved permit, the township is hereby granted the
power to enforce any financial security by appropriate legal and
equitable remedies. If proceeds of the maintenance guarantee or
deposit are insufficient to pay the cost of installing or making
repairs or corrections to all the improvements covered by said
financial security, the township may, at its option, install all or part
of such improvements and may institute appropriate legal or
equitable action to recover the funds necessary to complete the
remainder of the improvements. All of the proceeds, whether
resulting from the financial security or from any legal or equitable
action brought against the applicant, or both, shall be used solely
for the installation of the improvements covered by such security
and not for any other municipal purpose.
§ 170-4.3 WEST HANOVER CODE § 170-4.4
144:260
§ 170-4.4. Liability insurance; requirements.
The certificate of insurance required of the applicant under § 170-4.1B(4) of
this article shall indicate that he is insured against claims for damages for
personal injury as well as against claims for property damages which may
arise from or out of the performance of the work, whether such performance
be by himself, his subcontractor or anyone directly or indirectly employed
by him. Such insurance shall include protection against liability arising from
completed operations. Such insurance shall provide complete third-party
coverage for the Township of West Hanover. The amount of such insurance
shall be prescribed by the Engineer in accordance with the nature of the
risks involved; provided, however, that the liability insurance for bodily
injury in effect shall be in an amount not less than $100,000 for each person
and $300,000 for each accident and for property damages an amount not
less than $50,000. Failure of applicant to file such certificate shall be
grounds for denying a permit.
§ 170-4.5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which is found to be in violation
of any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and/or undergo imprisonment for a
term not to exceed 90 days. Each and every day or portion thereof in which
any violation of the provisions of this article is committed or continued shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 170-4.4 PLUMBING § 170-4.5
144:261

ARTICLE II
Sidewalks
[Adopted 7-20-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-8]
§ 170-5. Sidewalk requirements.
Sidewalks may be required on all streets and highways in the township, or
as specifically designed in Chapter 173, Subdivision and Land Development,
or Chapter 195, Zoning.
§ 170-6. Sidewalk construction.
Sidewalks should be constructed in accordance with § 173-25F(12) of
Chapter 173, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 170-7. Curb cut ramps.
Curb cut ramps shall be provided when constructing new sidewalks or
reconstruction of existing sidewalks in accordance with current ADA
requirements.
§ 170-8. Permit required.
Before constructing or reconstructing any sidewalk, it shall be the duty of
all owners of real estate, or contractor(s), to secure the necessary permit,
line and grade from the township, authorizing the requested construction
or reconstruction.
§ 170-9. Application for permit.
It shall be the duty of every owner(s) of real estate, previous to the
construction or reconstruction of curbing or sidewalks, footways or gutters
on any street or alley in the township, to make an application for a permit to
the township to fix the line and grade for the construction or reconstruction
or curbing, sidewalk or gutters. Such permit, when duly issued by the
township, shall be sufficient authority for such owner or his contractor,
subcontractor, mechanic or laborer to commence and complete, along such
lot or ground, as may be described in such permit and in accordance with
the regulations, rules and specifications fixed and established by this article
and none other, to construct or reconstruct sidewalks or gutters for which
such permit has been granted. Grade stakes and offset stakes will be given
by the Township Engineer at the time of the issuance of the permit. The
township will be given five days' notice prior to the date the owner wishes
to commence construction so that there will be sufficient time to place the
construction stakes.
§ 170-10. Permit fee.
The permit fee for administration and inspection of the sidewalk
construction and repair shall be set by resolution of the Board of
§ 170-5 PLUMBING § 170-10
144:263
Supervisors. When a sidewalk or portions thereof are constructed or
reconstructed simultaneously, only one permit and fee shall be required.
§ 170-11. Notice to construct.
All owner(s) of property abutting on any street or highway in the township,
upon 60 days' notice to do so from the Board of Supervisors, shall construct,
grade, pave, install, curb cut ramp or repave the sidewalk along such
property, and upon failure of such owner or owners to comply with such
notice or without notice to the property owner or owners as above provided,
the township shall levy and collect the costs thereof from such owner or
owners. The cost of any such grading, paving, repaving and installation
of curb cut ramp shall be a lien upon the premises from the time of the
commencement of the work, which date shall be fixed by the Township
Engineer and shall be filed with the township. Any such lien may be
collected by action of assumpsit or by lien filed in the manner provided by
law for the filing and collection of municipal claims.
§ 170-12. Notice of repair.
All owner(s) of property abutting on any street or highway in the township
shall keep the sidewalk, together with any portion of his property paved and
used as a sidewalk or public walk immediately in front of his property, in
good order and repair. All owner(s) of property abutting on any street or
highway in the township, upon 60 days' notice to do so from the Board of
Supervisors, shall repair the sidewalks along such property in the manner
stipulated in such notice. If such owner(s) fail to comply with the
requirements of such notice within 60 days from the date of its service, the
Board of Supervisors shall cause the same to be done. The cost of the same,
together with a penalty of 10%, shall be paid by such owner(s) and may be
collected by action of assumpsit or by lien filed against the property in the
manner provided by law for the filing and collection of municipal claims.
The township may, in its discretion, grant extensions to the sixty-day notice
requirement due to adverse weather conditions.
§ 170-13. Inspection.
All sidewalk pavements and curb cut ramp shall be laid to a line and grade
obtained from the Township Engineer and constructed in accordance with
the specifications provided in Article IV. The Township Engineer may, at
any time during the course of the work, visit the site of such work to
ascertain whether such work is being done according to requirements, and
the Township Engineer or one of his agents or employees shall visit any
such site for such purpose whenever requested by the property owner(s).
Within two days after the completion of such work by the property owner(s),
it shall be the duty of such owner(s) where such work was done to notify
the Township Engineer of that fact so that he may inspect the same to
determine whether such work has been done according to requirements.
§ 170-10 WEST HANOVER CODE § 170-14
144:264
§ 170-14. Failure to conform.
If any sidewalk or curb cut ramp hereafter constructed or reconstructed
is not constructed or reconstructed in conformity to the specifications of
§ 173-25F(12) of Chapter 173, Subdivision and Land Development, it shall
be the duty of the person to construct or reconstruct the sidewalk, upon
notice from the township, so to alter and construct the same as to conform
to the specifications of § 173-25F(12). Failure to conform with the
requirements of this chapter within five days after such notice shall be a
violation. Each day's neglect and refusal to comply with the terms of the
notice shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 170-15. Repair by owner without notice.
Upon receiving a permit from the township, any property owner(s), upon
his own initiative, may grade, pave, install, curb cut ramp, repave or repair
the sidewalks along such property. The owner(s) shall conform to the
requirements of this article and § 173-25F(12) of Chapter 173, Subdivision
and Land Development. The owner(s) shall notify the township within two
days after completion of the work so that the township may inspect the
same to determine whether such work has been done according to
requirements.
§ 170-16. Board authorized to enter into contracts.
The Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized to enter into contracts, upon
compliance with the requirements of law, for the construction, grading,
paving, installing, curb cut ramp, repaving or repairing of the sidewalks
within the township, or, if the Supervisors by resolution so desire, such work
or any part thereof shall be done under the supervision of the Township
Manager.
§ 170-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who is found to be in violation of any
provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay
a fine of not more than $1,000 and/or undergo imprisonment for a term
not to exceed 90 days. Each and every day or portion thereof in which any
violation of the provisions of this article is committed or continued shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 170-14 PLUMBING § 170-17
144:265

ARTICLE III
Street Repairs
[Adopted 10-4-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-13]
§ 170-18. Definitions. [Added 9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-1369]
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context
clearly indicates otherwise:
BALLAST — Coarse gravel or crushed rock laid at an exit or entrance to a
construction site to form a bed that assists in jarring loose and removing
mud, dirt and debris from a construction vehicle's tires.
CONSTRUCTION SITE — A parcel or portion thereof where any man-made
change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited
to buildings or other structures, streets, or other paving, utilities, filling,
grading, excavation, mining, dredging, drilling operations.
STREET — The entire right-of-way of a public street, public highway, public
alley, public way, public road or public easement within the Township.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of West Hanover, Dauphin County,
Pennsylvania, a municipality acting by and through its Board of Supervisors
or, in appropriate cases, acting by and through its authorized
representatives.
§ 170-19. Repairing damage and removal of debris.
A. Any development, forestry, construction or earthmoving activities being
undertaken on any lot in West Hanover Township must be accomplished
without damage to any abutting Township street. Equipment must be
unloaded and loaded on the lot when possible. No tracked equipment
may be driven on Township streets without prior written approval from
the Roadmaster. Any damage to the pavement, curbing or shoulders of
a Township street caused by the parking or movement of construction
equipment or trucks must be restored by the property owner or
contactor at his expense. Damage shall include, but shall not be limited
to, oil spills and the scarring or breakage of the pavement and curbing.
The area damaged must be cut out and replaced in accordance with
Township street specifications.
B. All earth, gravel and/or debris dragged onto any public street in the
Township, or any private street under construction and intended to be
dedicated to the Township, from vehicles and equipment moving in and
out of a lot under construction or excavation must be removed and
cleaned from the street cartway and berm by the property owner or
contractor as may be necessary during construction and/or before the
end of each workday. [Amended 9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-13]
69.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former §§ 170-18
through 170-32 to §§ 170-19 through 170-33, respectively.
§ 170-18 PLUMBING § 170-19
144:267
§ 170-20. Public nuisance.
§ 170-21. Outrigger protection.
Except for emergency vehicles, all backhoes, cranes, elevating platforms
and other vehicles operating on public roads with outrigger or jack-type
supports shall have boards or other materials inserted between such
supports and the pavement of any public road to prevent scarring,
depressions and other damage to the pavement.
§ 170-22. Enforcement.
The Township Roadmaster, Township Engineer and Township Code Official
or other qualified persons designated by the Township are authorized to
conduct inspections regarding road damage and compliance with this
article.
§ 170-23. Right of entry.
§ 170-24. Inspections.
C. Construction vehicles or other vehicles entering and exiting a
construction site shall not transfer mud, dirt and similar construction
debris onto any and all streets. Construction site entrances and exits
where mud, dirt and similar construction debris is being generated
shall have sufficient ballast installed at the location of each site
entrance and/or exit. [Added 9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-13]
A. The violation of any provision of this article is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
B. Each day past the notification of violation that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate violation.
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of the Township may enter at reasonable times upon
any property within the Township to inspect the nature of any
development, forestry, construction or excavation activities being
undertaken on a lot and to determine the source of cause to damage to
any abutting Township street, conditions, or operation and maintenance
of the project in response to a complaint and in regard to any aspect
governed by this article.
B. Property owners and contractor operators shall allow Township officials
ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
determining compliance with this article.
C. Unreasonable delays in allowing the Township access is a violation of
this article.
A. The Township Roadmaster, Zoning Officer and Township Engineer
normally ensure compliance of all activities within the public road
§ 170-19 WEST HANOVER CODE § 170-24
144:268
§ 170-25. Notification of violation.
system of West Hanover Township, including any permits issued for
access, road excavation and stormwater management, etc. The
Township and its designees may inspect any and all phases of the
construction, operations, safety, maintenance and any other impacts to
public roads appurtenant facilities as they may relate to this article.
B. Periodic inspections may be made at any time by the Township or
designee where construction is occurring on a lot on a Township street.
C. If the Township or its designee determines that development, forestry,
construction or excavations being undertaken on a lot in West Hanover
Township are not being implemented in accordance with this article,
the Township may suspend or revoke any existing permits or other
approvals until the deficiencies are corrected.
A. Whenever the Township finds that a person has caused damage to a
public street from development, forestry, construction or excavations
being undertaken on a lot and failed to meet a requirement of this
article, the Township may order compliance by verbal request from the
field and/or written notice to the responsible person. Such notice may
require without limitation any of the following:
(1) The elimination of prohibited damage from the public street.
(2) Cessation of any violating activity, practices, or operations causing
the damage.
(3) The abatement or remediation of street damage and safety hazards
and the restoration of any affected street.
(4) Submission of a Township road cut permit in a accordance with the
provisions of this article.
(5) Providing separate financial security in an amount determined by
the Township Engineer to ensure the public street is protected from
damage and properly restored.
(6) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs.
B. Written notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and
establish a time limit for correction of these violations(s). Said notice
may further advise that, if applicable, should the violator fail to take the
required action within the established deadline, the work will be done
by the Township or designee, and the expense thereof shall be charged
to the violator.
C. Failure to comply within the time specified shall also subject such
person to the penalty provisions of this article. All such penalties shall
be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the Township from
pursuing any and all other remedies available in law or equity.
§ 170-24 PLUMBING § 170-26
144:269
§ 170-26. Suspension and revocation of permits and approvals.
§ 170-27. Violations and penalties.
A. Any building, land development or other permit or approval issued by
the Township may be suspended or revoked by the Township for the
following reasons:
(1) A violation of any provision of this article; or
(2) The creation of any condition or the commission of any road
damage during development, forestry, construction or excavations
being undertaken on any lot in West Hanover Township which
constitutes or creates a hazard or nuisance, pollution or which
endangers public safety.
B. A suspended permit or approval shall be reinstated by the Township
when:
(1) The Roadmaster, Township Engineer, Code Official or designee has
inspected and approved the corrections to the public street, or the
elimination of the hazard or nuisance; and/or
(2) The Township is satisfied that the violation of ordinance, law, or
rule and regulation has been corrected.
C. A permit or approval which has been revoked by the Township cannot
be reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new permit under the
procedures outlined in this article.
D. Occupancy permits. An occupancy permit shall not be issued unless the
certification of compliance has been secured. The occupancy permit
shall be required for each lot owner and/or developer for all
subdivisions and land development in the Township.
A. Any person, firm, corporation or utility who violates any provision of
this article shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by the Township before a District Justice, pay a
fine for each such violation in an amount not less than $750 and not
more than $1,000, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's
fees, incurred by the Township. Each day that the violation continues
shall be a separate offense. No judgment shall be imposed until the data
of the determination of a violation by the District Justice. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township
may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil
procedure.
B. In addition, the Township, through its Solicitor, may institute injunctive,
mandamus or any other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in
equity for the enforcement of this article. Any court of competent
jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary
§ 170-26 WEST HANOVER CODE § 170-27
144:270
or permanent injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate forms of
remedy or relief.
§ 170-27 PLUMBING § 170-27
144:271

ARTICLE IV
Snow Removal on Streets, Sidewalks and Fire Hydrants
[Added 12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-10]
§ 170-28. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DRIVEWAY — A private roadway providing access for vehicles to a parking
space, garage, dwelling or other structure. A shared driveway is a single
driveway serving two or more adjoining lots.
FIRE HYDRANT — An upright pipe exposed above ground with a closed
nozzle or spout structure used by fire emergency personnel for drawing
water from a public or private water main to use in fighting a fire.
SIDEWALK — A paved area, typically paralleling and usually located in the
public right-of-way and separated from the street, used as a walkway for
pedestrians.
§ 170-29. Removal of snow and ice from sidewalks and parking
areas.
§ 170-30. Dumping of snow, ice, sleet or hail, or other.
A. It shall be the responsibility of every property owner, occupant, lessee
of any dwelling, tenement, store, shop, place of business, church,
school or any other building or premises, be it public or private and
fronting on any public sidewalk located upon any street, private street,
highway or driveway, to remove or cause to be removed all snow, ice or
sleet from said sidewalks. The accumulated snow and ice shall be
cleaned or removed from the sidewalk and walking surfaces where a
public sidewalk crosses any driveway a minimum path the width of two
feet six inches to the front or along the property where the sidewalk is
located. All snow, ice, hail or sleet thereon fallen or formed shall be
removed within 24 hours after the storm event and accumulation of
snow, ice or sleet shall have ceased to fall or to be formed.
B. It shall be the duty of every nonresidential property owner, lessee, or
occupant to remove or cause to be removed all snow, ice or sleet from
parking lot and said sidewalks and walkways leading to and from
parking areas and public streets to the entrance of any structure. All
snow, ice, hail or sleet thereon fallen or formed shall be removed within
24 hours after the storm event and accumulation of snow, ice or sleet
shall have ceased to fall or to be formed.
C. All ice shall be removed from roof ridges, gutters or roof overhangs if
such formation is an obstruction or renders any public sidewalk path
the width of two feet six inches dangerous to public travel.
§ 170-28 PLUMBING § 170-30
144:273
§ 170-31. Exceptions.
All designated public or private trails, walkways and ped-paths designed
for recreational use and/or not constructed with macadam or concrete are
exempt from snow, ice, sleet, slush, or hail removal.
§ 170-32. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-15-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-13]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall commit a summary offense and shall, upon conviction thereof,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25 or more than $1,000. Each
day that a violation of this chapter continues shall be considered a separate
violation. It is further provided that, upon judgment against any person
by summary conviction, or by proceedings by summons on default of the
payment of the fine or penalty imposed and the costs, the defendant may be
A. No property owner, occupant of any dwelling, tenement, store, shop,
place of business, church, school or any other building or premises, be
it public or private, shall deposit or dump or cause to be dumped within
the lines of any cartway, street, Township road, or highway any snow,
ice, sleet, slush, or hail or combination thereof.
B. No property owner, occupant of any dwelling, tenement, store, shop,
place of business, church, school or any other building or premises, be
it public or private, shall pile snow, ice, sleet, slush, or hail in such a
manner to obstruct the line of safe sight from any driveway, street,
private road, Township road or highway.
C. No property owner, occupant of any dwelling, tenement, store, shop,
place of business, church, school or any other building or premises, be
it public or private and fronting on any sidewalk located upon any
public street or private street, shall allow snow, sleet or ice to be
dumped and remain on or accumulate in any stormwater drain located
on or near any sidewalk so as to impede the flow of water therein in
case of thaw or rain.
D. Fire hydrants. No property owner, occupant of any dwelling, tenement,
store, shop, place of business, church, school or any other building or
premises, be it public or private and located adjacent to a fire hydrant
located upon any public street or private street, shall allow snow, ice,
sleet, slush, or hail or combination thereof to be pushed or dumped on
or accumulate on any fire hydrant as to impede access by fire
emergency personnel to, from, and/or around a fire hydrant. In cases
involving heavy snowfall and accumulation, fire hydrants shall be
cleared of all snow, ice, sleet, slush, or hail or combination thereof
within 24 hours following the storm; in any event any accumulated
snow, ice, sleet, slush, or hail shall be removed not less than once every
twenty-four-hour period. Removal of accumulated snow, ice, sleet,
slush, or hail or combination thereof is necessary to allow for fire hose
connections to be made to access water in the event of a fire.
§ 170-30 WEST HANOVER CODE § 170-32
144:274
sentenced and committed to the county prison for a period not exceeding
30 days.
§ 170-33. Saving clause.
Nothing in this article or in the code hereby adopted shall be construed to
affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired,
or liability incurred, or any cause of action acquired or existing, nor shall
any just or legal right or remedy or any character be lost, impaired or
affected by this article.
§ 170-32 PLUMBING § 170-33
144:275

ARTICLE V
Street Usage
[Adopted 3-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-04]
§ 170-34. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
USAGE — Any activity other than normal vehicular driving or parking on
any Township-owned road, such as, but not limited to, testing, fastening,
stretching across, temporary blocking, or other nondestructive obstructions
to the normal flow of traffic.
§ 170-35. Notification.
Any usage of a Township-owned road that meets the definition in this article
shall notify the Township in writing seven days prior to the usage, unless
the event is for emergency service, when a phone call to the Township prior
to commencing work will be accepted.
§ 170-34 PLUMBING § 170-35
144:277
Chapter 173
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal authorities — See Ch. 4.
Environmental Advisory Council — See Ch.
15.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 52.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 88.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 108.
Sewers — See Ch. 158.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 168.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 170.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 170-35 WEST HANOVER CODE § 170-35
144:278
ARTICLE I
Title
§ 173-1. Short title.
These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the "West Hanover
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance."
§ 173-1 PLUMBING § 173-1
144:279

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 173-2. Purpose.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to generally implement the
Comprehensive Plan and protect the public health, safety and general
welfare. The provisions of this chapter shall be administered to ensure
harmonious development and shall supplement and facilitate the
provisions of Chapter 195, Zoning. [Amended 11-4-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-9]
B. Further purposes are as follows:
(1) Ensuring the orderly and efficient integration of subdivisions into
the development of West Hanover Township.
(2) Ensuring sites suitable for building purposes and human
habitation.
(3) Ensuring conformance of subdivision plans with public
improvement plans.
(4) Ensuring coordination of inter- and intramunicipal public
improvement plans and programs.
(5) Ensuring the safe and efficient movement of traffic.
(6) Ensuring the conservation, protection and wise use of the natural
resources and features, including but not limited to water,
woodlands, slopes, vegetation, soils, wetlands, natural drainage
systems and geology.
(7) Ensuring the sound management of stormwater runoff.
(8) Ensuring equitable handling of all subdivision plans by providing
uniform standards and procedures.
(9) Ensuring the efficient and orderly extension of community services
and facilities at minimum cost and maximum convenience.
(10) Regulating the subdivision and development of land within any
floodplain district in order to promote the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the Township.
(11) Requiring that each lot in flood-prone areas includes a safe
building site with adequate access, and that public facilities which
serve such uses be designed and installed to minimize flood
damage.
(12) Ensuring that any area designated or reserved for use as public
grounds by the developer shall be suitable in size and location for
their designated uses.
§ 173-2 PLUMBING § 173-2
144:281
§ 173-3. Authority.
§ 173-4. Review of plans by county.
Applications for subdivision and land development located within West
Hanover Township shall be forwarded upon receipt, with the appropriate
review fee, to the Dauphin County Planning Commission for review and
report. The Township Board of Supervisors shall not approve such
applications until the county review report is received or until the expiration
of 30 days from the date the application was forwarded to the County
Planning Commission. As evidence of their review and report, officials of the
County Planning Commission shall sign final plats which have been formally
approved by the municipality before such plats are presented for recording.
§ 173-5. Application of regulations.
(13) Guiding the future growth and development of West Hanover
Township in accordance with its adopted Comprehensive Plan.
(14) Ensuring that documents prepared as part of a land ownership
transfer fully and accurately describe the parcel of land being
subdivided and the new parcel(s) thus created.
A. The West Hanover Township Board of Supervisors (hereinafter "Board
of Supervisors") shall have the authority to approve or disapprove all
preliminary and final subdivision or land development plat applications
as required herein.
B. The West Hanover Township Planning Commission (hereinafter
"Planning Commission") is hereby designated as the agency which shall
review and make recommendations on all subdivision and land
development plat applications as required herein, prior to action on the
same by the Board of Supervisors.
A. No subdivision or land development of any lot, tract or parcel of land
located in West Hanover Township shall be effected, and no street,
sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main or other facilities in connection
therewith shall be laid out, constructed, opened or dedicated for public
use or travel, or for the common use of occupants of buildings thereon,
unless and until a final subdivision plat has been approved by the Board
of Supervisors and publicly recorded in the manner prescribed herein,
nor otherwise, except in strict accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
B. No lot in a subdivision may be sold, no permit to erect or alter any
building upon land in a subdivision or land development may be issued
and no building may be erected or altered in a subdivision or land
development unless and until a final subdivision plat has been approved
by the Board of Supervisors and recorded, and until construction of the
improvements required in the manner prescribed herein.
§ 173-2 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-5
144:282
§ 173-6. Interpretation.
C. Unit or condominium land development of real property is included
within the meaning of "land development" as defined herein, and must
comply with these regulations. Such compliance shall include but not
be limited to the filing of preliminary and final plans, payment of
established fees and charges, location of each structure and clear
definition of each unit, public easements, common areas, improvements
and all easements appurtenant to each unit.
D. Preliminary and final plans shall indicate the location of existing
structure(s), clearly define each unit and shall indicate public
easements, common areas, open spaces, environmentally sensitive
areas, and improvements, all easements appurtenant to each unit and
improvements to public rights-of-way.
E. All subdivision and land development plans are subject to zoning
regulations as they apply to use and density requirements, setbacks,
height, parking and other such zoning-related features.
A. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be minimum requirements for the promotion of public health,
safety, comfort, convenience and greater welfare.
B. In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to conflict with
the provision of a zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance or
code of this municipality, or law, rule or regulation of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (hereinafter the "commonwealth"), the
provisions which establish the higher standard for the promotion and
protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail.
C. In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict
with the provisions of another ordinance or code of this municipality, or
law, rule or regulation of the commonwealth, which establishes a less
restrictive standard for the promotion and protection of the health and
safety of the people, the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to
prevail. In addition, should the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code (hereinafter "MPC")70 be amended to establish mandatory
provisions which would be inconsistent herewith, those mandatory
provisions shall be deemed to be incorporated herein by reference
thereto without further amendment of this chapter.
70.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 173-5 PLUMBING § 173-6
144:283

ARTICLE III
Definitions
§ 173-7. Definitions and word usage.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words shall, for the
purpose of this chapter, have the meaning herein indicated. Words
expressed in the plural include their singular meanings; the present tense
shall include the future; words used in the masculine gender shall include
the feminine and the neuter; the words "shall" and "will" are mandatory; the
words "should" and "may" are permissive. It is the intent of this chapter to
parallel the MPC. Therefore, if a definition is not included herein, reference
should be made thereto.
ABUT — To physically touch or border upon; or to share a common property
line.
ACCESS DRIVE — A paved surface, other than a street, which provides
vehicular access from a street or private road to a lot.
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building subordinate to and detached from the
main building on the same lot and used for purposes customarily incidental
to the main building.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A subordinate structure detached from but
located on the same lot as the principal structure, the use of which is
incidental and accessory to that of the principal structure.
AISLE — The traveled way by which cars enter and depart parking spaces.
ALLEY — A public thoroughfare, other than a street or side street, which
affords only secondary means of access to abutting properties and not
intended for general traffic circulation.
ALLUVIAL SOILS — A soil developing from recently deposited alluvium
and exhibiting essentially no horizon development or modifications of the
recently deposited material.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer or other person who has filed an
application for development, building permit, zoning permit, approval to
engage in any regulated earth disturbance activity, etc., at a property or
project site within West Hanover Township.[Amended 3-21-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-3]
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary or final, required to be filed and approved prior to start of
construction or development, including but not limited to an application for
a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat or plan or for the
approval of a development plan.
ALLUVIUM — A general term for all detrital material deposited or in
transit by streams, including gravel, sand, silt, clay and all variations
and mixtures of these. Unless otherwise noted, alluvium is
unconsolidated.
A.
§ 173-7 PLUMBING § 173-7
144:285
AREA, BUILDING — The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at
the main grade level of the principal building and all accessory buildings,
exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces and steps.
AS-BUILT DRAWINGS — Location of utilities and proposed design features
as installed.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year flood elevation as
indicated on the Flood Insurance Study and Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM), as revised, for West Hanover Township, Dauphin County,
Pennsylvania, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
Federal Insurance Administration.
BIOLOGICAL ATTRIBUTE — A characterization of the flora and fauna of a
given piece of ground or area, with emphasis on populations or groups of
plants or animals and/or she rare species of either.[Added 12-7-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-05]
BLOCK — An area bounded by streets.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The West Hanover Township Board of
Supervisors.
BRIDGE — A structure having a clear span of more than 20 feet designed to
convey vehicles and/or pedestrians over a watercourse, railroad, public or
private right-of-way or any depression.
BUFFER — An area within a property or site generally adjacent to and
parallel with the property line, either consisting of natural existing
vegetation or created by the use of trees, shrubs, fences and/or berms,
designed to limit continuously the view, sound and/or light from the site to
adjacent sites or properties.
BUILDABLE AREA — The area of a lot remaining after the minimum yard,
open space requirements and environmental protection overlays of Chapter
195, Zoning, have been met.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls
and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or
property, including covered porches or bay windows and chimneys.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The horizontal area measured within the outside
of the exterior walls of the ground floor of all principal and accessory
buildings on a lot.
BUILDING, DETACHED — A building surrounded by open space on the
same lot.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The line within a property defining the
required minimum distance between any principal or accessory structure
and the adjacent right-of-way ("street line"), and the line defining side and
rear yards, where required.
CARTWAY or ROADWAY — That improved portion of a street or alley within
which vehicles are permitted, including travel lanes, but not including
parking areas, shoulders, curbs, sidewalks or swales.
§ 173-7 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-7
144:286
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — A triangular-shaped portion of land
established at street intersections in which nothing is erected, placed,
planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight
distance of motorists entering or leaving the intersection. (Refer to Exhibit
VI.71)
COMMISSION — The West Hanover Township Planning Commission.
COMMON ELEMENTS — Land amenities, parts of buildings, central
services and utilities and any other elements and facilities owned and used
by all unit owners and are designated as common elements. These elements
may include but are not limited to:
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of
water, or a combination of land and water, within a development site and
designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a residential
development, not including streets, off-street parking areas and areas set
aside for public facilities.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — An official document adopted by the Board of
Supervisors in accordance with the MPC, Act 247,72 setting forth its policies
regarding the long-term development of the Township; the preparation of
which is based on careful studies of existing conditions and prospect for
future growth of the Township. The plan shall include but need not be
limited to plans for the use of land, transportation of goods and people,
community facilities and services, and a map and statement indicating the
relationship of the Township and its proposed development to adjacent
municipalities.
CONDOMINIUM — A building or group of buildings in which units are
owned individually, and the structure, common areas and facilities are
The land on which the building is located and portions of the building
which are not included in a unit;
A.
The foundation, structural parts, supports, main walls, roofs,
basements, halls, corridors, lobbies, stairways, entrances and exits of
the building;
B.
C. The yards, parking area and driveways;
Portions of the land and building used exclusively for the management,
operation or maintenance of the common elements;
D.
E. Installations of all central services and utilities;
All other elements of the building necessary or convenient to its
existence, management, operation, maintenance and safety or normally
in common use; and
F.
G. Such other facilities as are designated as common elements.
71.Editor's Note: Exhibit VI is included at the end of this chapter.
72.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 173-7 PLUMBING § 173-7
144:287
owned by all the owners on a proportional, undivided basis. Real estate is
not a condominium unless the undivided interests in the common elements
are vested in the unit owners.
CONDOMINIUM ASSOCIATION — The community association which
administers and maintains the common property and common elements of
a condominium.
COOPERATIVE — Ownership in common with others of a parcel of land
and of a building or buildings thereon which would normally be used by
all occupants, together with individual rights of occupancy of a particular
unit or apartment in such building or buildings or on such parcel of land,
and may include dwellings, offices and other types of space in commercial
buildings or on property and where the lease, sale or exchange of a unit
is subject to the agreement of the group of persons having common
ownership.
COUNTY — County of Dauphin, Pennsylvania.
COVERAGE — That portion or percentage of the lot area covered by
impervious materials, to include buildings and paved surfaces.
CROSSWALK — A right-of-way, publicly or privately owned, intended to
furnish access for pedestrians over a public or private street.
CUL-DE-SAC — An access street open at one end for vehicular and
pedestrian access and terminating at the opposite end by a vehicular
turnaround. This is an example of, or may be part of, a single-access
street.[Amended 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-17]
CULTURAL ATTRIBUTE — A historical site, either by structure, remnants
of a structure, or a significant documented historical event that took place
on a given piece of ground.[Added 12-7-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-05]
CULVERT — A drain, pipe or conduit not incorporated in a closed system,
that carries drainage water under a driveway, roadway, railroad, pedestrian
walk or public way.
CURB — A stone or concrete boundary usually marking the edge of the
roadway or paved area.
CURB CUT — The opening along the curb line at which point vehicles may
enter or leave the roadway.
CUT — An excavation; the difference between a point on the original ground
and designated point of lower elevation of the final grade; also, the material
removed in excavation.
DETENTION BASIN — A storage facility for the temporary storage of
stormwater runoff.
DETENTION POND — A vegetated pond designed to collect water runoff for
a given storm event and release it at a predetermined rate; also known as a
"dry pond."
§ 173-7 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-7
144:288
DETERMINATION — Final action by an officer, body or agency charged with
the administration of any land use ordinance or applications thereunder,
except the following:
DEVELOPER — A landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with
permission from such landowner who makes or seeks to under undertake
subdivision of land, land development or any regulated earth disturbance
activities at a project site in the Township.[Amended 3-21-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-3]
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, filling,
grading, paving, excavating, earth disturbance activity, mining, dredging
or drilling operations, the placement of manufactured homes, streets and
other paving, utilities and the subdivision of land.[Amended 3-21-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-3]
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development, including a
planned residential development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants
relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity
of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking facilities,
common open space and public facilities (NOTE: Public facilities include
utility easements for sewer collection, water, electric, telephone and gas
distribution, transformer, pumping stations, telecommunications, etc.). The
phrase "provisions of development plan" when used in this chapter shall
mean the written and graphic materials referred to in this definition.
DRAINAGE —
DRAINAGE AREA — That area in which all of the surface runoff resulting
from precipitation is concentrated into a particular stream.
DRAINAGE FACILITY — Any ditch, gutter, culvert, storm sewer or other
structure designed, intended or constructed for the purpose of diverting
surface waters from or carrying surface waters off streets, public rights-of-
A. The Board of Supervisors;
B. The Zoning Hearing Board; or
The Planning Commission, only if and to the extent the Planning
Commission is charged with final decision on preliminary or final plans
under the subdivision and land development ordinance or planned
residential development ordinances. Determinations shall be
appealable only to the boards designated as having jurisdiction for such
appeal.
C.
A. Surface water runoff.
The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains,
grading or other means which include runoff controls to minimize
erosion and sedimentation during and after construction of
development, the means for preserving the water supply and the
prevention or alleviation of flooding.
B.
§ 173-7 PLUMBING § 173-7
144:289
way, parks, recreational areas or any part of any subdivision or contiguous
land areas.
DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Pipes, swales, natural features and man-made
improvements designed to carry drainage.
DRAINAGEWAY — Any natural or artificial watercourse, channel, trench,
ditch, pipe, swale or similar depression into which surface water
flows.[Amended 3-21-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-3]
DRIVEWAY — A private roadway providing access for vehicles to a parking
space, garage, dwelling or other structure. A shared driveway is a single
driveway serving two or more adjoining lots.
DWELLING — A single unit providing complete independent living facilities
for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping,
eating, cooking and sanitation.
DWELLING, APARTMENT — A dwelling unit within a multifamily dwelling.
This classification includes apartments in apartment houses, efficiency,
bachelor apartments, studio apartments and kitchenette apartments.
DWELLING, ATTACHED — A one-family dwelling attached to two or more
one-family dwellings by common vertical walls.
DWELLING, DETACHED — A dwelling that is not attached to any other
dwelling by any means.
DWELLING, DUPLEX — A building containing two single-family dwelling
units totally separated from each other by an unpierced wall extending from
ground to roof. Each unit is located on its own separate lot.
DWELLING, GARDEN APARTMENT — One or more two- or three-story,
multifamily structures, generally built at a gross density of 10 to 15 dwelling
units per acre, with each structure containing eight to 20 dwelling units and
including off-street parking, open space and recreation.
DWELLING GROUP — A group of two or more single-family, two-family or
multifamily dwellings occupying a lot in one ownership.
DWELLING, MANUFACTURED — A factory-built structure that is
manufactured or constructed under the authority of 42 United States Code
(U.S.C.) § 5401 and is to be used as a place for human habitation, but which
is not constructed or equipped with a permanent hitch or other device
allowing it to be moved other than for the purpose of moving to a permanent
site, and which does not have permanently attached to its body or frame any
wheels or axles. A mobile home is not a manufactured home.
DWELLING, MOBILE HOME — A transportable, factory-built home,
designed to be used as a year-round residential dwelling and built prior to
enactment of the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety
Standards Act of 1974, which became effective June 15, 1976.
DWELLING, MODULAR — Any structure designed primarily for residential
occupancy, except a manufactured home, which is wholly or in substantial
part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing facilities for
§ 173-7 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-7
144:290
installation or assembly and installation on the building site in such a
manner that all concealed parts or processes of manufacture cannot be
inspected at the site without disassembly, damage or destruction. Modular
dwellings shall be certified as meeting the BOCA National Building Code
standards as adopted by West Hanover Township.73 Modular homes shall be
subject to the same standards as site-built homes.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building used by three or more families
living independently of each other and doing their own cooking.
DWELLING, PATIO HOME — A one-family dwelling on a separate lot with
open space setbacks on three sides with a court.
DWELLING, QUADRUPLEX — Four attached dwellings in one building in
which each has two open space exposures and shares one or two walls with
adjoining unit or units.
DWELLING, SEASONAL — A dwelling unit not used as a principal residence
that may be occupied weekends and for brief periods during the year.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED — A dwelling used for one family
and having two party walls in common with other buildings (such as row
house or townhouse).
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A building used by one family,
having only one dwelling unit and having two side yards.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED — A dwelling used by one
family, having one side yard, and one party wall common with another
building.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE — A one-family dwelling in a row of at least
three such units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the
outside, no unit is located over another unit and each is separated from any
other unit by one or more vertical common fire-resistant walls.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building on a single lot containing two
dwelling units, each of which is totally separated from the other by an
unpierced wall extending from ground to roof or an unpierced ceiling and
floor extending from exterior wall to exterior wall, except for a common
stairwell exterior to both dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete independent living
facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human activity
which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited to, clearing
and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, road maintenance,
building construction and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of
soil, rock or earth materials.[Amended 3-21-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-3]
73.Editor's Note: See Ch. 78, Building Construction, Art. I, Building Code.
§ 173-7 PLUMBING § 173-7
144:291
EASEMENT — A grant of one or more property rights by the property owner
to and/or for the use by the public, a corporation or another person or
entity.[Amended 3-21-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-3]
EASEMENT, CONSERVATION — An easement for the preservation of
natural features that precludes future or additional development to the
land.
EASEMENT, DRAINAGE — An easement required for the installation and
maintenance of stormwater sewers, drainage ditches, other drainage
facilities and/or required for the preservation or maintenance of a natural
watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream.[Amended 3-21-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-3]
ENGINEERING LAND SURVEYS — Surveys for:
ENGINEERING SPECIFICATIONS — The engineering specifications of the
municipality regulating the installation of any required improvements or for
any facility installed by any owner, subject to public use.
ENGINEER, PROFESSIONAL — An individual licensed and registered
under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to engage in the
practice of engineering. A professional engineer may not practice land
surveying unless licensed as set forth in P.L. 913, No. 367;74 however, a
professional engineer may perform engineering land surveys.
ENGINEER, TOWNSHIP — A registered professional engineer in
Pennsylvania designated by the Township to perform the duties of engineer
as herein specified.
The development of any tract of land, including the incidental design
of related improvements, such as line and grade extension of roads,
sewers and grading but not requiring independent engineering
judgment; provided, however, that tract perimeter surveys shall be the
function of the professional land surveyor;
A.
The determination of the configuration or contour of the earth's
surface, or the position of fixed objects thereon or related thereto, by
means of measuring lines and angles and applying the principles of
mathematics, photogrammetry or other measurement methods;
B.
Geodetic or cadastral surveys, underground survey and hydrographic
survey;
C.
D. Sedimentation and erosion control surveys;
E. The determination of the quantities of materials;
F. Tests for water percolation in soils; and
The preparation of plans and specifications and estimates of proposed
work as described herein.
G.
74.Editor's Note: See 63 P.S. § 151.1 et seq.
§ 173-7 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-7
144:292
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREAS — An area on a development site
with one or more of the following characteristics:
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT (EDU) — A measurement of sanitary
sewage effluent equaling 350 gallons of effluent per day.
EROSION — The process involving the detachment and movement of soil
or rock fragments, or the wearing away of the land surface or channels
by water, ice, wind, chemical action and gravity.[Amended 3-21-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-3]
EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other
similar material is dug into, cut, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced,
relocated or bulldozed. It shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
EXISTING CONDITIONS — Existing conditions are defined as the land use
present at the time a drainage/stormwater management plan is submitted.
However, a more impervious existing condition can be used if the developer
can document that a more impervious condition was present at the time the
Township adopted this chapter. For computation purposes, meadow or good
woods/forest shall be used for existing pervious conditions. For existing
areas consisting of a combination of pervious and impervious/parking shall
be used of the various precomputed composite covers for developed areas
shall be used.
FILL — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material
is placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved to a new location
above the natural surface of the ground or on top of the stripped surface
and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom; the difference in
elevation between a point on the original ground and a designated point of
higher elevation on the final grade; the material used to make a fill.
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
A. Slopes in excess of 20%;
B. Floodways and floodplains;
Soils determined by the United States Department of Agriculture and
Soil as having a high water table;
C.
Land incapable of meeting percolation requirements for on-lot sewage
treatment;
D.
E. Stream corridors;
F. Mature stands of native vegetation;
Soils determined as prime agriculture soils by the United States
Department of Agriculture and Soil Conservation Service; and
G.
Wetlands as delineated in accordance with the Federal Manual for
Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands.
H.
§ 173-7 PLUMBING § 173-7
144:293
FLOOD, BASE (ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD) —
FLOOD FRINGE — That portion of the floodplain outside the floodway.
FLOOD HAZARD, AREAS OF SPECIAL — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FHBM) — An official
map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration.
FLOODPLAIN —
FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT — An overlay to the underlying districts
as specifically described in the floodway data table and the one-hundredyear
flood delineation in the Flood Insurance Study prepared for the
Township by the Flood Insurance Administration dated March 18, 1980.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to proposed and existing structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real
property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The designated area of a floodplain required to carry and
discharge floodwaters of a given magnitude. For the purposes of this
chapter, the floodway shall be capable of accommodating a flood of the onehundred-
year magnitude.
FUTURE RIGHT-OF-WAY —
GOVERNING BODY — The Board of Supervisors of West Hanover Township,
Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
GRADE, ESTABLISHED — The elevation of the center line of the streets, as
officially established by the municipal authorities.
A flood that, on the average, is likely to occur once every 100 years
(i.e., that has a one-percent chance of occurring each year, although the
flood may occur in any year).
A.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION: The elevation that a flood on the
average is likely to occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a onepercent
chance of occurring each year although the flood elevation may
occur at any year.
B.
A relatively flat or low land area, comprised of the floodway area and
the flood fringe area, which is subject to partial or complete inundation
from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or watercourse.
A.
An area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of
surface waters from any source.
B.
Right-of-way width required for the expansion of existing streets to
accommodate anticipated future traffic loads.
A.
A right-of-way established to provide future access to or through
undeveloped land.
B.
§ 173-7 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-7
144:294
GRADE, EXISTING — The vertical location of the ground surface prior to
excavation or filling.
GRADE, FINISHED — The completed surfaces of lawns, walks and roads
brought to grades as shown on official plans or designs relating thereto.
GRADE, NATURAL — The elevation of the ground in its natural state, before
man-made alterations.
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION — A community association, other than
a condominium association, that is organized in a development in which
individual owners share common interests and responsibilities for costs and
upkeep of common open space or facilities.
IMPERVIOUS MATERIAL — Any substance placed on a lot which covers
the surface in such fashion as to prevent natural absorption of surface
water by the earth so covered. The following items shall be deemed to
be impervious material: buildings, concrete sidewalks, paved driveways
and parking areas, swimming pools and other nonporous structures or
materials.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that prevents the infiltration of water
into the ground. Impervious surface includes, but is not limited to, any
building, building roof, paved parking or driveway areas and any paved
streets and concrete sidewalks, concrete features and areas designed to
initially be gravel or crushed stone.[Amended 3-21-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-3]
IMPROVEMENT(S) — Those physical additions, installations and changes
required to render land suitable for the use intended, including but not
limited to grading, paving, curbing, street lights and signs, fire hydrants,
water mains, electric service, gas service, sanitary sewers, storm drains,
sidewalks, crosswalks, driveways, culverts, street shade trees and
improvements to existing watercourses.
INTERIOR WALK — A right-of-way for pedestrian use extending from a
street into a block or across a block to another street.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of, streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
§ 173-7 PLUMBING § 173-7
144:295
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including
the holder, or an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee, if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other persons having a
proprietary interest in land.
LANDSCAPE PLAN — A component of a development plan, where required,
on which is shown proposed landscape species (such as number, spacing,
size at time of planting and planting details); proposals for protection
of existing vegetation during and after construction; proposed treatment
of hard and soft surfaces; proposed decorative features; grade changes;
buffers and screening devices; etc.
LAND USE — A description of how land is occupied or utilized.
LIGHTING —
LOADING BERTH/SPACE — An off-street area on the same lot with a
building or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of
a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials.
LOOP STREET — An access street open at one end for vehicular and
pedestrian access and terminating on itself, where lots are subdivided or
development occurs on both sides of the street. This is an example of, or
may be part of, a single-access street.[Added 12-1-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-17]
The exclusion of certain land development from this definition of "land
development" is permitted only when such land development involves:
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or
single-family semidetached dwelling into not more that three
residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium.
(1)
The addition of an accessory building, including farm buildings, on
a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building not to
exceed 5,000 square feet of impervious coverage.
(2)
An addition to a nonresidential building not to exceed 2,500 square
feet. Files must be checked to be sure plan is compatible with the
original land development plan. [Added 12-1-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-17]
(3)
C.
DIFFUSED — That form of lighting wherein the light passes from the
source through a translucent cover or shade.
A.
DIRECT OR FLOOD — That form of lighting wherein the source is
visible and the light is distributed directly from it to the object to be
illuminated.
B.
INDIRECT — That form of lighting wherein the light source is entirely
hidden, the light being projected to a suitable reflector from which it is
reflected to the object to be illuminated.
C.
§ 173-7 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-7
144:296
LOT — Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory
buildings, or by a dwelling group and its accessory buildings, together with
such open space as required under the provisions of this chapter, having not
less than the minimum area and width required by this chapter for a lot in
the district in which such land is situated, and having its principal frontage
on a street; a designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat,
deed or permitted by law to be used, developed or built upon.
LOT AREA — The area contained within the property lines of a lot as
shown on a subdivision plan, excluding space within any rights-of-way, but
including the area of any easement.
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the junction of and abutting on two or more
intersecting streets or at the point of abrupt change of a single street,
where the interior angle is less than 135º and the radius of the street line is
less than 100 feet.
LOT COVERAGE — That portion of a lot covered by buildings and/or other
impervious improvements.
LOT, DEPTH OF — The average horizontal distance between the front and
rear lot lines.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE — A lot that fronts upon two parallel streets or
that fronts upon two streets that do not intersect at the boundaries of the
lot.
LOT, FLAG — A large lot not meeting minimum frontage requirements and
where access to the public road is by a narrow, private right-of-way or
driveway.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE — A line of record bounding a lot which divides one lot from
another lot or from a public or private street, or any other public space.
LOT, NONCONFORMING — A lot, the area, dimensions or location of which
was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter, or
Chapter 195, Zoning, but which fails by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment to conform to the present requirements.
LOT OF RECORD — A lot which has been properly recorded in the office of
the Recorder of Deeds of Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE — A lot extending between and having frontage
on an arterial street and a minor street, and with vehicular access solely
from the minor street.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot which fronts upon two parallel streets, or which
fronts upon two streets which do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot
measured at right angles to its depth along a straight line parallel to the
front lot line at the minimum required building setback line. The width of
lots abutting a cul-de-sac shall be measured as the chord distance length at
the building setback line.
§ 173-7 PLUMBING § 173-7
144:297
MANUFACTURED HOME — A dwelling unit fabricated in an off-site
manufacturing facility for installation or assembly at the building site,
bearing a label certifying that it is built in compliance with the Federal
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards (see CFR 3280
for legal definition).
MANUFACTURED HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a manufactured home
park, improved with the necessary utility connections and other
appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a single mobile home.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land
which has been so designated and improved that it contains two or more
manufactured home lots for the placement thereon of manufactured homes.
MASTER DEED — A legal instrument under which title to real estate is
conveyed and by which a condominium is created and established.
MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE — The maximum percentage of impervious
cover on any lot.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, factory-built home, designed to be used
as a year-round residential dwelling and built prior to enactment of the
Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of
1974, which became effective June 15, 1976.
MODULAR HOME — Factory-built housing certified as meeting the BOCA
National Building Code standards as adopted by West Hanover Township.75
Modular homes shall be subject to the same standards as site-built homes.
MUNICIPALITY — West Hanover Township, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
NATURAL DRAINAGE FLOW — The pattern of surface and stormwater
drainage from a particular site before the construction or installation of
improvements or prior to any regrading.
OBSTRUCTION — Any wall, dam, wharf, embankment, levee, dike,
projection, excavation, channel, rectification, culvert, building, fence,
stockpile, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along, across or projecting into
any channel, watercourse or flood-prone area, which may impede, retard or
change the direction of the flow of water either in itself or by catching or
collecting debris carried by such water, or is placed where the flow of the
water might carry the same downstream to the damage of life and property.
OPEN SPACE — An area that is intended to provide light and air, and is
designed for either environmental, scenic or recreational purposes. Open
space may include but is not limited to lawns, decorative planting,
walkways, active and passive recreation areas, playgrounds, fountains,
swimming pools, wooded areas and watercourses. Open space shall not be
deemed to include driveways, parking lots or other surfaces designed or
intended for vehicular travel. Land which is used for recreation, resource
protection, amenity and/or buffers. In no event shall any area of a lot
constituting the minimum lot area nor any part of an existing or future road
or right-of-way be counted as constituting open space.
75.Editor's Note: See Ch. 78, Building Construction, Art. I, Building Code.
§ 173-7 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-7
144:298
OPEN SPACE, COMMON — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water,
or a combination of land and water, within a development site and designed
and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a development, not
including streets, off-street parking areas and areas set aside for public
facilities.
OPEN SPACE DEVELOPMENT — A development design technique that
concentrates buildings in specific areas on a site to allow the remaining
land to be used for recreation, common open space and preservation of
environmentally sensitive areas.
OPEN SPACE, PRIVATE — Open space owned and maintained privately,
not for the use of the general public. Ownership can be in the form of a
conservation easement.[Added 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-17]
OPEN SPACE, PUBLIC — Open space owned by a public agency and
maintained by it for the use and enjoyment of the general public.
OVERLAY ZONE — A zoning district that encompasses one or more
underlying zones and that imposes additional requirements above that
required by the underlying zone.
OWNER — An individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership or
corporation having sufficient proprietary interest to seek development of
land.
PACKAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Small, self-contained sewage treatment
facilities built to serve developed areas beyond the service area of larger
regional plants.
PARKING AREA — Any public or private land area designed and used for
parking motor vehicles, including parking lots, garages, private driveways
and legally designated areas of public streets.
PARKING LOT — An area not within a building where motor vehicles may be
stored for the purposes of temporary, daily or overnight off-street parking;
a tract of land used for the temporary parking of motor vehicles when such
use is not accessory to any other use.
PARKING, SHARED — The development and use of parking areas on two
or more separate properties for joint use by the businesses on those
properties.
PARKING SPACE — An area on a lot and/or within a building intended
for the use of temporary parking of a personal vehicle. This term is used
interchangeably with "parking stall."
PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET — A temporary storage area for a motor
vehicle, trailer or vessel that is directly accessible to a driveway or access
drive, and which is not located on a dedicated street right-of-way.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, copartnership or a governmental unit, public utility or any
other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of
rights and duties.[Amended 3-21-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-3]
§ 173-7 PLUMBING § 173-7
144:299
PERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that generally permits the infiltration of
water into the ground.
PLAN, CONSTRUCTION IMPROVEMENT — A plan prepared by a
registered engineer or surveyor showing the construction details of streets,
drains, sewers, bridges, culverts and other improvements for review by the
Township Engineer, as required by this chapter.
PLAN, FINAL — A complete and exact subdivision or land development plat,
prepared for official recording as required by statute, to define property
rights and proposed streets and other improvements.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — Land under unified control to be planned
and developed as a whole in a single development operation or a definitely
programmed series of development operations or phases. A planned
development includes principal and accessory structures and uses
substantially related to the character and purposes of the planned
development. A planned development is built according to general and
detailed plans that include not only streets, utilities, lots and building
location, and the like, but also site plans for all buildings as are intended
to be located, constructed, used and related to each other, and plans for
other uses and improvements on the land as related to the buildings. A
planned development includes a program for the provisions, operations
and maintenance of such areas, facilities and improvements as will be for
common use by some or all of the occupants of the planned development
district, but which will not be provided, operated or maintained at general
public expense.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of land, controlled by
a landowner, to be developed as a single entity for a number of dwelling
units, or combination of residential and nonresidential uses, to develop
a plan for which does not correspond in lot size, bulk, type of dwelling,
or use, density or intensity, lot coverage, and required open space to the
regulations established in any one district created, from time to time, under
the provision.
PLANNING CODE — The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act
247, as amended. 76
PLANNING COMMISSION — The West Hanover Township Planning
Commission, appointed by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.
PLAN, PRELIMINARY — A tentative subdivision or land development plat,
in lesser detail than a final plat, showing approximate proposed street and
lot layout as a basis for consideration prior to preparation of a final plat.
PLAN, SKETCH — An informal plan, not necessarily to exact scale,
indicating salient existing features of a tract and its surroundings and the
general layout of a proposed subdivision or land development.
76.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 173-7 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-7
144:300
POLLUTANT — Any introduced gas, liquid or solid that makes a resource
unfit for a specific purpose.
POLLUTION — The presence of matter or energy whose nature, location or
quantity produces undesired environmental effects.
PRACTICABLE — Capable of being put to use or put into practice.[Added
12-7-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-05]
PRESERVATION TRUST — A locally formed nonprofit organization that
acquires and manages land for preservation and public use.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building in which the primary use of the lot on
which the building is located is conducted; a structure or, where the context
so indicates, a group of structures in or on which is conducted the principal
use of the lot on which such structure is located.
PRINCIPAL USE — The main use of land or structures, as distinguished
from a secondary or accessory use; the primary use and chief purpose of a
lot or structure.
PRIVATE — Not publicly owned, operated or controlled.
PRIVATE ROAD — A legally established right-of-way, other than a public
street, which provides the primary pedestrian and vehicular access to one
or more lots.
PROFILE LINE — The profile of the center line of the finished surface of the
street, which shall be midway between the sidelines of the street.
PUBLIC — Owned, operated or controlled by a government agency (federal,
state or local, including a corporation created by law for the performance
of certain specialized governmental functions and the Board of Public
Education).
PUBLIC AREAS — Public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other
recreational areas and other public open spaces; scenic and historic sites;
schools and other public buildings and structures.
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Public grounds include the following:
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by
the governing body or planning agency, intended to inform and obtain
public comment, prior to taking action in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Code, Act 247, as amended. 77
Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and other
public areas;
A.
Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly
owned or operated facilities; and
B.
C. Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
77.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 173-7 PLUMBING § 173-7
144:301
PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE AREA — A designated growth area and all or
any portion of a future growth area described in a county or multimunicipal
comprehensive plan where public infrastructure services will be provided.
Public infrastructure services outside the "area" will not have to be publicly
financed.[Added 11-4-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-9]
PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE SERVICES — Services provided to areas with
densities of one or more units to the acre, which may include, but need
not be limited to, sanitary facilities, including collection lines and treatment
plants, water lines and facilities, parks, streets, sidewalks, and public
transportation. The term excludes fire protection and emergency medical
services and any other services required to protect the health and safety of
residents.[Added 11-4-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-9]
PUBLIC MEETING — A meeting held in compliance with the Open Meetings
Act (65 Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 7).[Amended 11-4-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-9]
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in West Hanover Township,
Dauphin County, Pennsylvania. Such notice shall state the time and place of
the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the
hearing. The first publication shall be not more than 30 days and the second
publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of the hearing.
PUBLIC SEWER AND WATER SYSTEM — Any system, other than an
individual septic tank, tile field or individual septic tank or well, that is
operated by a municipality, governmental agency or a public utility for the
collection, treatment and disposal of wastes and the furnishing of potable
water.
PUBLIC UTILITY — A closely regulated private enterprise with an exclusive
franchise for providing a public service.
PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITIES — Telephone, electric and cable television
lines, poles, equipment and structures; water or gas pipes, mains, valves
or structures; sewer pipes; pumping stations; telephone exchanges and
repeater stations; and all other facilities, equipment and structures
necessary for conducting a service by a government or a public utility.
REAL ESTATE — Any fee, leasehold or other estate or interest in, over
or under land, including structures, fixtures and other improvements and
interests which by custom, usage or law pass with a conveyance of land
though not described in the contract of sale or instrument of conveyance.
Real estate includes parcels with or without upper or lower boundaries, and
spaces that may be filled with air or water.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicular-type unit designed as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, which has its own
motorized power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle (including
a camping trailer, motor home, travel trailer and truck camper); and a
body width of no more than eight feet and a body length of not more that
35 feet when factory equipped for the road, and licensed as such by the
commonwealth.
§ 173-7 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-7
144:302
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK OR CAMPGROUND — A parcel of land
under single ownership which has been planned and improved for the
placement of recreational vehicles or camping equipment for temporary
living quarters, for recreational, camping or travel use, on recreational
vehicle or campground lots rented for such use, thereby constituting a "land
development."
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK OR CAMPGROUND LOT — A parcel of
land abutting a street or private road occupied by one recreational vehicle
or camping equipment for temporary living quarters, for recreational,
camping or travel use, together with such open space as is required under
the provisions of this chapter having not less that the minimum area and
width required by this chapter for a recreational vehicle park or
campground lot.
RECREATION AREAS — A place designed and equipped for the conduct of
sports, leisure-time activities and other customary and usual recreational
activities. Public recreation areas are those owned and operated by a unit
of local government. Private recreation areas are those owned and operated
by a nonprofit organization and open only to bona fide members and their
guests. Commercial recreation areas are those operated as a business and
open to the public for a fee.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Earth disturbance
activity one acre or more with a point source discharge to surface waters
or the Township’s storm sewer system, or five acres or more regardless of
the planned runoff. This includes earth disturbance on any portion of, part
or during any stage of a larger common plan of development. This only
includes road maintenance activities involving 25 acres or more of earth
disturbance.[Added 3-21-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-3]
RESERVE STRIP — A strip of land adjacent to a street intended to control
access to the street from an adjacent property.
RESIDENT PROPERTY OWNER — Any individual maintaining a voting
address in the Township within 1,000 feet of the proposed subdivision,
owning real estate in his own or joint names. A tenancy in common or
any other means of joint ownership shall be considered as an individual;
however, the signature of any single joint owner shall be considered as
binding the others.
RESUBDIVISION — Any subdivision or transfer of land laid out on a plan
which has been approved by the Township Supervisors that changes or
proposes to change property line(s) and/or public right-of-way lines not in
strict accordance with the previously approved plan.
RETENTION BASIN — A pond containing a permanent pool of water
designed and/or constructed to store water runoff for a given storm event
and release it at a predetermined rate.
REVERSE FRONTAGE LOT — A lot extending between and having frontage
on a major street and a minor street with vehicular access solely from the
latter.
§ 173-7 PLUMBING § 173-7
144:303
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced
dedication, prescription or condemnation and intended to be occupied or
occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil
or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary storm sewer and other similar uses;
generally, the right of one to pass over the property of another.
RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE — See "street line."
RIGHT-OF-WAY, STREET — A public thoroughfare for vehicular traffic and/
or pedestrian traffic, whether designated as a street, highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane or alley, or however
designated.
ROADWAY — See "cartway."
RUNOFF — The surface water discharge or rate of discharge of a given
watershed after a fall of rain or snow that does not enter the soil but runs
off the surface of the land.
SANITARY SEWER, PUBLIC — A sanitary sewage collection method in
which sewage is carried from the site by a system of pipes to a central
treatment and disposal plant.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by wind, water or gravity. Once this matter is
deposited (or remains suspended in water), it is usually referred to as
"sediment."
SEDIMENT BASIN — A temporary dam or barrier constructed across a
waterway or at other suitable locations to intercept runoff and trap and
retain sediment.
SEEPAGE BED — A covered pit with perforated pipe through which the
septic tank effluent may seep or leach into the surrounding soil.
SEPTIC SYSTEM — An underground system with a septic tank used for the
decomposition of domestic wastes; also referred to as an "on-lot system."
SEPTIC TANK — A watertight tank in which raw sewage is broken down
into solid, liquid and gaseous phases to facilitate further treatment and final
disposal.
SERVICE DRIVE (PRIVATE) — A serviceway providing a secondary means
of private access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic
circulation.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM (ON-LOT) — Any structures designated to
dispose of sanitary sewage within the boundaries of a lot.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM (PUBLIC) — A sanitary sewage collection
method in which sewage is carried from the site by a system of pipes to a
central treatment and disposal plant.
SIDEWALK — A paved, surfaced or leveled area, paralleling and usually
separated from the street, used as a pedestrian walkway.
§ 173-7 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-7
144:304
SIGHT DISTANCE — The length of roadway visible to the driver of a
passenger vehicle at any given point on the roadway when the view is
unobstructed by traffic.
SINGLE-ACCESS STREET — A local street or streets, including, but not
limited to, culs-de-sac and loop streets, which have only one point of
intersection with an existing Township road, state road, or proposed road
having at least two separate and distinct access points.[Added 12-1-2008
by Ord. No. 2008-17]
SITE ANALYSIS — The study of a specific parcel of land which takes into
account the physical attributes and conditions, including climate, soils/
watersheds/drainage, topography, existing trees and vegetation,
environmentally sensitive areas (wetlands/hillsides/slopes/streams/lakes/
ponds), geology, hydrology and viewsheds, wildlife [species of concern and
endangered species (PNDI)], cultural attributes, including historical sites,
public infrastructure and existing structures.[Added 12-7-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-05]
SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A scaled graphical depiction of the proposed
development of a lot, parcel or tract of land describing all covenants
assigned, as well as accurately depicting the use, location and bulk of all
buildings and structures, intensity of use or density of development, streets,
driveways, rights-of-ways, easements, parking facilities, open space, public
facilities and utilities, setbacks, height of buildings and structures and other
such data necessary for municipal officials to determine compliance with
this chapter and appropriate provisions of other such ordinances, as they
may apply.
SKETCH PLAN — An informal plan used for the purpose of discussion
and classification, not necessarily to exact scale, indicating salient existing
features of a tract and its surroundings and the general layout of a proposed
subdivision and land development.
SLOPE — The face of an embankment or cut section; any ground whose
surface makes an angle with the plane of the horizon. Slopes are usually
expressed in a percentage based upon vertical difference in feet per 100
feet of horizontal distance.
SOIL PERCOLATION TEST — A field test conducted to determine the
absorption capacity of soil to a specified depth in a given location for the
purpose of determining suitability of soil for on-lot sewage disposal.
SOIL PROBE — A field test conducted to determine the types and depths of
soils located on a given lot and/or study area.
SOIL STABILIZATION — Chemical or structural treatment of a mass of soil
to increase or maintain its stability or otherwise to improve its engineering
properties.
STORM FREQUENCY — The average interval expected between storms of
a specific duration and intensity.
§ 173-7 PLUMBING § 173-7
144:305
STORMWATER DETENTION — Any storm drainage technique that retards
or detains runoff, such as detention or retention basin, parking lot storage,
rooftop storage, porous pavement, dry wells or any combination thereof.
STORMWATER DETENTION BASIN — A vegetated pond designed to drain
completely after storing runoff only for a given storm event and release it at
a predetermined rate; also known as a "dry pond."
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES — Facilities designed to reduce
peak flows and/or volumes, such as stormwater management ponds,
underground storage, rooftop storage, pervious parking, etc.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The planned control of runoff to
allow water falling on a given site to be absorbed or retained on site to the
extent that after development the peak rate of discharge leaving the site is
not greater than if the site had remained undeveloped; a plan showing all
present and proposed grades and facilities for stormwater management.
STREAM — A watercourse with definite bed and banks which confine and
convey continuously or intermittently flowing water.
STREAM, INTERMITTENT — A natural stream carrying water during the
wet seasons and having at least one critical area feature.
STREAM, PERENNIAL — A stream that is present at all seasons of the year.
STREET — A public or private right-of-way constructed to municipal
standards which affords primary vehicular traffic or pedestrian access to
abutting properties, which includes avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
freeway, parkway and viaduct, but shall not include an alley for the purpose
of this chapter.
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC — A street intersecting another street at one end
terminating at the other in a vehicular turnaround.
STREET GRADE — The officially established grade of the street upon which
a lot fronts or, in its absence, the established grade of the other streets upon
which the lot abuts, at the midpoint of the frontage of the lot thereon. If
there is no officially established grade, the existing grade of the street at
such midpoint shall be taken as the street grade.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between the street, or road and the lot,
also known as the "right-of-way line."
STREET, MAJOR —
ARTERIAL STREET — A major street or highway with fast or heavy
traffic of considerable continuity and used primarily as a traffic artery
for intercommunications among large areas.
A.
COLLECTOR STREET — A major street or highway which carries traffic
from minor streets to arterial streets including the principal entrance
streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within
such a development.
B.
§ 173-7 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-7
144:306
STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS — A minor street which is parallel and
adjacent to a limited access highway or arterial street, which provides
access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
STREET, MINOR — A street used primarily for access to abutting
properties.
STREET SHOULDERS — The portion of the street, contiguous to the
cartway, for the accommodation of stopped vehicles, for emergency parking
and for lateral support of base and surface courses of the pavement.
STREET WIDTH — The distance between street lines measured at right
angles to the center line of the street.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land; for
floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including
a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a
manufactured home.
STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY — A structure without any foundation or
footings and which is to be removed when the designated time period,
activity or use for which the temporary structure was erected has ceased.
SUBDIVIDER — (See "developer" and "applicant.") The owner or authorized
agent of the owner of a lot, tract or parcel of land to be subdivided for sale
or development under the terms of this chapter.
SUBDIVISION — (See "land development" and "resubdivision.") The
division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any means into two
or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land including changes in
existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease,
partition of the court for distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of
ownership or building or lot development; provided, however, that the
subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more
than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of access, or any
residential dwelling, shall be exempted.[Amended 8-20-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-08]
LIMITED ACCESS — A major street or highway which carries large
volumes of traffic at comparatively high speed with access at
designated points and not from abutting properties.
C.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — The subdivision of a single lot, tract or parcel
of land into four or fewer lots, tracts or parcels of land, for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or of building
development, providing lots, tracts or parcels of land thereby created
having frontage on an improved public street or streets and providing
further that there is not created by the subdivision any new street,
street easement, easements of access or need therefor.
A.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision involving more than four lots,
parcels of land or other divisions of land, whether or not they involve
new streets, additional utilities or other facilities immediate or future.
B.
§ 173-7 PLUMBING § 173-7
144:307
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — Where, in the judgment of the Township
Engineer, at least 90% (based on the cost of the required improvements
for which financial security was posted) of those improvements required
as a condition for final approval have been completed in accordance with
the approved plan, so that the project will be able to be used, occupied or
operated for its intended use.
SURFACE DRAINAGE PLAN — A plan showing all present and proposed
grades and facilities for stormwater drainage.
SURVEYOR, PROFESSIONAL LAND — An individual licensed and
registered under the laws of this commonwealth to engage in the practice of
land surveying. A professional land surveyor may perform engineering land
surveys but may not practice any other branch of engineering.
SWALE — A natural or man-made low-lying stretch of vegetative land
characterized as a depression and used to carry surface water runoff.
THROUGH STREET — A street that has at least two separate and distinct
access points, as a means of ingress and egress for vehicular and pedestrian
traffic.[Added 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-17]
TOPOGRAPHIC MAP — A map showing the elevations of the ground by
contours or elevation.
TOPOGRAPHY — The configuration of a surface area showing relative
elevations.
TOPSOIL — Surface soils and subsurface soils which presumably are fertile
soils and soil material, ordinarily rich in organic matter or humus debris.
Topsoil is usually found in the uppermost soil layer called the "A Horizon."
TOWNSHIP — West Hanover Township, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
TRIP — A single or one-way vehicle movement either to or from a subject
property or study area.
TRIP ENDS — The total of trips entering and leaving a specific land use or
site over a designated period of time.
UNDEVELOPED LAND — Any lot, tract or parcel of land which has not been
graded or in any other manner prepared for the construction of a building.
UNIT — That part of the property, structure or building designed or
intended for any type of independent use, which has direct exit to a public
street or way or to an easement or right-of-way leading to a public street
or way, and includes a proportionate undivided interest in the common
elements, which is assigned to the property, structure or building.
UTILITY, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE —
Any agency which under public franchise or ownership, or under
certificate of convenience and necessity, provides the public with
electricity, gas, heat, steam, communication, rail transportation, water,
sewage collection or other similar service.
A.
§ 173-7 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-7
144:308
WATER AND SEWER AUTHORITY — West Hanover Township Water and
Sewer Authority.
WATERCOURSE — A channel for the conveyance of surface water, such as
a stream or creek, or intermittent stream, having a defined bed and banks,
whether natural or artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow.[Amended
3-21-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-3]
WATER FACILITY — Any water works, water supply works, water
distribution system or part thereof designed, intended or constructed to
provide or distribute potable water.
WATER POLLUTION — The addition of pollutants to water in concentrations
or in sufficient quantities to result in measurable degradation of water
quality.
WATER TABLE — The upper surface of groundwater, or that level below
which the soil is seasonally saturated with water.
WETLANDS — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface
or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs and similar areas. (The term includes but is not limited
to wetland areas listed in the State Water Plan, the United States Forest
Service Wetlands Inventory of Pennsylvania, the Pennsylvania Coastal Zone
Management Plan and a wetland area designated by a river basin
commission. This definition is used by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency and the United States Army Corps of Engineers.)
ZONING DISTRICT — The part, zone or geographic area as depicted on
the West Hanover Township Zoning Map within which certain zoning and
development regulations apply.
A closely regulated private enterprise with an exclusive franchise for
providing a public service.
B.
§ 173-7 PLUMBING § 173-7
144:309

ARTICLE IV
Plan Specifications and Processing Procedures
§ 173-8. General requirements.
Whenever a subdivision of land or land development is desired to be
effected in West Hanover Township, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania, a plan of
the layout of such subdivision or land development shall be prepared, filed
and processed according to the requirements of this chapter as follows.
§ 173-9. Sketch plans. [Amended 5-3-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-8]
A. Purpose.
(1) Prior to the filing of a subdivision or land development plan for
review and approval, the submission of an informal sketch plan for
such subdivision or land development is strongly recommended.
(2) The purpose of the sketch plan is for the applicant to present
general information regarding the proposed subdivision and to
receive comments from Township boards and commissions on the
necessary requirements to achieve conformity with the standards
of this chapter and other applicable ordinances, as well as being
alerted to other factors which must be considered, prior to the
expenditure of substantial sums of money on surveying, wetland
delineation and engineering.
(3) The Township agrees to act in good faith and confidentiality
regarding sketch plans submitted for review. To encourage sketch
plan submissions, the Township agrees to not apply a proposed
change of the Zoning Ordinance78 that would adversely affect the
density or use allowed on a property that has submitted a sketch
plan for review. However, once the Planning Commission
undertakes Comprehensive Plan revisions required by the MPC
(Municipal Planning Code),79 the protection afforded by this section
shall not apply until after any amendments are made to the Zoning
Ordinance in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan update.
This protection shall apply for a period of 90 days from the date of
plan review and shall not be available again for a period of one year
for the same property from the end of the ninety-day protection
period.
B. Procedure. The applicant is encouraged to submit a sketch plan and
make a verbal presentation regarding the site and proposed
subdivision. It is an informal meeting prior to the submission of an
application.
78.Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning.
79.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 173-8 PLUMBING § 173-9
144:311
(1) Pre-sketch-plan meeting. A meeting is strongly recommended
between the Township's Zoning Officer and the applicant to
introduce the applicant to the Township's zoning and subdivision
regulations and procedures, to discuss the applicant's objectives,
introduce the applicant to the four-step design process for
subdivisions, and to schedule site visits prior to plan reviews.
(2) Site inspection. Applicants are encouraged to arrange for a visit to
the property by the Planning Commission and/or other municipal
officials (applicants, their site designers, and the landowner are
encouraged to accompany the Planning Commission). The purpose
of the visit is to familiarize local officials with the property's
existing conditions and special features, to identify potential site
design issues, and to provide an informal opportunity to discuss
site design concepts, including the general layout of designated
required open space (if applicable) and potential locations for
proposed buildings and street alignments. Comments made by
municipal officials or their staff and consultants will be interpreted
as being only advisory. It will be understood by all parties that no
formal recommendations can be offered, and no official decisions
can be made at the site visit.
(3) Sketch plan submission.
(a) The sketch plan should show in simple freehand pencil sketch
form, the proposed project, providing sufficient information to
clearly indicate the character and extent of the proposed
subdivision or land development and its relationship to existing
conditions and facilities within the area in which it is to be
located.
(b) It is recommended that the sketch plan submission include a
map covering sufficient area to establish the location of the
site, existing resources and elements of the Four-Step Process,
as described below.
(4) Sketch plan review. The Township will not in any case construe
presentation of a sketch plan as an official submission for plan
review. Because of its unofficial status, the sketch plan will not be
subject to the time limitations for plan review specified by the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,80 nor will the
presentation of a sketch plan be considered a formal application,
commencing the time limitation specified by Section 508 of said
Code for approval of a preliminary plan or final plan. No fee will be
required by the Township for the presentation of a sketch plan.
C. Sketch plan information. To provide a full understanding of the site's
potential and to facilitate the most effective exchange with the Planning
Commission and other boards and commissions, it is recommended the
80.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 173-9 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-9
144:312
sketch plan include, but is not limited to, the information listed below.
None of the sketch plan data requirements go beyond what is required
as part of a preliminary plan in § 173-12. Many of these items are
available in published data, and as part of the Township's
environmental resource inventory, and GIS mapping.
(1) Name and address of the legal owner, the equitable owner, and/or
the applicant;
(2) Name and address for the person responsible for preparing the
plan;
(3) Plan shall be clearly labeled "Sketch Plan";
(4) North arrow;
(5) Approximate tract boundaries, sufficient to locate the tract on a
map of the municipality;
(6) Location map;
(7) Zoning district;
(8) Streets on and adjacent to the tract;
(9) Approximately one-hundred-year floodplain limits;
(10) Existing resources and site conditions. Topographic, physical, and
cultural features including soil types, wooded areas, ditches,
drains, dumps, storage tanks, ponds, streams within 200 feet of the
tract, and existing rights-of-way and easements; cultural features
such as all structures, foundations, walls, wells, trails, and
abandoned roads; and
(11) Proposed methods of water supply, sewage disposal, and
stormwater management.
D. Four-step design process for subdivisions. It is highly recommended
that a sketch plan be developed from the Four-Step Design Process in
determining the layout of proposed conservation lands (open space, as
defined in Article XVII, § 195-85), house sites, streets and lot lines,
(1) Step 1: Delineate potential open space lands to be preserved;
include floodplains, environmental protection overlay districts and
conservation features, as defined in § 195-85. The actual minimum
percentage and acreage of required open space lands should be
calculated by the applicant and submitted as part of the sketch
plan.
(a) Primary open space lands include all constrained lands:
wetlands, floodplains, hillsides and steep slopes, streams,
ponds and lakes (as defined in Articles XV and XVI of the
Zoning Ordinance81).
§ 173-9 PLUMBING § 173-9
144:313
§ 173-10. Preapplication conference.
(b) Secondary open space lands include those parts of the
remaining buildable lands that might be considered for
conservation. These include: mature woodlands, large
individual trees of 15 inches in diameter or greater or of
botanic significance, tree masses, trails, prime farmland,
hedgerows, natural meadows, critical wildlife habitats and
travel corridors, scenic viewsheds, sites listed on the
Pennsylvania Natural Resource Inventory, rock outcroppings,
historic structures and sites, and culturally or archeologically
significant areas.
(c) The remaining part of the property should be shown as the
"potential development area."
(2) Step 2: Location of house sites. Potential house sites should be
tentatively located, using the proposed open space lands as a base
map as well as other relevant factors such as topography and soils.
House sites should generally be located in relationship to the
environmental protection overlay districts as defined in Article XVI,
taking into consideration the potential negative impacts of
residential development on such areas as well as the potential
positive benefits of such locations to provide attractive views and
visual settings for residences.
(3) Step 3: Alignment of streets. Upon designating the house sites, a
street plan should be designed to provide vehicular access to each
house, complying with the standards in Article XXI and bearing a
logical relationship to topographic conditions. Impacts of the street
plan on proposed conservation (open space) lands shall be
minimized, particularly with respect to crossing environmentally
sensitive areas such as wetlands and traversing slopes exceeding
15%. Street connections shall generally be encouraged to minimize
the number of new culs-de-sac to be maintained by the municipality
and to facilitate access to and from homes in different parts of the
tract and adjoining parcels.
(4) Step 4: drawing in the lot lines. Upon completion of the proceeding
three steps, lot lines can be drawn in accordance with good
planning design to delineate the boundaries of individual
residential lots.
A. The purpose of the preapplication conference is to:
(1) Foster informal plan review between the applicant and the
municipality.
81.Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning, Arts. XV and XVI.
§ 173-9 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-10
144:314
§ 173-11. Minor subdivision and land development applications.
(2) Reduce subdivision site plan design and development costs for the
applicant.
(3) Expedite the Township's review and approval process.
B. A preapplication conference shall be held with the municipality and/or
the Township Engineer.
C. The applicant shall have prepared a completed subdivision or land
development plan in accordance with Articles IV, V, VI, VII, VIII and IX,
as necessary, and any other descriptive materials.
D. The preapplication conference shall be scheduled at least 28 days prior
to the Planning Commission meeting. [Amended 12-6-2004 by Ord.
No. 2004-16]
E. The applicant may be charged reasonable fees for the preapplication
and preconstruction conference services for the Township Engineer's
attendance. [Amended 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-16]
F. Due to the informal nature of the preapplication conference, the
applicant or the Township shall not be bound by the determination of
the preapplication conference.
A. A land development where four or fewer units are proposed for
development or subdivision where four or fewer lots proposed to be
subdivided from a tract of land or where land is being transferred to be
combined with an existing lot, the Board of Supervisors, being advised
by the Planning Commission, in response to a written request by the
applicant, may waive the preliminary plan requirements, provided that
such proposal is on an existing street and no new streets are involved. A
minor subdivision is a final plan. In such cases the applicant shall
submit a final plan as follows. [Amended 4-17-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-3; 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-17]
B. The final plan shall be submitted and processed as required by
§ 173-14, Final plan procedure, and contain the following data and plan
specifications:
(1) Seventeen copies of the plan prepared by a registered surveyor or
engineer on sheets at a minimum size of 17 inches by 22 inches and
no larger than 24 inches by 36 inches clearly labeled "final plan."
[Amended 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-17]
(2) The final plan shall be submitted containing the following
information:
(a) A separate drawing titled "The Original Property Description,"
depicting the outline of the property from which the lot or lots
are being subdivided at a minimum scale of one inch equals
400 feet. [Amended 4-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-3]
§ 173-10 PLUMBING § 173-11
144:315
(b) A location map on the plan (minimum scale one inch equals
1,000 feet) titled "Location Map," showing property location,
streets and other pertinent information, in sufficient detail to
adequately identify the property location.
(c) If applicable, a separate drawing (minimum scale one inch
equals 10 feet) titled "Driveway Profile," depicting the
driveway profile, drainage conditions and entry to the street.
(d) The subdivision and/or land development plan. A separate
drawing of the proposed lot(s) (minimum scale one inch equals
100 feet), with lot area, lot number, lot dimensions, bearings
and distances of lot lines, existing street right-of-way,
dedicated right-of-way, street name and number and building
setback lines. [Amended 4-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-3]
(e) The development or property name.
(f) The municipality where the property is located.
(g) The zoning district(s) in which the site is located.
(h) The proposed land use and purpose for which sites, other than
residential lots or parcels, within unit, cooperative or
condominium subdivisions are dedicated or reserved.
(i) Date of plan preparation.
(j) Adjacent landowners' names, addresses and parcel numbers.
[Amended 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-17]
(k) Reference to recorded subdivision plans of adjoining platted
land by record name, date and number.
(l) Tax parcel number.
(m) The Township-issued identified number.
(n) North arrow and scale for all drawings or maps.
(o) Name, address and telephone number and e-mail address of
the owner or applicant. [Amended 12-1-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-17]
(p) Name, address and telephone number, e-mail address and seal
of the professional engineer certifying engineering aspects and
the professional land surveyor certifying the accuracy of the
plan survey (as defined herein). (Example contained in Exhibit
I herein.82) [Amended 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-17]
(q) Certification of ownership and dedicatory statement signed by
owner. (Example contained in Exhibit I herein.)
82.Editor's Note: Exhibit I is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 173-11 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-11
144:316
(r) Notary public and recording statement. (Example contained in
Exhibit I herein.)
(s) Approval blocks to be signed by the Planning Commission and
the Board of Supervisors. (Example contained in Exhibit II
herein.83)
(t) Location of existing buildings, streets, septic system(s),
stormwater facilities, culverts, fire hydrants, sanitary sewers,
well(s) and other significant man-made features located on or
adjacent to the proposed lots. [Amended 4-17-2000 by Ord.
No. 2000-3]
(u) Existing natural features such as alluvial soils, floodplain (onehundred-
year-flood elevations), rock outcrops, steep slopes,
and wooded areas, watercourses, and wetlands delineated in
accordance with Article VI, § 173-30, and other natural
features.
(v) Location and description of survey monuments shown on the
plan.
(w) The primary control point.
(x) Existing and proposed protective covenants running with the
land, if any.
(y) Existing public or private easements, such as but not limited to
utility, stream, lakes and ponds, stormwater, erosion control,
access and conservation; and the location of any public
utilities.
(z) The source of the proposed water supply should be identified;
location of proposed wells.
(aa) Perc and probe sites when on-site facilities are planned.
(bb) Existing contours at vertical intervals of two feet, except in
areas where the slope is greater than 15%, in which case the
contour interval shall be five feet.
(cc) Existing and proposed driveway locations depicting sight
distance and sight triangle in accordance with Article VI,
§ 173-25J(11).
(dd) Place the following as a conspicuous stand-alone note on the
cover sheet: "The owner or contractor must schedule a
preconstruction conference with the Township Engineer to be
held at least four working days prior to the start of any site
construction, earth disturbance, clearing or grubbing. Also,
the owner or contractor shall contact the Township Engineer at
83.Editor's Note: Exhibit II is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 173-11 PLUMBING § 173-11
144:317
least four working days prior to the start of any site
construction, earth disturbance, clearing or grubbing to
facilitate construction observation." [Added 9-8-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-1684]
(ee) Modifications of requirements shall be submitted in writing at
time of submission of the final plan in accordance with Article
XI.
(ff) Such other data as may be required by the Planning
Commission or Board of Supervisors in the enforcement of this
chapter.
(3) The final plan shall also be accompanied by the following ancillary
data, as applicable, and may be approved as a condition upon the
applicant's written acceptance of the condition(s):
(a) An erosion and sedimentation control plan as required by the
Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law,85 and the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP) Erosion and
Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual (April 1990):
(Title 25, Part I, Subpart C, Article II, Chapter 102 - Erosion
Control). The plan content shall be prepared in accordance
with the erosion control measures set forth in § 173-29.
[Amended 3-21-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-3]
(b) A copy of the Sewage Module for Land Development or other
equivalent documentation submitted to the Sewage
Enforcement Officer and ready for submission to the PADEP in
compliance with the requirements of the Pennsylvania Sewage
Facilities Act86 and Chapter 71 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania
Code.
(c) State highway occupancy permits.
[1] Where the proposed subdivision or land development
abuts a state highway (Pennsylvania Route or United
States Route), the following two notes shall be added to
the plan:
[a] No. 1: "A highway occupancy permit is required
pursuant to Section 420 of the Act of June 1, 1945,
(P.L. 1242, No. 428)."
[b] No. 2: "No building permit will be issued for any lot or
parcel which will require access to a state highway
84.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection
B(2)(dd) and (ee) as Subsection B(2)(ee) and (ff), respectively.
85.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
86.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 173-11 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-11
144:318
until authorized by a Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation highway occupancy permit."
[2] In addition, the Township Engineer shall certify, in writing,
that the clear sight distance standards and other safety
requirements contained in this chapter have been met.
(d) Township road occupancy permits. Where the proposed
subdivision or land development abuts a Township street, each
lot must be approved by the Township Engineer that proper
sight distance and other safety requirements contained in this
chapter have been met. A note shall be added to the plan as
follows: [Amended 4-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-3]
"No building permit will be issued until a Township Engineer
has verified the sight distance."
(e) When any portion of the tract proposed for subdivision or land
development is located within an identified flood district or
floodplain area, the information required in Article VI,
§ 173-24E, shall be provided as part of the final plan and shall
be prepared by a registered engineer or surveyor.
(f) A final drainage and stormwater management plan (D/SWM
plan), approved by the Township Engineer. (See Article VII of
this chapter.) [Amended 3-21-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-3]
(g) If water is to be provided by means other than private wells
owned and maintained by the individual owners of lots within
the subdivision or development, applicants shall present
evidence to the Board of Supervisors that the subdivision is to
be supplied by a certified public utility, a bona fide cooperative
association of lot owners or by a municipal corporation,
authority or utility. A copy of a certificate of public convenience
from the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or an
application for such certificate, a cooperative agreement or a
commitment or agreement to service the area in question,
whichever is appropriate, shall be acceptable.
(h) A wetlands study in accordance with Article VI, § 173-30.
(i) A traffic impact study, if required, in accordance with Article
IX.
(j) If public sewers are proposed, a certification letter from the
Township Water and Sewer Authority indicating that there is
sufficient capacity available for the subdivision or land
development. If applicable, the professional services and
review escrow agreement shall be submitted with the
application. [Amended 4-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-3]
§ 173-11 PLUMBING § 173-11
144:319
§ 173-12. Preliminary plan procedure.
(k) In the case of subdivision and land development plans
proposed for the sale of lots only, the subdivider shall include
on the final plan a covenant with the land assuring the
implementation by the lot owners of the erosion and
sedimentation control plan and approved D/SWM plan, as may
be required by Chapter 168, Stormwater Management of the
Township Code. Any approved operations and maintenance
plans and agreements required under Chapter 168, § 168-22,
shall be provided to the Township prior to recording and will
remain a permanent record with the final plan application.
[Amended 3-21-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-3]
(l) All required permits and documentation from the PADEP, any
other commonwealth agency and local municipality where any
alteration or relocation of a stream or watercourse is proposed.
(m) Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements or dedications
as may be required by the Board of Supervisors or Planning
Commission in the enforcement of this chapter.
(n) Legal descriptions for roads are to be prepared and submitted
prior to final approval. [Added 12-1-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-17]
(o) All subdivision proposals and development proposals
containing at least 50 lots or at least five acres, whichever is
the lesser, in flood hazard areas where base flood elevation
data are not available shall be supported by hydrologic and
hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be
prepared by a licensed professional engineer in a format
required by FEMA for a conditional letter of map revision
(CLOMR) or letter of map revision (LOMR). Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of
the applicant. [Added 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-17]
(4) Before acting on a minor subdivision plan, the Board of Supervisors
may hold a public hearing thereon after proper public notice.
A. The applicant shall submit to the Township Zoning Administrator or his
designee the appropriate filing fees and 16 copies of a preliminary plan
of the proposed subdivision or land development and other required
data and maps. The preliminary plan shall be submitted not less than 21
calendar days prior to the regular meeting of the Planning Commission
at which consideration is desired. The applicant shall submit
concurrently, with the preliminary plan, three copies of the sewage Plan
Revision Module for Land Development, if applicable. [Amended
12-6-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-16; 8-6-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-14]
§ 173-11 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-12
144:320
B. Filing of preliminary plan.
(1) Upon filing of the preliminary plan, the Township Zoning
Administrator shall, within seven working days, forward a copy
with the appropriate review fee to the Dauphin County Planning
Commission. The Township Zoning Administrator will likewise
forward copies to the Township Engineer and may, as appropriate,
forward copies to affected public utilities, school district, Dauphin
County Conservation District, fire departments, emergency
response agencies and other public agencies for review and report
to the Township. [Amended 4-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-3;
8-6-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-14]
(2) The Board of Supervisors, upon the recommendation of the
Planning Commission, shall act on any such preliminary plan and
communicate its decision to the applicant not later than 90 days
following the date of the regular meeting of the Board of
Supervisors or the Planning Commission (whichever first reviews
the application) following the date the application is filed. Should
the next regular meeting of the Planning Commission occur more
than 30 days following the filing of the application with the Board of
Supervisors, said ninety-day period shall be measured from the
30th day following the day the application has been filed with the
Board of Supervisors.
(3) In the event that any modification of requirements from this
chapter is requested by the applicant or is deemed necessary for
approval in accordance with Article XI, the modification request,
the provision(s) involved, the hardship upon which the requirement
is based and the minimum modification necessary shall be entered
in the records of the Planning Commission and/or Board of
Supervisors. [Amended 8-6-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-14]
C. The Dauphin County Planning Commission shall review the preliminary
plan and data and shall return a copy of a written report indicating its
recommendations to the Board of Supervisors within 30 days of its
receipt of the same or forfeit its right to review. The Township shall not
approve applications until the county report is received or until the
expiration of 30 days from the date the application was forwarded to
the county.
D. Before taking final action on any submitted preliminary plan, the
Township Zoning Administrator or his designee shall submit copies of
the preliminary plan and accompanying data to the Township Engineer,
who shall advise the Board of Supervisors and the Planning Commission
as to the suitability of all engineering details and specifications as per
this chapter. As necessary, the Township Zoning Administrator or his
designee, on behalf of the Planning Commission, may submit copies of
the preliminary plan to all affected public utilities which shall be
requested to make recommendations as to the utility easements; to the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, where the subdivision or
§ 173-12 PLUMBING § 173-12
144:321
land development will front on an existing or proposed state highway
or has a proposed street entering such highways. [Amended 8-6-2012
by Ord. No. 2012-14]
E. The Board of Supervisors shall determine whether the plan shall be
approved, approved with conditions acceptable to the applicant or
disapproved. The decision of the Board of Supervisors shall be in
writing and shall be communicated to the applicant personally or
mailed to him as his last known address not later than 15 days following
the decision. If the plan is approved with conditions, the applicant shall
respond to the Board of Supervisors indicating acceptance or rejection
of such conditions. Such response shall be in writing, signed by the
applicant, and shall be received by the Township Zoning Administrator
or his designee within 10 calendar days of receipt by the applicant of
the Board of Supervisors’ decision to approve the plan with conditions.
Approval of the plan shall be rescinded automatically upon the
applicant’s failure to accept or reject such conditions in the manner and
within the time frame noted above. [Amended 8-6-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-14]
F. Before acting on any subdivision plan, the Board of Supervisors may
hold a public hearing thereon after proper public notice.
G. When the application is not approved in terms as filed, the decision
shall specify the defects found in the application and shall, in each case,
cite the applicable provisions of this chapter.
H. Failure of the Board of Supervisors to render a decision and
communicate it to the applicant within the time and in the manner
required herein shall be deemed an approval of the application in terms
as presented unless the applicant has agreed, in writing, to an
extension of time or change in the prescribed manner of presentation of
communication of the decision, in which case failure to meet the
extended time or change in manner of presentation of communication
shall have like effect. (See exhibit "Time Extension Agreement."87)
I. All conditional use issues shall be identified, hearings applied for and
held, and decisions rendered by the appropriate governing body prior
to any recommendation of approval of the preliminary plan by the
Planning Commission. Time extensions may therefore be necessary to
meet approval timetables. [Added 8-6-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-1488]
J. Approval of the preliminary plan constitutes approval of the proposed
subdivision or land development with respect to the general design, the
approximate dimensions and other planned features. Preliminary
approval binds the developer to the general scheme of the plan as
87.Editor's Note: Exhibit III, Sample Time Extension Agreement, is included at the end of this
chapter.
88.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections I
and J as Subsections J and K, respectively.
§ 173-12 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-12
144:322
§ 173-13. Preliminary plan specifications. [Amended 4-17-2000 by
Ord. No. 2000-3]
The preliminary plan shall be submitted and processed as required by
§ 173-12, Preliminary plan procedure, and contain the following data and
plan specifications:
approved. Preliminary approval does not authorize the recording, sale
or transfer of lots.
K. Effect of ordinance changes on preliminary plan. See Article XII.
A. Seventeen copies of the plan prepared by a registered surveyor or
engineer on sheets at a minimum size of 17 inches by 22 inches and no
larger than 24 inches by 36 inches clearly labeled "preliminary plan."
[Amended 12-6-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-16]
B. The preliminary plan shall be submitted containing the following
information:
(1) A separate drawing titled "The Original Property Description,"
depicting the outline of the property from which the lot or lots are
being subdivided at a minimum scale of one inch equals 400 feet.
(2) A location map on the plan (minimum scale one inch equals 1,000
feet) titled "Location Map," showing property location, streets and
other pertinent information, in sufficient detail to adequately
identify the property location.
(3) If applicable, a separate drawing (one inch equals 50 feet
horizontal and one inch equals five feet vertical) titled "Driveway
Profile," depicting the driveway profile, drainage conditions and
entry to the street. [Amended 5-21-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-06]
(4) The subdivision and/or land development plan. A separate drawing
of the proposed lot(s) (minimum scale one inch equals 100 feet),
with lot area, lot number, proposed lot dimensions, proposed lot
lines, existing street right-of-way, dedicated right-of-way, proposed
street name and number and building setback lines.
(5) The subdivision plan or land development plan shall show the
following information if phasing of the development and
improvements is proposed:
(a) Reference outlining and/or indicating all lots in each phase.
(b) Each phase, except the last phase, must contain a minimum of
25% of the total number of lots or dwelling units.
(c) A schedule indicating the intended deadlines for filing a final
plan for each phase. The schedule shall be updated annually be
the application or before the anniversary date of the
preliminary plan approval, until final approval of the final
§ 173-12 PLUMBING § 173-13
144:323
phase is granted. Schedule modifications shall be subject to
the approval of the Board of Supervisors.
(6) Location of any proposed site improvements such as curbs,
sidewalks, street trees, fire hydrants and, when the proposed
development includes other than individual residences, the type of
land use and the location of structures and parking facilities.
(7) The development or property name.
(8) The municipality where the property is located.
(9) The zoning district(s) in which the site is located.
(10) The proposed land use and purpose for which sites, other than
residential lots or parcels within unit, cooperative or condominium
subdivisions are dedicated or reserved.
(11) Date of plan preparation.
(12) The adjacent landowners' names, addresses and parcel numbers.
[Amended 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-17]
(13) Reference to recorded subdivision plans of adjoining platted land
by record name, date and number.
(14) Tax parcel number.
(15) The Township-issued identified number.
(16) North arrow and scale for all drawings or maps.
(17) Name, address, telephone number and e-mail address of the owner
or applicant. [Amended 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-17]
(18) Name, address, telephone number, e-mail address and seal of the
professional engineer certifying engineering aspects and the
professional land surveyor certifying the accuracy of the plan
survey (as defined herein). (Example contained in Exhibit I
herein.89) [Amended 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-17]
(19) Certification of ownership and dedicatory statement signed by the
owner. (Example contained in Exhibit I herein.)
(20) Notary public and recording statement. (Example contained in
Exhibit I herein.)
(21) Approval blocks to be signed by the Planning Commission and the
Board of Supervisors. (Example contained in Exhibit II herein.90)
(22) Location of existing buildings, streets, septic system(s),
stormwater facilities, culverts, fire hydrants, sanitary sewers,
89.Editor's Note: Exhibit I is included at the end of this chapter.
90.Editor's Note: Exhibit II is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 173-13 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-13
144:324
well(s) and other significant man-made features located on or
adjacent to the proposed lots.
(23) Existing natural features such as alluvial soils, floodplain (onehundred-
year-flood elevations), rock outcrops, steep slopes, and
wooded areas, watercourses, wetlands delineated in accordance
with Article VI, § 173-30, and other natural features.
(24) Location and description of survey monuments shown on the plan.
(25) The primary control point.
(26) Proposed protective covenants running with the land, if any.
(27) Existing public or private easements, such as but not limited to
utility, stream, lakes and ponds, stormwater, erosion control,
access, conservation; and the location of any public utilities.
(28) An indication of the general location of proposed water mains,
sanitary sewers and stormwater catch basins and lines. The
preliminary size of each line should be shown as well as the
locations of or distances to any existing line to be connected to,
with the size of such existing lines indicated.
(29) The source of the proposed water supply should be identified;
location of proposed wells.
(30) Proposed perc and probe sites when on-site facilities are planned.
(31) Existing contours at vertical intervals of two feet, except in areas
where the slope is greater than 15%, in which case the contour
interval shall be five feet.
(32) Existing and proposed driveway locations depicting sight distance
and sight triangle in accordance with Article VI, § 173-25J(11).
(33) Streetlighting facilities in accordance with Article VI, § 173-24I.
(34) Modifications of requirements shall be submitted, in writing, at
time of submission of the final plan in accordance with Article XI.
(35) Such other data as may be required by the Planning Commission or
Board of Supervisors in the enforcement of this chapter.
C. The preliminary plan shall also be accompanied by the following
ancillary data, as applicable, and may be approved as a condition upon
the applicant's written acceptance of the condition(s):
(1) An erosion and sedimentation control plan as required by the
Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law,91 and the PADEP Erosion and
Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual (April 1990): (Title 25,
Part I, Subpart C, Article II, Chapter 102 - Erosion Control). The
91.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 173-13 PLUMBING § 173-13
144:325
plan content shall be prepared in accordance with the erosion
control measures set forth.
(2) A copy of the Sewage Module for Land Development or other
equivalent documentation submitted to the Sewage Enforcement
Officer and ready for submission to the PADEP in compliance with
the requirements of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act92 and
Chapter 71 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code.
(3) State highway occupancy permits.
(a) Where the proposed subdivision or land development abuts a
state highway (Pennsylvania Route or United States Route),
the application shall begin preparation of a highway occupancy
permit to be submitted to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation for review.
(b) The Township Engineer shall certify, in writing, that the clear
sight distance standards have been met.
(4) Township road occupancy permits. Where the proposed subdivision
or land development abuts a Township street, the applicant should
verify that property sight distance is available for each proposed lot
in accordance with Article VI, § 173-25L(10).
(5) When any portion of the tract proposed for subdivision or land
development is located within an identified flood district or
floodplain area, the information required in Article VI, § 173-24D,
shall be provided as part of the preliminary plan and shall be
prepared by a registered engineer or surveyor.
(6) General plans for drainage and stormwater management which
may include but not be limited to the collection, detention or
retention of runoff of surface water and its outfall, together with
design analyses and other supporting data for the Township
Engineer's review. (See Article VII.) [Amended 3-21-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-3]
(7) If water is to be provided by means other than private wells owned
and maintained by the individual owners of lots within the
subdivision or development, applicants shall present evidence to
the Board of Supervisors that the subdivision is to be supplied by a
certified public utility, a bona fide cooperative association of lot
owners or by a municipal corporation, authority or utility. A copy of
a certificate of public convenience from the Pennsylvania Public
Utility Commission or an application for such certificate, a
cooperative agreement or a commitment or agreement to service
the area in question, which ever is appropriate, shall be acceptable.
92.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 173-13 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-13
144:326
§ 173-14. Final plan procedure.
(8) A preliminary wetlands analysis in accordance with Article VI,
§ 173-30.
(9) Total acreage, number of lots, minimum lot areas, density, use of
land, and setback lines in tabular form. The applicant shall be
required to delineate the various phased sections (if applicable)
and sequence of final plan submissions.
(10) Parcels of land intended to be dedicated or reserved for schools,
parks, playgrounds, parking areas, common open space or other
public, semipublic or community purposes.
(11) Evidence, in writing, where 25 or more dwelling units are proposed
in a subdivision or land development, from the school district in
which the subdivision or land development is located containing
the review and comments of the proposed development.
(12) A traffic impact study, if required, in accordance with Article IX.
(13) If public sewers are proposed, a certification letter from the
Township Water and Sewer Authority indicating that there is
sufficient capacity available for the subdivision or land
development. If applicable, the professional services and review
escrow agreement shall be submitted with the application.
(14) All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at
least 50 lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in flood
hazard areas where base flood elevation data are not available shall
be supported by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses
that determine base flood elevations and floodway information. The
analyses shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer in a
format required by FEMA for a conditional letter of map revision
(CLOMR) or letter of map revision (LOMR). Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant. [Added 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-17]
D. Before acting on a preliminary subdivision plan, the Board of
Supervisors may hold a public hearing thereon after proper public
notice.
A. The applicant shall, not later than one year after the date of approval of
the preliminary plan, for that portion intended to be developed, file with
the Township Code Enforcement Officer or his designee a final plan.
Such filing shall include, as part of the formal submission, all the
material and other ancillary data required under the final plan
specifications as listed in § 173-13A, B and C of this chapter. Failure to
comply with the time limitation herein provided shall make the approval
of the preliminary plan null and void.
§ 173-13 PLUMBING § 173-14
144:327
B. The final plan shall incorporate all the changes and modifications
required by the Board of Supervisors; otherwise it shall conform to the
approved preliminary plan, and it may constitute only that portion of
the approved preliminary plan which the applicant proposes to record
and develop at the time, provided that such portion conforms with all of
the requirements of this chapter and the phasing requirements of the
MPC, Act 247, as amended.93
C. The applicant shall submit to the Township Zoning Administrator the
appropriate filing fees and 17 copies of the final subdivision or land
development plan and other required data and maps. The final plan
shall be submitted not less than 21 calendar days prior to the regular
meeting of the Planning Commission at which consideration is desired.
The applicant shall submit concurrently, with the final plan, three
copies of the sewage Plan Revision Module for Land Development, if
applicable. Upon receipt of the plan, the Zoning Administrator shall
forward a copy of the plan, with the appropriate review fee, to the
Dauphin County Planning Commission. The Township Zoning
Administrator shall likewise forward copies to the Township Engineer
and may, as appropriate, forward copies to affected public utilities,
school districts, fire departments, emergency response agencies and
other public agencies for review and report to the Township.
[Amended 4-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-3; 12-6-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-16]
D. Completion of improvements or guaranty thereof prerequisite to final
plan approval shall be in accordance with Article V.
E. Before acting on any subdivision plan, the Board of Supervisors may
hold a public hearing thereon after public notice.
F. The Board of Supervisors, upon the recommendation of the Planning
Commission, shall act on the final subdivision or land development plan
within 90 days and in accordance with Article II, § 173-3.
G. The Board of Supervisors shall determine whether the plan shall be
approved, approved with conditions acceptable to the applicant or
disapproved. The decision of the Board of Supervisors shall be in
writing and shall be communicated to the applicant personally or
mailed to him at his last known address not later than 15 days following
the decision. If the plan is approved with conditions, the applicant shall
respond to the Board of Supervisors indicating acceptance or rejection
of such conditions. Such response shall be in writing, signed by the
applicant, and be received by the Township Code Enforcement Officer
or his designee within 10 calendar days of receipt by the applicant of
the Board of Supervisors' decision to approve the plan with conditions.
Approval of the plan shall be rescinded automatically upon the
applicant's failure to accept or reject such conditions in the manner and
within the time frame noted above.
93.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 173-14 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-14
144:328
H. No changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be made on any
final plan of a subdivision or land development after approval has been
given by the Board of Supervisors, and endorsed in writing on the plan,
unless the plan is first resubmitted to the Board of Supervisors.
I. Recordation of approved plan; digital submission requirements.
[Amended 11-4-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-9; 12-1-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-17]
(1) Within 90 days after the date of approval of a final plan by the
Board of Supervisors and upon all conditions being met, the
developer shall record the approved subdivision or land
development plan in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Dauphin
County and return a digital submission and two paper copies of the
plan to the Township for its records, with the instrument number
and date recorded indicated on the plan.
(2) Digital submission requirements. All plans and as-built drawings
submitted digitally shall meet the following standards:
(a) All data submitted shall be in compliance with the Manual of
Practice for Professional Land Surveyors in the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
(b) All digital files submitted shall be based on accurate geometric
calculations.
(c) Digital submissions shall have all layers clearly and separately
represented. Included with all digital submissions, a metadata
file shall be included outlining the following:
[1] A list of all layers, with a description of what those layers
represent.
[2] A list of all point files and break lines, with a description of
any abbreviations.
(d) All plans must be in Pennsylvania State Plane Coordinate
System South Zone, utilizing the North American Datum of
1983 (NAD83) and the North American Vertical Datum of 1988
(NAVD88). Units shall be in U.S. survey feet.
(e) All plans must be submitted in AutoCAD drawing (.dwg),
AutoCAD interchange (.dxf), ArcView Shapefile (.shp), or ESRI
GeoDatabase format on CD-Rom or other agreeable format
acceptable to the Township.
J. Whenever plan approval by the Board of Supervisors is required, the
Dauphin County Recorder of Deeds shall not accept any plan for
recording unless such plan officially notes the approval of the Board of
Supervisors and review by the Dauphin County Planning Commission.
After the plan has been approved and recorded as provided in this
§ 173-14 PLUMBING § 173-14
144:329
§ 173-15. Final plan specifications. [Amended 4-17-2000 by Ord.
No. 2000-3]
The final plan shall be submitted and processed as required by § 173-14,
Final plan procedure, and contain the following data and plan
specifications:
chapter, all streets and public grounds on such plan shall become a part
of the Official Map of the Township.
A. Seventeen copies of the plan prepared by a registered surveyor or
engineer on sheets at a minimum size of 17 inches by 22 inches and no
larger than 24 inches by 36 inches clearly labeled "final plan."
[Amended 12-6-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-16]
B. The final plan shall be submitted containing the following information:
(1) A separate drawing titled "The Original Property Description,"
depicting the outline of the property from which the lot or lots are
being subdivided at a minimum scale of one inch equals 400 feet.
(2) A location map on the plan (minimum scale one inch equals 1,000
feet) titled "Location Map," showing property location, streets and
other pertinent information, in sufficient detail to adequately
identify the property location.
(3) If applicable, a separate drawing (one inch equals 50 feet
horizontal and one inch equals five feet vertical) titled "Driveway
Profile," depicting the driveway profile, drainage conditions and
entry to the street. [Amended 5-21-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-06]
(4) The subdivision and/or land development plan. A separate drawing
of the proposed lot(s) (minimum scale one inch equals 100 feet),
with lot area, lot number, lot dimensions, bearings and distances of
lot lines, existing street right-of-way, dedicated right-of-way, street
name and number and building setback lines.
(5) The development or property name.
(6) The municipality where the property is located.
(7) The zoning district(s) in which the site is located.
(8) The proposed land use and purpose for which sites, other than
residential lots or parcels, within unit, cooperative or condominium
subdivisions are dedicated or reserved.
(9) Date of plan preparation.
(10) Adjacent landowners' names, addresses and parcel numbers.
[Amended 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-17]
(11) Reference to recorded subdivision plans of adjoining platted land
by record name, date and number.
§ 173-14 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-15
144:330
(12) Tax parcel number.
(13) The Township-issued identified number.
(14) North arrow and scale for all drawings or maps.
(15) Name, address, telephone number and e-mail address for owner or
applicant. [Amended 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-17]
(16) Name, address, telephone number, e-mail address and seal of the
professional engineer certifying engineering aspects and the
professional land surveyor certifying the accuracy of the plan
survey (as defined herein). (Example contained in Exhibit I
herein.94) [Amended 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-17]
(17) Certification of ownership and dedicatory statement signed by the
owner. (Example contained in Exhibit I herein.)
(18) Notary public and recording statement. (Example contained in
Exhibit I herein.)
(19) Approval blocks to be signed by the Planning Commission and the
Board of Supervisors. (Example contained in Exhibit II herein.95)
(20) Location of existing buildings, streets, septic system(s),
stormwater facilities, culverts, fire hydrants, sanitary sewers,
well(s) and other significant man-made features located on or
adjacent to the proposed lots.
(21) Existing natural features such as alluvial soils, floodplain (onehundred-
year-flood elevations), rock outcrops, steep slopes, and
wooded areas, watercourses, wetlands delineated in accordance
with Article VI, § 173-30, and other natural features.
(22) Location and description of survey monuments shown on the plan.
(23) The primary control point.
(24) Existing and proposed protective covenants running with the land,
if any.
(25) Existing public or private easements, such as but not limited to
utility, stream, lakes and ponds, stormwater, erosion control, access
and conservation; and the location of any public utilities.
(26) The source of the proposed water supply should be identified;
location of proposed wells.
(27) Perc and probe sites when on-site facilities are planned.
(28) Existing contours at vertical intervals of five feet.
94.Editor's Note: Exhibit I is included at the end of this chapter.
95.Editor's Note: Exhibit II is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 173-15 PLUMBING § 173-15
144:331
(29) Existing and proposed driveway locations depicting sight distance
and sight triangle in accordance with § 173-25L(10). [Amended
6-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-06]
(30) Streetlighting facilities, as applicable.
(31) Modifications of requirements shall be submitted, in writing, at
time of submission of the final plan in accordance with Article XI.
(32) Place the following as a conspicuous stand-alone note on the cover
sheet: "The owner or contractor must schedule a preconstruction
conference with the Township Engineer to be held at least four
working days prior to the start of any site construction, earth
disturbance, clearing or grubbing. Also, the owner or contractor
shall contact the Township Engineer at least four working days
prior to the start of any site construction, earth disturbance,
clearing or grubbing to facilitate construction observation. [Added
9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-1696]
(33) Such other data as may be required by the Planning Commission or
Board of Supervisors in the enforcement of this chapter.
(34) Legal descriptions for roads are to be prepared and submitted prior
to final approval. [Added 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-17]
C. The final plan shall also be accompanied by the following ancillary data,
as applicable, and may be approved as a condition upon the applicant's
written acceptance of the condition(s):
(1) A final erosion and sedimentation control plan as required by the
Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law,97 and the PADEP Erosion and
Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual (April 1990): (Title 25,
Part I, Subpart C, Article II, Chapter 102 - Erosion Control). The
plan content shall be prepared in accordance with the erosion
control measures set forth in § 173-29. [Amended 3-21-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-3]
(2) A copy of the Sewage Module for Land Development or other
equivalent documentation approved by the PADEP in compliance
with the requirements of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act98
and Chapter 71 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code.
(3) State highway occupancy permits.
(a) Where the proposed subdivision or land development abuts a
state highway (Pennsylvania Route or United States Route),
the following two notes shall be added to the plan:
96.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection
B(2)(32) and (33) as Subsection B(2)(33) and (34), respectively.
97.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
98.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 173-15 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-15
144:332
[1] No. 1: "A highway occupancy permit is required pursuant
to Section 420 of the Act of June 1, 1945 (P.L. 1242, No.
428)."99
[2] No. 2: "No building permit will be issued for any lot or
parcel which will require access to a state highway until
authorized by a Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation highway occupancy permit."
(b) In addition, the Township Engineer shall certify, in writing, that
the clear sight distance standards have been met.
(4) Township road occupancy permits. Where the proposed subdivision
or land development abuts a Township street, each lot must be
approved by the Township Engineer that proper sight distance and
other safety requirements contained in this chapter have been met.
A note shall be added to the plan as follows:
"No building permit will be issued until the Township Engineer has
verified the sight distance."
(5) When any portion of the tract proposed for subdivision or land
development is located within an identified flood district or
floodplain area, the information required in Article VI, § 173-24E
shall be provided as part of the final plan and shall be prepared by a
registered engineer or surveyor.
(6) A final stormwater management plan (SWM plan), approved by the
Township Engineer, including appropriate permit transfers of
maintenance and access easements prior to Township acceptance.
(See Article VII of this chapter.) [Amended 3-21-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-3; 6-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-06]
(7) If water is to be provided by means other than private wells owned
and maintained by the individual owners of lots within the
subdivision or development, applicants shall present evidence to
the Board of Supervisors that the subdivision is to be supplied by a
certified public utility, a bona fide cooperative association of lot
owners or by a municipal corporation, authority or utility. A copy of
a certificate of public convenience from the Pennsylvania Public
Utility Commission or an application for such certificate, a
cooperative agreement or a commitment or agreement to service
the area in question, whichever is appropriate, shall be acceptable.
(8) A final wetlands study in accordance with Article VI, § 173-30.
(9) Parcels of land intended to be dedicated or reserved for schools,
parks, playgrounds, parking areas, common open space or other
public, semipublic or community purposes.
99.Editor's Note: See the State Highway Law, 36 P.S. § 670-101 et seq.
§ 173-15 PLUMBING § 173-15
144:333
(10) Evidence, in writing, where 25 or more dwelling units are proposed
in a subdivision or land development, from the school district in
which the subdivision or land development is located containing
the review and comments of the proposed development.
(11) A final traffic impact study in accordance with Article IX.
(12) If public sewers are proposed, a certification letter from the
Township Water and Sewer Authority indicating that there is
sufficient capacity available for the subdivision or land
development. If applicable, the professional services and review
escrow agreement shall be submitted with the application.
(13) Profiles of streets and alleys showing grades.
(14) Typical cross sections of each type of street, minor streets,
collector, etc., showing the width of right-of-way, width of cartway,
location and width of sidewalks, if required, and location and size of
utility mains.
(15) Plans and profiles of proposed sanitary and stormwater sewers,
with grades and pipe size indicated, and a plan of any proposed
water distribution system showing pipe sizes and location of valves
and fire hydrants.
(16) Certificates of agreement to provide service from applicable utility
companies.
(17) In the case of subdivision and land development plans proposed for
the sale of lots only, the subdivider shall include on the final plan a
covenant with the land assuring the implementation by the lot
owners of the erosion and sedimentation control plan and approved
D/SWM Plan, as may be required by Chapter 168, Stormwater
Management of the Township Code. Any approved operations and
maintenance plans and agreements required under Chapter 168,
§ 168-22, shall be provided to the Township prior to recording and
will remain a permanent record with the final plan application.
[Amended 3-21-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-3]
(18) All required permits and documentation from the PADEP, any other
commonwealth agency and local municipality where any alteration
or relocation of a stream or watercourse is proposed.
(19) Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements or dedications as
may be required by the Board of Supervisors or Planning
Commission in the enforcement of this chapter.
(20) All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at
least 50 lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in flood
hazard areas where base flood elevation data are not available shall
be supported by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses
that determine base flood elevations and floodway information. The
§ 173-15 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-15
144:334
analyses shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer
in a format required by FEMA for a conditional letter of map
revision (CLOMR) or letter of map revision (LOMR). Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant. [Added 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-17]
§ 173-15 PLUMBING § 173-15
144:335

ARTICLE V
Improvement and Maintenance Guaranties
§ 173-16. General requirements.
§ 173-17. Financial security for improvement guaranty.
The administration of the financial security shall comply with the provisions
of this article, the MPC, Act 247, as amended,100 and other applicable laws
of the commonwealth.
A. No project shall be considered in compliance with this chapter until the
public improvements, including streets, streetlights, all street signs,
sidewalks, curbs, landscaping, stormwater management facilities,
storm drainage for dedication or which affect adjacent properties or
streets, sanitary sewer facilities for dedication, water supply facilities,
fire hydrants, lot line markers, survey monuments, recreational
facilities, open space improvements and other such public improvement
have been installed in accordance with this chapter, other applicable
Township ordinances and the rules and regulations of a public utility or
the Township Water and Sewer Authority.
B. If water mains or sanitary sewer lines, or both, along with apparatus or
facilities related thereto, are to be installed under the jurisdiction and
pursuant to the rules and regulations of a public utility or the Township
Water and Sewer Authority, financial security to assure proper
completion and maintenance thereof shall be posted in accordance with
the regulations of the controlling public utility or Township Water and
Sewer Authority and shall not be included within the financial security
as otherwise required by this section.
C. No final plan shall be signed by the Board of Supervisors for recording
in the office of the Dauphin County Recorder of Deeds unless:
(1) Financial security in accordance with § 173-17 is accepted by the
Board of Supervisors;
(2) Financial security is accepted by a public utility or the Township
Water and Sewer Authority, if necessary; and/or
(3) The improvements required by this chapter have been installed.
D. Such financial security shall provide for, and secure to the public, the
completion of any improvements which may be required on or before
the date fixed in the formal action of approval or accompanying
agreement for completion of the improvements.
A. Submission of improvement guaranty. Final plan applications that
include public improvements that have not been installed shall include
an improvement guaranty in the form of financial security. No financial
100. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 173-16 PLUMBING § 173-17
144:337
security shall be required or provided for improvements where financial
security is provided to the State Department of Transportation.
[Amended 11-4-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-9]
(1) Type of financial security. Although the Board of Supervisors may
accept an alternative type of financial security, commonly used
forms such as irrevocable letters of credit and escrow accounts will
be accepted. Such financial security shall be posted with a bonding
company or federal or commonwealth chartered lending institution
chosen by the party posting the financial security, provided that
said bonding company or lending institution is authorized to
conduct such business in the commonwealth, subject to review by
the Township Solicitor for adequacy.
(2) Amount of financial security.
(a) The amount of financial security shall be equal to 110% of the
cost of completion estimated as of 90 days following the date
scheduled for completion by the developer. Annually, the
Township may adjust the amount of the financial security by
comparing the actual cost of the improvements which have
been completed and estimated cost for the completion of the
remaining improvements as of the expiration of the 90th day
after either the original date scheduled for completion or a
rescheduled date of completion. Subsequent to said
adjustment, the Township may require the developer to post
additional security in order to assure that the financial security
equals said 110%. Any additional security shall be posted by
the developer in accordance with this chapter.
(b) The amount of financial security required shall be based upon
an estimate of the cost of completion of the required
improvements, submitted by an applicant or developer and
prepared by a professional engineer licensed as such in this
commonwealth and certified by such engineer to be a fair and
reasonable estimate of such cost. The Township, upon the
recommendation of the Township Engineer, may refuse to
accept such estimate for good cause shown. If the applicant or
developer and the Township are unable to agree upon an
estimate, the estimate shall be recalculated and recertified by
another professional engineer licensed as such in this
commonwealth and chosen mutually by the Township and the
applicant or developer. The estimate certified by the third
engineer shall be presumed fair and reasonable, and shall be
the final estimate. In the event that a third engineer is so
chosen, fees for the services of said engineer shall be paid
equally by the Township and the applicant or developer.
(c) If the party posting the financial security requires more than
one year from the date of posting of the financial security to
complete the required improvements, the amount of financial
§ 173-17 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-17
144:338
security may be increased by an additional 10% for each oneyear
period beyond the first anniversary date from posting of
financial security to an amount not exceeding 110% of the cost
of completing the required improvements as reestablished on
or about the expiration of the preceding one-year period by
using the above procedure.
(d) In the case where development is projected over a period of
years, the Board of Supervisors may authorize submission of
final plans by phases, sections or stages of development
subject to such requirements or guaranties as to improvements
in future sections or stages of development as it finds essential
for the protection of any finally approved section of the
development.
(3) Security agreement. The developer shall declare the intent to
provide an improvement guaranty by executing the security
agreement included in this chapter.101 The security agreement shall
be submitted at the time application is made for approval of a final
plan.
B. Plan approval conditioned upon financial security. When requested by
the developer, in order to facilitate financing, the Township Board of
Supervisors shall furnish the developer with a signed copy of a
resolution indicating approval of the final plan contingent upon the
developer obtaining a satisfactory financial security. The final plan or
record plan shall not be signed nor recorded until the financial
improvements agreement is executed. The resolution or letter of
contingent approval shall expire and be deemed to be revoked if the
financial security agreement is not executed within 90 days unless a
written extension is granted by the governing body; such extension
shall not be unreasonably withheld and shall be placed in writing at the
request of the developer. The extension must be requested by the
applicant in writing.
C. Release of financial security.
(1) As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the
party posting the financial security may request the Board of
Supervisors to release or authorize the release of, from time to
time, such portions of the financial security necessary for payment
to the contractor or contractors performing the work. Any such
requests shall be in writing addressed to the Board of Supervisors,
and the Board of Supervisors shall have 45 days from receipt of
such request within which to allow the Township Engineer to
certify, in writing, to the Board of Supervisors that such portion of
the work upon the improvements has been completed in
accordance with the approval of the plan. Upon such certification
the Board of Supervisors shall authorize release by the bonding
101. Editor's Note: Exhibit V, Security Agreement, is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 173-17 PLUMBING § 173-17
144:339
company or lending institution of an amount as estimated by the
Township Engineer fairly representing the value of the
improvements completed or, if the Board of Supervisors fails to
act within said forty-five-day period, the Board of Supervisors shall
be deemed to have approved the release of funds as requested.
The Board of Supervisors may, prior to final release at the time of
completion and certification by its engineer, require retention of
10% of the estimated cost of the aforesaid improvements.
(2) When the developer has completed all of the necessary and
appropriate improvements, the developer shall notify the Board of
Supervisors in writing, by certified or registered mail, of the
completion of the aforesaid improvements and shall send a copy
thereof to the Township Engineer. The Board of Supervisors shall,
within 10 days after receipt of such notice, direct and authorize the
Township Engineer to inspect all of the aforesaid improvements.
The Township Engineer shall, thereupon, file a report, in writing,
with the Board of Supervisors, and shall promptly mail a copy of the
same to the developer by certified or registered mail. The report
shall be made and mailed within 30 days after receipt by the
Township Engineer of the aforesaid authorization from the Board of
Supervisors; said report shall be detailed and shall indicate
approval or rejection of said improvements, either in whole or in
part, and if said improvements or any portion thereof shall not be
approved or shall be rejected by the Township Engineer, said report
shall contain a statement of reasons for such nonapproval or
rejection.
(3) The Board of Supervisors shall notify the developer within 15 days
of receipt of the Engineer's report, in writing, by certified or
registered mail, of the action of the Board of Supervisors with
relation thereto.
(4) If the Board of Supervisors or the Township Engineer fails to
comply with the time limitation provisions contained herein, all
improvements will be deemed to have been approved and the
developer shall be released from all liability, pursuant to its
performance guaranty bond or other security agreements.
(5) If any portion of said improvement shall not be approved or shall be
rejected by the Board of Supervisors, the developer shall proceed
to complete the same and, upon completion, the same procedure of
notification, as outlined herein, shall be followed.
(6) Documents for all permit transfers for access and maintenance of
stormwater control systems shall be provided prior to the final
release of improvement guarantee funds. [Added 6-4-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-06102]
102. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection
C(6) as Subsection C(7).
§ 173-17 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-17
144:340
§ 173-18. Dedication of improvements. [Amended 12-1-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-17]
All improvements shall be deemed to be private improvements and only for
the benefit of the specific project until such time as the same have been
offered for dedication and formally accepted by the Board of Supervisors.
No responsibility of any kind with respect to improvements shown on the
final plan shall be transferred until the improvements have been formally
accepted. No roads shall be accepted for dedication until a minimum of 80%
of the dwelling units are completed by phase. Dedications shall include all
public improvements at one time and not piecemeal, i.e., no separation of
sidewalks from roads, unless the plan was approved as such by the Board of
(7) If any portion of said improvements are not approved or are
rejected by the Board of Supervisors, the applicant shall proceed to
complete the same and, upon completion, the same procedure of
notification outlined herein shall be followed.
D. Remedies to effect completion of improvements. In the event that any
improvements which may be required have not been installed as
provided in this article or in accord with the approved final plan, the
Board of Supervisors is hereby granted the power to enforce any
financial security by appropriate legal and equitable remedies. If
proceeds of the financial security are insufficient to pay the cost of
installing or making repairs or corrections to all the improvements
covered by said security, the Board of Supervisors may, at its option,
install all or part of such improvements and may institute appropriate
legal or equitable action to recover the funds necessary to complete the
remainder of the improvements. All of the proceeds, whether resulting
from the security or from any legal or equitable action brought against
the applicant, or both, shall be used solely for the installation of the
improvements covered by such security, and not for any other municipal
purpose.
E. Other effects of financial security. If financial security has been
provided in lieu of the completion of the improvements required as a
condition for the final approval of the plan as set forth in this article, the
Township shall not condition the issuance of building, grading or other
permits relating to the erection or placement of improvements,
including buildings, upon the lots or land as depicted upon the final
plan upon actual completion of the improvements depicted upon the
approved final plan. Moreover, if said financial security has been
provided, occupancy permits for any building or buildings to be erected
shall not be withheld following the improvements of the streets
providing access to and from existing public roads to such building or
building as to a mud-free or otherwise permanently passable condition,
as well as the completion of all other improvements as depicted upon
the approved plan, either upon the lot or lots or beyond the lot or lots in
question if such improvements are necessary for the reasonable use of
or occupancy of the building or buildings.
§ 173-17 PLUMBING § 173-18
144:341
Supervisors. No improvements shall be accepted for dedication except upon
submission of as-built drawings by the developer and inspection of the final
construction by the Township.
§ 173-19. Inspection of improvements during construction.
A. The owner or contractor shall schedule a pre-construction conference
with the Township Engineer to be held at least four days prior to the
start of any site construction, earth disturbance, clearing or grubbing.
[Added 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-16103]
B. Prior to the initiation of construction, the developer shall notify the
Township so that an inspection schedule can be coordinated with the
construction schedule. Additionally, the Township and the Township
Engineer shall be notified four working days in advance of any intended
date of construction. The provisions stated herein shall be construed as
mandating periodic inspections and the undertaking of periodic
inspections shall not be construed as an acceptance of the work during
construction or as a final inspection of the construction.
C. The applicant shall reimburse the Township for the reasonable and
necessary expense incurred for the inspection of improvements. Such
reimbursement shall be based upon time and material costs for the
referenced inspections. Such expense shall be reasonable and in
accordance with the ordinary and customary fees charged by the
Township Engineer for work performed for similar services in the
community, but in no event shall the fees exceed the rate or cost
charged by the Township Engineer to the Township when fees are not
reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants. When fees are
disputed, the applicant and Township shall adhere to the procedure
described in Section 510(g) of the MPC, Act 247,104 and the professional
resolving the fee dispute shall be of the same profession as the
consultants whose fees are being disputed. [Amended 11-4-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-9]
D. The Township, at the expense of the developer, reserves the right to
require tests of the improvement to determine whether the
improvement complies in all respects with the requirements of the
Township.
E. The Township will invoice the developer for costs incurred by the
Township for the inspection of improvements. Improvements shall not
be finally approved until the invoice is paid.
F. A final inspection report by the Township Engineer shall be presented
to the Board of Supervisors indicating no problems with the
improvements. [Added 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-17]
103. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections A
through E as Subsections B through F, respectively.
104. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10510(g).
§ 173-18 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-20
144:342
§ 173-20. Maintenance guaranty. [Amended 12-1-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-17]
When the Township has accepted dedication of certain improvements, the
Board of Supervisors may, at its discretion, require the applicant to submit
a maintenance guaranty or other approved guaranty as specified herein,
guaranteeing the structural integrity as well as function of any
improvement shown on the final plan for a term not to exceed 18 months
from the date of acceptance of dedication by the Board of Supervisors.
Said guaranty shall not exceed 15% of the actual cost of installation of said
improvement and be of the same type of financial security as required in
this article. Stormwater facilities shall be required to be bonded for a period
of 18 months after all public improvements and all principal structures
utilizing that stormwater facility are one-hundred-percent completed.
§ 173-21. Record plans. [Amended 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-17]
A. Submission. Upon completion of all required improvements and prior to
final inspection of improvements, the applicant shall submit a plan
labeled "Record Plan," showing the location, dimension and elevation of
all improvements. In addition, the plan shall indicate that the
improvements are in substantial conformance with the previously
approved drawings and specifications. The plan shall note all deviations
from the previously approved drawings. Three copies of the plan (two
paper prints and one digital submission) shall be submitted to the
Township, which shall distribute the paper print to the Township
Engineer and retain one paper print and the digital submission for the
Township files.
B. Digital submission requirements. All plans and as-built drawings
submitted digitally shall meet the following standards:
(1) All data submitted shall be in compliance with the Manual of
Practice for Professional Land Surveyors in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(2) All digital files submitted shall be based on accurate geometric
calculations.
(3) Digital submissions shall have all layers clearly and separately
represented. Included with all digital submissions, a metadata file
shall be included outlining the following:
(a) A list of all layers, with a description of what those layers
represent.
(b) A list of all point files and break lines, with a description of any
abbreviations.
(4) All plans must be in Pennsylvania State Plane Coordinate System
South Zone, utilizing the North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83)
§ 173-20 PLUMBING § 173-21
144:343
and the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88). Units
shall be in U.S. survey feet.
(5) All plans must be submitted in AutoCAD drawing (.dwg), AutoCAD
interchange (.dxf), AreView Shapefile (.shp), or ESRI GeoDatabase
format on CD-Rom or other agreeable format acceptable to the
Township.
§ 173-21 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-21
144:344
ARTICLE VI
Design Standards
§ 173-22. General provisions.
§ 173-23. Site design standards.
A. Minimum standards. The standards and requirements contained in this
article shall apply as minimum design standards for subdivisions and/or
land developments in the Township.
B. Compliance with Chapter 195, Zoning, Zoning Hearing Board, and
Board of Supervisors (conditional use) decisions. Whenever Chapter
195, Zoning, provides that the use proposed by the applicant for
subdivision or land development approval shall constitute a use by
special exception or conditional use or when a variance from the terms
of Chapter 195, Zoning, is required to develop in accordance with the
plan, the applicant shall obtain such special exception or variance
approval from the Township Zoning Hearing Board or conditional use
approval by the Board of Supervisors prior to the submission of the
preliminary plan. The plan shall be designed and developed in
accordance with any conditions which have been imposed upon the
grant of such special exception or variance by the Township Zoning
Hearing Board or conditional use approval by the Board of Supervisors.
A. Purpose. The purpose of good subdivision and site design is to create a
functional and attractive development, to minimize adverse impacts
and to ensure a project will be an asset to a community. To promote this
purpose, the subdivision and/or land development shall reflect and
consider the following standards which are designed to result in a wellplanned
community without adding unnecessarily to development
costs.
B. Site design standards.
(1) The location and design of the subdivision and/or land development
should conform to the Township Comprehensive Plan with respect
to design standards, streets, traffic circulation, public sites,
proposed utilities, natural features, etc.
(2) Land shall be subdivided or developed only in conformance with all
other ordinances and regulations in effect in the Township.
(3) Development of the site shall be based on a site analysis. The site
analysis shall show the physical, biological and cultural attributes
of the site. To the maximum extent practicable, subdivisions and/or
land development shall be designed and located to preserve the
natural features of the site, to avoid areas of environmental
sensitivity and to minimize negative impacts and alterations of
natural features. [Amended 12-7-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-05]
§ 173-22 PLUMBING § 173-23
144:345
§ 173-24. Floodplain areas.
(4) Subdivision and/or land development design shall consider the
natural features and overlays as specified in Articles XV, XVI and
XVII of Chapter 195, Zoning. [Amended 12-1-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-17]
(5) Subdivisions and/or land developments shall be designed to avoid
adversely affecting groundwater and aquifer recharge; to reduce
cut and fill; to avoid unnecessary impervious coves; to prevent
flooding; to provide adequate and safe access to lots and sites; and
to mitigate adverse effects of noise, odor, traffic, drainage and
utilities on neighboring properties. [Amended 12-7-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-05]
(6) Land subject to hazards of life, health or property that may arise
from fire, floods, disease, or excessive noise, or considered
uninhabitable for other reasons, may not be developed unless the
hazards have been removed or the plans show adequate safeguards
against them. [Amended 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-17]
(7) A land development must be coordinated with existing land
development in the neighborhood so that the entire area may be
developed harmoniously within the permitted uses of each zoning
district. [Amended 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-17]
(8) All portions of a parcel being subdivided or developed shall be
taken up in lots, streets, public lands or other proposed uses so that
remnants and landlocked areas are not created.
(9) Provide documentation that all of the design standards of this
section have been reviewed and addressed. [Added 12-7-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-05]
C. Exemptions. Provisions of this section shall not pertain to subdivisions
and/or land developments which qualify as a minor subdivision or which
involve fewer than three acres. [Added 12-7-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-05]
A. Purpose. The specific purpose of these provisions is:
(1) To regulate the subdivision of land within any designated floodplain
district in order to promote the general health, welfare and safety
of the community. Development within a floodplain area is
permitted only in accordance with Article XV of Chapter 195,
Zoning.
(2) To require that each subdivision lot in floodplain areas includes a
safe building site with adequate access; and that public facilities
which serve such uses be designed and installed to minimize flood
damage.
§ 173-23 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-24
144:346
(3) To protect individuals from buying lands which are unsuitable for
use because of flooding by prohibiting the improper subdivision
and/or development of unprotected lands within the designated
floodplain districts.
B. Municipal liability. The grant of a permit or approval of a plan for any
proposed subdivision and/or land development to be located within any
identified floodplain area or district shall not constitute a
representation, guaranty or warranty of any kind by the municipality or
by any official or employee thereof of the practicability or safety of the
proposed use, and shall create no liability upon the municipality, its
officials or employees.
C. General.
(1) Development within identified floodplain areas shall be consistent
with Article XV of Chapter 195, Zoning.
(2) All floodplains and floodways shall be identified in accordance with
Article XV of Chapter 195, Zoning.
D. Preliminary plan requirements. The following information shall be
required as part of the preliminary plan and shall be prepared by a
registered engineer or surveyor:
(1) Name of the engineer, surveyor or other qualified person
responsible for providing the information required in this section.
(2) A map showing the location of the proposed subdivision and/or land
development with respect to any identified floodplain area or
district, including information on the one-hundred-year-flood
elevations.
(3) Where the subdivision and/or land development lies partially or
completely within any identified floodplain area or district or where
such activities border on any identified floodplain area or district,
the preliminary plan map shall include the following information:
(a) The location and elevation of proposed roads, utilities and
building sites, fills, flood, or erosion protection facilities.
(b) The one-hundred-year-flood elevations.
(c) Areas subject to special deed restrictions.
(d) The fifty-foot setback measured from a floodplain district and
any new construction or development required by Article XVI
of Chapter 195, Zoning.
(4) All such maps shall show contours at intervals required by
§ 173-13B(31) of this chapter and identify accurately the
boundaries of the identified floodplain areas or districts.
§ 173-24 PLUMBING § 173-24
144:347
E. Final plan requirements. The following information shall be required as
part of the final plan and shall be prepared by a registered engineer or
surveyor:
(1) All information required for the submission of the preliminary plan,
incorporating any changes requested by the Township.
(2) A map showing the exact location and elevation of all proposed
buildings, structures, roads and public utilities to be constructed
within any identified floodplain area or district. All such maps shall
show contours at intervals required by § 173-15B(28) of this
chapter and identify accurately the boundaries of the floodplain
areas.
(3) Submission of the final plan shall also be accompanied by all
required permits and related documentation from the PADEP, and
any other commonwealth agency or local municipality where any
alteration or relocation of a stream or watercourse is proposed. In
addition, documentation shall be submitted indicating that all
affected adjacent municipalities have been notified of the proposed
alteration or relocation. The Department of Community and
Economic Development and the Federal Insurance Administrator
shall also be notified whenever any such activity is proposed.
F. Design standards and improvement in designated floodplain districts.
(1) General.
(a) Where not prohibited by this or any other laws or ordinances,
land located in any identified floodplain area or district may be
developed with the provision that the developer construct all
buildings and structures to preclude flood damage in
accordance with this and any other laws and ordinances
regulating such development.
(b) If the Township determines that only a part of a proposed plan
can be safely developed, it shall limit development to that part
and shall require that development proceed consistent with
this determination.
(c) When a developer does not intend to develop the plan himself
and the Township determines that additional controls are
required to ensure safe development, it may require the
developer to impose appropriate deed restrictions on the land.
Such deed restrictions shall be inserted in every deed and
noted on every recorded plan.
(2) Streets. The finished elevation of proposed streets shall not be
more than the one foot below the regulatory flood elevation. The
Township may require profiles and elevations of streets to
determine compliance with the requirements. Drainage openings
§ 173-24 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-24
144:348
§ 173-25. Street systems.
shall be sufficient to discharge flood flows without unduly
increasing flood heights.
(3) Sanitary sewer facilities. All sanitary sewer systems, whether
public or private, shall be floodproofed up to the 1 1/2 feet above
the regulatory flood elevation. The installation of sewage disposal
facilities requiring soil absorption systems shall be prohibited
where such systems will not function due to high groundwater,
flooding or unsuitable soil characteristics or if these systems are
within designated floodplain areas or districts. The Township may
require that the developer note on the face of the plan and in any
deed of conveyance that soil absorption fields are prohibited in
such area or district.
(4) Water facilities. All water systems, whether public or private, shall
be floodproofed up to 1 1/2 feet above the regulatory flood
elevation.
(5) Other utilities and facilities. All other public and private utilities
and facilities, including gas and electric, shall be elevated or
floodproofed up to 1 1/2 feet above the regulatory flood elevation.
A. General. All streets proposed to be constructed within the Township
shall conform to the following general design requirements:
(1) The Township encourages creative design methods to minimize the
number of access points onto Township and state roads for the
safety and convenience of public travel. Whenever possible, the
Township strongly encourages the use of shared driveways, service
roads and other methods to minimize the number of road access
points.
(2) Proposed streets shall be planned with regard to the existing street
system, public convenience in terms of fire protection and
pedestrian traffic, probable volumes of traffic, existing and
proposed use of land on abutting properties and future
development extensions of the street system.
(3) The arrangement of streets shall provide for the continuation of
existing or platted streets and for proper access to adjoining
undeveloped parcels suitable for future development. Right-of-way
access for future streets is required where practicable. [Amended
12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-17]
(4) Streets shall be logically related to topography so as to produce
reasonable grades, satisfactory drainage and suitable building
sites.
(5) The finished elevation of proposed streets shall not be more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation. The Township may
§ 173-24 PLUMBING § 173-25
144:349
require profiles and elevations of streets to determine compliance
with this requirement.
(6) The streets must be properly located and constructed with regard
to the proposed traffic functions, including the minimization of
through traffic on minor streets and the protection of major street
capacities from excessive marginal access.
(7) The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of
all streets and highways must conform to the Comprehensive Plan
and/or Official Map, as amended.
B. Road classifications. All Township roads are grouped into the following
classifications based upon function:
(1) Freeway. A freeway is a limited access roadway.
(2) Highway. A highway is usually a state or interstate highway which
provides intermunicipal up to interstate traffic of substantial
volumes. A highway usually accommodates operating speeds up to
55 miles per hour (mph).
(3) Arterial. An arterial is a high-volume street that should have no
access other than by way of a collector street. Its function is to
conduct traffic between communities and activity centers and to
connect communities to highways and freeways. The design speed
is typically 45 mph or more. (See Illustration 1.105)
(4) Collector. As the principal traffic artery within residential or
commercial areas, the collector carries relatively high traffic
volumes and conveys traffic from arterial streets to lower-order
streets. Its function is to promote the free flow of traffic.
Consequently, the Township does not encourage parking or
residences along a collector. The collector's secondary function is
to serve abutting land uses. A collector street may also
accommodate public transit such as buses. The design speed is
typically 40 mph. (See Illustration 1.)
(5) Subcollector. The subcollector provides passage to access streets
and conveys traffic to collectors. Like the access street, the
subcollector provides frontage and access to residential lots but
also carries some through traffic to lower-order (access) streets.
The subcollector is a relatively low-volume street. The design speed
is typically 30 mph. (See Illustration 1.)
(6) Access street. The access street is designed to conduct traffic
between dwelling units and higher-order streets. As the lowestorder
street in the hierarchy, the access street carries no through
traffic and includes short streets, culs-de-sac and courts.
Subcollectors usually serve more dwellings and carry a small
105. Editor's Note: Illustration 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 173-25 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-25
144:350
volume of through traffic to one or more access streets. The design
speed is typically 20 mph. (See Illustration 1.)
(7) Alley (service street). Alleys are special-purpose service roads that
provide secondary means of access to lots.
(8) Nonresidential street. These streets serve nonresidential areas
such as retail, office or industrial. The design speed is typically 40
mph.
(9) Roadway subcollectors. Following is an illustrative figure
classification of roads in the Township: [Amended 12-1-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-17]
Table 1. Classification of Roadways
FUNCTIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF ROADWAYS
Road Number/Name Classification
I-81/Interstate 81 Freeway
U.S. 22/Allentown Boulevard Highway
PA 39/Linglestown/Hershey Road Highway
PA 443/Fishing Creek Valley Road Arterial
S.R. 2003/Oak Grove Road Arterial
T-561/Blue Ridge Avenue Arterial
T-601/Old Jonestown Road (East of PA
39)
Arterial
Various/Fairville/Piketown/Sleepy
Hollow/Pine Tree
Arterial
S.R. 2023/Red Top Road Collector
S.R. 2026/Green Hill Road Collector
T-465/Manor Drive/Sandy Hollow Road Collector
T-520/Clover Lane Collector
T-601/ Jonestown Road (West of PA 39) Collector
NOTE:
All other Township roads are classified as subcollector, access,
alley or nonresidential.
C. Street and right-of-way widths. Following are the minimum street and
right-of-way widths. A minimum four-foot shoulder shall be provided on
each side of the road when curbing is not provided. Required widths
may be increased or decreased by the Township based upon projected
traffic counts and needs of public health, safety and convenience.
§ 173-25 PLUMBING § 173-25
144:351
Table 2. Street and Right-of-Way Widths
Classification
Minimum Right-of-Way
Width
(feet)
Minimum Roadway
Width
(feet)
Highway As determined after consultation with the Township
Board of Supervisors and PennDOT
Arterial As determined after consultation with the Township
Board of Supervisors and PennDOT
Collector 50 28A
Subcollector 50 28
Access 50 26B
Nonresidential 50 30
NOTES:
AIf residences front on the collector, then the pavement width can be
increased up to 36 feet to provide two travel lanes and two parking
lanes.
BThe width of access roads can be reduced to 20 feet if on-street
parking will not be required. The developer must provide "no parking"
signs and adequate off-street parking areas that will accommodate
four parking spaces per unit.
(1) For access streets, a twenty-six-foot-wide pavement provides two
travel lanes or one travel lane with two parking lanes. For
subcollectors, a twenty-eight-foot-wide pavement provides two
travel lanes and one parking lane. [Amended 12-1-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-17]
(2) Additional street width and right-of-way may be required when
determined to be necessary by the Township in specific cases for:
(a) Public safety and convenience.
(b) Parking in commercial and industrial areas and in areas of
high-density development.
(c) Widening of existing streets where the width does not meet the
requirements of the above table.
(d) To accommodate installation of utilities, to accommodate
ponding of runoff, to provide storage of plowed snow, to
provide emergency parking, to accommodate temporary
roadway adjustments during maintenance and accidents and to
accommodate future improvements.
§ 173-25 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-25
144:352
(3) The applicant shall certify, prior to final approval of a subdivision or
land development plan, that title to any street rights-of-way are
free and clear of all liens and encumbrances and that no prior rightof-
way has been granted to any utility or any other person.
(4) When the subdivision or land development is proposed to front on
an existing Township street, the required additional right-of-way
shall be dedicated for the lots or land development proposed, and
the dedication shall not be required for the remaining portion of
the property except where the remaining portion of the property is
less than one required lot width. The required right-of-way for all of
the property fronting the existing street shall be shown on the plan
and the signed dedicatory statement shall be shown on the final
plan.
(5) In the case of a plan for a land development fronting on an existing
or proposed public street, the Township may require the developer
to improve the portion of the roadway on which the proposed
development fronts to meet the minimum roadway standard as
specified above. This shall include shoulders, embankments,
gutters, berms, sidewalks and/or curbing.
D. Street design.
(1) Horizontal curves.
(a) Where connecting street lines deflect from each other at any
one point, the lines must be connected with a true, circular
curve. (See Table 3 for the minimum radius of the center line
for the curve.)
Table 3. Minimum Radius
Type of Street
Minimum Radius
(feet)
Collector 450
Subcollector and
nonresidential
250
Access 100
(b) Straight portions of the street must be tangent to the
beginning or ending of curves. Except for access streets, there
must be a tangent of at least 100 feet between reverse curves.
For curves on freeways, arterials and collector streets, proper
superelevation must be provided as required by the Township
and the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. Brokenback
curves shall be avoided.
(c) Proper sight distance must be provided with respect to
horizontal alignment, measured along the center line, from
height of eye (3.5 feet above grade) to the height of an object
§ 173-25 PLUMBING § 173-25
144:353
on the roadway (0.5 feet). See Table 4 for the minimum
stopping sight distances which must be maintained.
Table 4. Minimum Stopping Sight Distance
Design Speed
(miles per hour)
Minimum Stopping Sight Distance
(feet)
60 650
55 550
50 475
45 400
40 325
35 250
30 200
25 150
20 125
(2) Vertical curves.
(a) Changes in grade in excess of 1% shall be joined by vertical
curves. Proper sight distance must be provided with respect to
vertical alignment by using the following K values in Table 5,
where: [Amended 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-17]
K = L/A
L = length of curve.
A = Algebraic difference of percent grade.
Table 5. K Values
K Value
Design Speed Sag Crest
60 136 151
55 115 114
50 96 84
45 79 61
40 64 44
35 49 29
30 37 19
25 26 12
20 17 7
§ 173-25 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-25
144:354
(b) Sight distance shall be measured along the center line, from
height of eye (3.5 feet) to height of an object on the roadway
(0.5 feet).
(3) Grades.
(a) The center-line grades of streets must meet the following
requirements: [Amended 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-17]
Table 6. Grades of Streets
Type of Street Minimum Grade Maximum Grade
Collector 1% 6%
Subcollector and
nonresidential
1% 8%
Access 1% 10%
(b) In all grades exceeding 1%, vertical curves must be used and
must be designed for proper sight distance.
(c) Crown. The slope of the crown on streets shall be at least 1/4
inch per foot but not more than 3/8 inch per foot as directed by
the Township Engineer. This applies only to straight sections of
road. Where a curve is superelevated to reduce lateral
vehicular acceleration as required by the design speed of the
road, the crown requirement is eliminated.
(d) Slope of embankments. Embankment slopes shall be a
maximum 3:1 fill and 2:1 cut or be designed in accordance with
Roadside Design Guide by the American Association of State
Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO), current
edition. Slopes shall be suitably planted with perennial grasses
or other vegetation to prevent erosion.
E. Intersection design.
(1) Angle of intersections. Intersections must be as nearly at right
angles as possible. However, in no case should they deviate from
the standards in Table 7.
Table 7. Angle of Intersections
Type of Intersection
Highway
with
Highway
Arterial
with
Arterial
Highway
with
Arterial All Others
Angle of
intersection
of street
center
lines
90º 90º 90º 75º to
105º
§ 173-25 PLUMBING § 173-25
144:355
(2) Intersection grades. Intersections must be approached on all sides
by leveling areas. These leveling areas must have a minimum
length of 50 feet (measured from the intersection of the center
lines) within which no grade may exceed a maximum of 4%.
(3) Intersection curve radii.
(a) Design of curb or edge of pavement must take into account
such conditions as types of turning vehicles (including buses
and emergency vehicles), likely speeds of traffic, angle of turn,
number of lanes and whether parking is permitted. However,
curb or edge of pavement radii must not be less than the
following: [Amended 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-17]
Table 8. Curb/Edge of Pavement Radii
Type of Intersection
Minimum Simple Curve
Radii of Curb or Edge of
Pavement
(feet)
All intersections with
freeways, highways, and
arterials
40 or more, as determined
after consultation with the
Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation and/or the
Township
Collector with subcollector or
nonresidential
35
Subcollector collector with
subcollector or nonresidential
35
Access with collector,
subcollector, nonresidential
35
(b) Three-centered compound curves equivalent to the above
minimum simple curves are permitted and encouraged where
applicable. In the design of compound curves, the ratio of the
flatter radius to the sharper radius should not exceed 1.5.
Sudden changes between curves of widely different radii or
between long tangent and sharp curves shall be avoided.
(4) Distance between intersections. The required distance between
intersections shall be in accordance with the following in Table 9:
§ 173-25 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-25
144:356
Table 9. Distance Between Intersections
Type of Intersection
Collector
with
Collector
Collector
with
Subcollector
or
Nonresidential
Subcollector
or
Nonresidential
with
Subcollector
or
Nonresidential
Subcollector or
Nonresidential
with Access
All
Others
Minimum
distance
between
center lines
of
intersections
600 feet 350 feet 250 feet 125 feet 800
feet
(5) Multiple intersections. Intersections involving the junction of more
than two streets shall be prohibited.
(6) Clear sight triangles.
(a) Proper sight lines must be maintained at all street
intersections. Measured along the center line of the street,
there shall be a clear sight triangle with sides in accordance
with Table 10. D is measured from the intersection of the street
center lines along the center line of each street. [Amended
12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-17]
Table 10. Clear Sight Triangles
Type of Street
Clear Sight Triangle Side
(feet)
Highway or arterial collector 150
Subcollector, access or
nonresidential
75
(b) No building, structure, planting or other obstruction higher
than three feet above the roadway grade shall be permitted
within the clear sight triangle. However, posts, utility poles and
trees not exceeding one foot in diameter may be permitted if
not obstructing the view of traffic.
(7) Intersection safe stopping sight distance. All intersections shall be
designed to provide adequate sight distance with regard to both
horizontal and vertical alignment in accordance with A Policy on
Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, AASHTO, current
edition.
F. Street construction. [Amended 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-17]
§ 173-25 PLUMBING § 173-25
144:357
(1) All street materials, construction procedures and testing
requirements shall conform to the current editions of PennDOT
Publications 408, 418, 203, 236M Standards for Roadway
Construction (RC) Series 10-104, Publication 111 Traffic Standards
- Signing (TC) Series 7700 and Traffic Standards Signs (TC) Series
7800, current edition, including all supplemental specifications,
circular letters and amendments. All streets and related features
shall be constructed to the line, grade and dimensions shown on
the plans, profiles, cross sections and typical sections.
(2) The pavement base and wearing surface shall be constructed in
accordance with the pavement sections in the following Table 11:
Table 11. Minimum Pavement Section
Material Specifications
Street
Classification
Subbase
Material
Base
Material
Binder
Course
Wearing
Course
State Route As determined by the Board of Supervisors after
consultation with the Township Engineer and the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PennDOT)
Arterial,
collector and
nonresidential
Subbase
(No. 2A
crushed
aggregate),
6 inches
depth
SAMD
HMA base
course, PG
64-22, 0.3
to < 3
million
ESALs,
25.0 mm
mix, 5
inches
depth
SAMD
HMA
binder
course, PG
64-22, 0.3
to < 3
million
ESALs,
12.5 mm
mix, 2
inches
depth**
SAMD HMA
wearing
course, PG
64-22, 0.3
to < 3
million
ESALs, 9.5
mm mix,
1 1/2 inches
depth, SRL*
§ 173-25 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-25
144:358
Table 11. Minimum Pavement Section
Material Specifications
Street
Classification
Subbase
Material
Base
Material
Binder
Course
Wearing
Course
Subcollector,
access and
alley
Subbase
(No. 2A)
crushed
aggregate),
6 inches
depth
SAMD
HMA base
course, PG
64-22, 0 to
< 0.3
million
ESALs,
25.0 mm
mix, 4
inches
depth
SAMD
HMA
binder
course, PG
64-22, 0.3
to < 3
million
ESALs,
12.5 mm
mix, 2
inches
depth, or
bituminous
surface
treatment
(PennDOT
Pub. 408,
Section
480)**
SAMD HMA
wearing
course, PG
64-22, 0.3
to < 3
million
ESALs, 9.5
mm mix,
1 1/2 inches
depth, SRL*
* Skid resistance level (SRL) determination.
** Bituminous surface treatment or binder course (as appropriate)
must be installed before the first frost of the winter season unless
the road is overlaid with HMA wearing course.
Two-Way Average Daily
Traffic
SRL Alternates
20,000 and above E None
5,001 to 20,000 H Blend of E/M, blend of E/
G
3,001 to 5,000 G Blend of H/H, blend of E/
L
1,001 to 3,000 M Blend of H/L, blend of G/
L, blend of E/L
0 to 1,000 L Any
§ 173-25 PLUMBING § 173-25
144:359
Blends are 50% by weight of each aggregate. Blend the
aggregates using an approved method.
A pavement design, in accordance with PennDOT Publication 242,
shall be required for all facilities or developments that will
generate a total of 100 or more equivalent 18-kip single-axle loads
(ESALs) in a given weekday in all directions. The pavement design
requirements will be determined by the Transportation Engineer
and will take into account the supporting road networks' capacity
to handle additional heavy vehicle loading. No proposed pavement
section determined by the pavement design may be less than the
minimum requirements of § 1-73-25F(2).
A pavement design, in accordance with PennDOT Publication 242,
may be submitted for facilities or developments that will generate
less than 100 or more equivalent 18-kip single-axle loads (ESALs)
in a given weekday in all directions. The pavement design
requirements will be determined by the Transportation Engineer
and will take into account the supporting road networks' capacity
to handle additional heavy vehicle loading. The design will assume
300,000 equivalent 18-kip single-axle loads (ESALs) over 20 years.
Also, the California bearing ratio (CBR) determined in laboratory
testing shall not exceed a value of 10.
(3) A pavement design, in accordance with PennDOT Publication 242,
shall be required for all facilities or developments that will
generate a total of 100 or more equivalent 18-kip single-axle loads
(ESALs) in a given weekday in all directions. The pavement design
requirements will be determined by the Transportation Engineer
and will take into account the supporting road networks' capacity
to handle additional heavy vehicle loading. No proposed pavement
section determined by the pavement design may be less than the
minimum requirements of § 173-25F(2).
(4) A pavement design, in accordance with PennDOT Publication 242,
may be submitted for facilities or developments that will generate
less than 100 or more equivalent 18-kip single-axle loads (ESALs)
in a given weekday in all directions. The pavement design
requirements will be determined by the Transportation Engineer
and will take into account the supporting road networks' capacity
to handle additional heavy vehicle loading. The design will assume
300,000 equivalent 18-kip single-axle loads (ESALs) over 20 years.
Also, the California bearing ratio (CBR) determined in laboratory
testing shall not exceed a value of 10.
(5) Stakeout.
(a) All property pins or monuments will be witnessed with suitable
four-foot-high stakes before the beginning of construction.
(b) All streets prior to being rough cut shall be laid out in
accordance with approved design plans, using hubs and stakes
§ 173-25 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-25
144:360
set at fifty-foot intervals to provide both horizontal and vertical
control.
(6) Excavation.
(a) This work shall include excavation for roadways, shoulders,
ditches, drainage structures and stream channels.
(b) During construction, excavation shall be graded to drain to E &
S controls and adequate receiving drainage facilities.
(c) All suitable excavated materials as determined by the
Township may be used for the construction and preparation of
the roadway embankments, subgrade, shoulders, driveway
approaches, ditches, structures, stream channels and required
backfilling.
(7) Embankment.
(a) Placement of embankment shall be in layers not exceeding
eight inches prior to compaction.
(b) Material for the construction of embankment shall consist of
all excavation on the project except such materials as may be
determined to be unsuitable under PennDOT Publication 408,
current edition, and when required will include borrow
excavation.
(8) Subgrade.
(a) Prior to preparation of the subgrade, install all required
underground utilities and storm drainage within the cartway.
Compact trench backfill in layers (eight-inch maximum).
(b) No subbase or base course shall be placed on wet, frozen or
unsuitable material. Damaged areas of unsuitable material
shall be promptly and satisfactorily reshaped and recompacted
or removed and replaced. Unsuitable material includes sod,
stumps, spongy soil and excess rock.
(c) Where necessary as determined by the Township based on field
conditions, provide proper underdrain to address springs,
spring-like conditions or spongy areas.
(d) All large rocks, boulders or ledges shall be broken off six
inches below the improved subgrade surface.
(e) All surface irregularities exceeding 1/2 inch shall be corrected
by loosening the surface and removing or adding material as
required. The corrected area and surrounding surface shall be
compacted by rolling.
(f) Completed subgrade shall be maintained and protected in
advance of the succeeding operation.
§ 173-25 PLUMBING § 173-25
144:361
(g) Subgrade shall be inspected and approved by the Township
before placing of the base course.
(h) Use all means necessary to control dust on and near the work
and on and near all off-site borrow areas if such dust is caused
by the contractor's operations during performance of the work
or is a result of the condition in which the contractor leaves the
site. Thoroughly moisten all surfaces as required to prevent
dust from being a nuisance to the public, neighbors and
concurrent performance of other work on the site.
(9) Base course.
(a) Base course material shall not be placed on soft, muddy or
frozen areas. Unsatisfactory base conditions shall be
corrected.
(b) All foreign material shall be removed from the base course
prior to placing binder course.
(c) The base shall be compacted with a vibrating tamper or
vibrating roller.
(d) The base shall have binder applied as soon as possible to avoid
damage to the base.
(e) The base course shall be inspected by the Township prior to the
placing of binder course.
(10)Wearing course.
(a) Wearing course shall not be installed until a minimum of 75%
of units within the current phase are completely constructed,
including all landscaping.
(b) Base course and subsequent pavement layers shall be
inspected by the Township prior to placing the next
appropriate layer.
(c) Provide bituminous tack coat as required.
(d) Surface course shall be sealed using AC-20 where it comes in
contact with other structures, including curbs, inlets and
manholes.
(e) Paving notches shall conform to PennDOT RC-28.
(11) Shoulders. Shoulders shall be provided where curbing is not
required and shall conform to the same standards as the adjoining
road pavement section. Shoulders shall be provided by approval of
the Township Engineer and shall be consistent with the "intended
use" of the shoulder.
(12) Curbs.
§ 173-25 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-25
144:362
(a) Curbing shall be plain cement concrete and shall be vertical
conforming to PennDOT RC-64M or slant or rolled curb.
Details for slant curb and rolled curb have been added to the
chapter as Exhibits VIII and IX.106
(b) Other curbs shall only be installed at the discretion of the
Township, and the curb detail must be approved by the
Township Engineer.
(c) Terminal concrete curb ends shall have an exposed face of two
inches and be tapered two feet.
(d) Backfill must be placed within 48 hours after form removal and
this backfill shall be compacted in place along the rear face to
within six inches of the top of the curb.
(e) When curbing is to be removed to construct a driveway or
access drive, the length of curbing to be removed shall be
carried to the nearest expansion joint or saw cut if the joint is
located more than five feet from the end of the curb removal.
Curb replacement shall be formed and shaped to the required
driveway width. The driveway or access drive shall be
depressed to a height of 1 1/2 inches above the finishing
paving grade in accordance with RC-64M. Sawcutting of
existing curbs along the road surface is not an allowable
substitute for a depressed curb per RC-64M.
(f) No partial breaking out of the curb shall be permitted without
approval by the Township.
(g) Curbs shall be inspected by the Township after the forms have
been placed, just prior to the pouring of concrete and after
completion of all work.
(h) Curb cuts are permitted to allow overland flow through swales
for the purpose of disconnecting impervious surfaces. Special
design consideration is needed for swales at driveways and
sidewalks.
(13) Underdrain.
(a) Underdrain or combination storm sewer and underdrain shall
conform to PennDOT RC-30.
(b) Underdrain or combination storm sewer and underdrain shall
be provided where directed by the Township and completed
prior to base course construction. At a minimum, underdrain or
combination storm sewer and underdrain shall be provided in
all cut areas.
(14) Sidewalks.
106. Editor's Note: Exhibits VIII and IX are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 173-25 PLUMBING § 173-25
144:363
(a) Sidewalks shall have a minimum of four inches of Class A
cement concrete and four inches of compacted stone base (2A).
(b) Sidewalks shall have a minimum depth of six inches where
traversed by a residential driveway and a minimum depth of
eight inches where traversed by a commercial driveway.
(c) The minimum sidewalk width shall be five feet. [Amended
6-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-08]
(d) Sidewalks shall have a one-fourth-inch-per-foot slope towards
the street.
(e) Curb ramps must be installed in accordance with ADA
requirements, including detectable warning surfaces
consisting of truncated domes per PennDOT RC-67M.
(f) Alternate sidewalk material will be permitted only where
specifically authorized by the Township.
G. Other street designs. [Amended 9-16-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-10;
1-20-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-1; 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-17]
(1) Temporary culs-de-sac.
(a) Temporary culs-de-sac shall be permitted in order to permit
future street extensions into adjoining parcels that are
included in subsequent phases of the current plan. These
temporary culs-de-sac must be indicated on the plans and be
constructed to the same standard with right-of-way as required
for a permanent cul-de-sac, minus the curbing at the terminus
of the cul-de-sac. However, curbing may be required for
drainage control. The temporary cul-de-sac shall be removed
by the developer extending the existing street. Dead-end
streets without culs-de-sac shall be prohibited.
(2) Permanent culs-de-sac.
(a) Culs-de-sac shall not be approved whenever a through street or
loop street is practicable. Culs-de-sac shall be approved only
where they are clearly the only practical design of the
subdivision.
(b) Where the right-of-way approaches or abuts the tract
boundary, a fifty-foot right-of-way width shall be extended to
the adjacent property to permit future extension of the street
at full width unless future extension is clearly impractical,
unnecessary or undesirable.
(c) Culs-de-sac shall be provided with a minimum twenty-foot-wide
by fifteen-foot-deep, as measured from the right-of-way, snow
dump area enclosed by an easement. If the cul-de-sac has
curbing, then the snow dump shall include a depressed curb.
§ 173-25 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-25
144:364
Any sidewalk that will be driven upon to access the snow dump
area shall be a minimum eight inches in depth concrete.
(d) The Township encourages cul-de-sac design to include a
curbed interior planting island, in which native vegetation or
landscaping has been retained or planted. The minimum radius
of the cul-de-sac shall be designed to adequately maneuver
emergency, maintenance, school bus and moving van vehicles.
The minimum road width shall be 20 feet. Traffic flow shall be
in one direction in a counterclockwise manner. The applicant
must provide adequate traffic signs. Interior planting islands
shall be included within the right-of-way area offered for
dedication to the Township. Consequently, a maintenance
guarantee must be submitted for review, noted on the plan, and
approved by the Township. The applicant must provide offstreet
parking for four vehicles per unit served by the cul-desac
and provide "no parking" signs.
(e) The minimum cul-de-sac length is 250 feet. Culs-de-sac shall
not exceed 1,000 feet in length except for culs-de-sac serving
less than 15 dwelling units, which shall not exceed 1,500 feet.
(f) Culs-de-sac shall not serve more than 25 units. Emergency
access must be provided for culs-de-sac serving more than 15
units.
(g) Culs-de-sac shall be provided with a vehicular turnaround
having a right-of-way diameter not less than 116 feet and a
cartway diameter not less than 96 feet.
(3) Single-access streets.
(a) Single-access streets shall be approved only where they are
clearly the only practical design of the subdivision.
(b) Where the single-access street right-of-way approaches or
abuts the tract boundary, a minimum fifty-foot-wide right-ofway
width shall be extended to the adjacent property to permit
future extension of the street at full width unless future
extension to the single-access street is clearly impractical,
unnecessary or undesirable.
(c) The maximum center-line distance from a through street to the
vehicular turnaround of a cul-de-sac shall not exceed 1,000
feet in length except for single-access streets serving less than
15 dwelling units where the maximum center-line distance may
not exceed 1,500 feet, unless a cul-de-sac intersects with the
"loop" of a loop street.
(d) The maximum center-line distance from a through street to the
intersection of a loop road with itself shall not exceed 1,000
feet in length except for single-access streets serving less than
§ 173-25 PLUMBING § 173-25
144:365
15 dwelling units, where the maximum center-line distance
may not exceed 1,500 feet.
(e) Where a cul-de-sac intersects with the "loop" of a loop street,
the maximum center-line distance along the cul-de-sac to the
vehicular turnaround shall not exceed 1,000 feet in length
except for single-access streets serving less than 15 dwelling
units, where the maximum center-line distance may not exceed
1,500 feet and the maximum center-line distance from a
through street to the intersection of a loop road with itself shall
not exceed 1,000 feet in length except for single-access streets
serving less than 15 dwelling units, where the maximum
center-line distance may not exceed 1,500 feet.
(f) The minimum single-access street length is 250 feet.
(g) The minimum center-line distance of a loop road is 250 feet.
(h) The maximum center-line distance of a loop road between the
center line intersection with itself and the terminus is not
defined.
(i) Single-access streets shall not serve more than 25 units.
Emergency access must be provided for single-access streets
serving more than 15 units.
H. Boulevard entrances. [Added 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-17107]
(1) Width. The minimum full-depth pavement width shall be 20 feet on
each side of the interior island.
(2) Right-of-way. The right-of-way width shall extend to a point 10 feet
beyond the edge of curbing, to allow room for potential sidewalks.
(3) Terminus. The boulevard shall terminate at a point clearly designed
to allow for uninterrupted access by emergency vehicles without
crossing into oncoming traffic lanes.
(4) Interior island. The Interior island shall be a minimum ten-foot
width, curbed and included within the right-of-way area offered for
dedication. However, provide a note on the plan and a suitable
maintenance agreement requiring maintenance by other than the
Township.
I. One-way street. [Added 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-17]
(1) No parking shall be permitted on either side of a one-way street,
and the street shall be signed as such. The minimum pavement
width shall be 20 feet.
J. Street names and signs.
107. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections H
through J as Subsections J through L respectively.
§ 173-25 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-25
144:366
(1) Proposed public streets which are obviously in alignment with
other existing named streets shall bear the names of the existing
streets.
(2) In no case shall the name of the proposed street duplicate an
existing public street name in the Township or in the postal district,
irrespective of the use of the suffix "street," "road," "avenue,"
"boulevard," "drive," etc.
(3) All public street names shall be subject to the approval of the Board
upon recommendation of the Planning Commission, the Fire
Company, the post office and the Dauphin County Emergency
Management Agency.
(4) Street name signs shall be placed at all existing and proposed
intersections and shall be visible from both directions. All
intersections shall have both street names on all sign posts.
[Amended 5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-5; 12-1-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-17]
(5) Street signs shall be installed and approved prior to occupancy of
the first dwelling on the new street. [Added 12-1-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-17]
(6) The type of sign, location and installation shall meet the current
federal MUTCD (Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices)
Section 2D.43 standards and be approved by the Township
Engineer and meet the following standards (as of 4/3/12): [Added
12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-17; 6-4-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-09]
(a) Size: 48 inches maximum width by nine inches in depth.
Lettering for post-mounted signs: six inches, all uppercase,
with four-inch suffix "St., "Ave." etc.
(b) For overhead street name signs: lettering should be composed
of uppercase letters at least 12 inches in height and lowercase
at least nine inches.
(c) Post material: Type B breakaway system as approved by
PennDot and listed in Publications 408, 108, and 111.
(d) Sign material: Class 3 reflective sheeting on aluminum blank
as approved by PennDOT and listed in Publication 35.
(e) Color: white legend and border on green background.
(f) Height: seven feet from the ground to the bottom of the sign.
(g) Font: Clearview Highway.
K. Streetlights.
§ 173-25 PLUMBING § 173-25
144:367
(1) For the safety, convenience and attractiveness of land
developments or subdivisions with six or more lots, on-site or
public streetlights shall be installed.
(2) Standards. Streetlights shall be installed to meet the American
National Standard RP-8, Roadway Lighting, developed by the
Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IES). In
addition, streetlights shall meet the following footcandles. The
most restrictive standard shall apply.
Type of Street Footcandles
Local streets .372
Collector streets .5557
Major or arterial streets .836
(3) Where electric service is supplied by underground methods, the
subdivider shall provide and install conduits where necessary to
accommodate the installation of a streetlighting system, prior to
the installation of streets, curbs, sidewalks and driveways.
Installation and location of conduits shall comply with the
specifications of the appropriate public utility.
L. Driveways.
(1) Private driveways shall be provided for all residences and shall
provide safe access to Township and state roads, not impede the
flow of stormwater runoff and assure sufficient area for and access
to off-street parking.
(2) At the discretion of the Board, shared driveways may be permitted
for use by a maximum of four adjacent lots, each of which shall
have the required street frontage for the applicable zoning district
or as required for interior lots. An ownership and maintenance
agreement for the driveway, approved by the Township Solicitor,
shall be required. Shared driveways shall not be less than 12 feet in
width and they shall be located in a right-of-way at least 25 feet
wide.
(3) Grade. The driveway within the legal right-of-way of any Township
or state road shall not exceed a grade of 5%. The remaining
driveway beyond the right-of-way shall not exceed a grade of 12%.
(4) Material. The minimum required paved area of a single-family or
two-family residential driveway shall consist of one of the following
materials and be in accordance with § 195-138 of the West Hanover
Township Zoning Ordinance: [Amended 1-20-1997 by Ord. No.
1997-1; 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-17]
(a) Bituminous surface constructed with six inches of 2A subbase
and Superpave asphalt mix design, hot mix asphalt wearing
§ 173-25 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-25
144:368
course, PG 64-22, 0.3 to < 3 million ESALs, 9.5 mm mix, 2.5
inches depth, SRL-L (minimum).
(b) Brick paver designed for single-axle trucks. Construction
specifications must be submitted and approved by the
Township.
(c) Reinforced pavement systems, such as geoblocks, designed for
single-axle traffic. Construction specifications must be
submitted and approved by the Township.
(d) At a minimum the pavement within the right-of-way shall
match the existing road pavement.108
(5) Width. No driveway shall be less than 12 feet wide within the limits
of the legal right-of-way.
(6) Drainage. The gutter line, wherever possible, shall be maintained
as a paved swale and shall have a minimum depth of four inches
and a minimum width of 24 inches. Where required by the
Township, culverts or pipes shall be installed under driveways to
provide unobstructed flow of water in swales and shall be approved
by the Township Engineer. Also, driveway longitudinal drainage
shall be provided as needed. [Amended 12-1-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-17]
(7) Angle of intersection. The desirable intersection angle of the center
line of the driveway and the street shall be 90º. However, when 90º
is not practicable, the minimum angle between the driveway and
the street shall be not less than 75º.
(8) Curbs. All driveways in curb areas must have a depressed curb at
the driveway entrance in accordance with RC-64M, PennDOT
Publication 72.
(9) For new or expanded driveways not associated with new home
construction, a zoning permit is required prior to the start of
construction of any driveway. The Township will inspect the
proposed driveway location to determine whether a drainage pipe
or other facility is required to provide proper drainage. If a
drainage pipe is required, it shall be as required by the Township
and shall be installed by the applicant. The applicant shall also be
responsible for any additional grading required by the Township to
maintain proper drainage. [Amended 12-1-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-17]
(10) Sight distance. Adequate sight distance shall be provided in
accordance with Exhibit VI and Exhibit VII.109
108. Editor's Note: Former Subsection L(5), Material, added 1-20-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-1,
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-17.
This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former, Subsection L(6) through
(11) as Subsection L(5) through (10), respectively.
§ 173-25 PLUMBING § 173-26
144:369
§ 173-26. Curbs and gutters.
§ 173-27. Sidewalks and pedestrian pathways. [Amended 7-20-1998
by Ord. No. 1998-7]
A. Curbs.
(1) Curbs must be installed in residential developments with greater
than six lots which have a typical lot width of 100 feet or less at the
street line, or in commercial and industrial areas at the discretion
of the Township. Curbs must be installed on both sides of the
interior streets and on the side of streets which bound the
development. Curbs may also be required in developments where
lot widths are greater than 100 feet if the character of the
neighborhood is such that they are considered necessary to control
stormwater runoff, prevent erosion, prevent deterioration of
streets or provide safety.
(2) Parking lot curbs may have depressed sections to allow stormwater
into rain gardens. Bumper stops shall be provided for each parking
space where large sections of depressed curbs are used for sheet
flow off a parking area onto infiltration areas. [Added 7-6-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-07110]
(3) Refer to § 173-25F(12) for curb construction specifications.
B. Gutters. In areas where curbing is not required, suitable gutters,
swales or ditches must be installed to avoid erosion and must be of
sufficient cross section to permit the unimpeded flow of stormwater.
The Township may require the installation of curbs and/or gutters in
any development where the evidence indicates that such improvements
are necessary for proper drainage.
A. Requirements. In addition to § 195-126 of Chapter 195, Zoning,
sidewalks shall be installed as follows:
(1) In residential developments with greater than six lots, which have a
typical lot width of 100 feet or less, at the street line.
(2) Sidewalks shall be required in developments where lot widths at
the street line are greater than 100 feet and the character of the
neighborhood is such that they are considered necessary.
(3) Sidewalks shall be required in circumstances where it would be
desirable to link sidewalks in existing, adjoining or proposed
developments.
(4) Sidewalks shall be required in circumstances where it would be
desirable to connect sidewalks to community facilities such as
109. Editor's Note: Exhibits VI and VII are included at the end of this chapter.
110. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former Subsection
A(2) as Subsection A(3).
§ 173-26 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-27
144:370
schools, bus stops, shopping areas, restaurants and recreation
areas. [Amended 7-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-12]
(5) Sidewalks and pedestrian pathways shall be required in areas
where they would provide safer avenues of personal exercise
(walking, jogging, bicycling, etc.) within a neighborhood or
extended community, and not purely as a destination between two
points. [Added 7-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-12]
(6) Sidewalks and pedestrian pathways shall be required in areas
where they would reduce future dependency on motorized vehicles
for local travel within the nearby community. [Added 7-6-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-12]
B. Placement.
(1) All sidewalks must be constructed no closer than one foot to the
street right-of-way line and extended toward the curb or gutter
line. A grass-planting strip, not less than two feet in width, shall be
provided between the curb or roadway edge and the sidewalk.
(2) Sidewalks must be installed on both sides of the interior streets and
on one side of streets which bound the developments.
(3) The Township may waive requirements for sidewalks on one or
both sides of the street where pedestrian interior pathways, in the
judgment of the Township, better serve the needs of the subdivision
or land development.
C. Construction specifications. [Amended 7-6-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-12]
(1) Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with § 173-25F(14) of
this article. Pervious concrete should be considered as a materiel of
choice where expected lot impervious coverage is greater than
25%.
(2) Pedestrian bridges, when not part of a roadway bridge, shall be
approved by the Township Engineer.
D. Maintenance. Maintenance of sidewalks shall be the responsibility of
the property owner.
E. Pedestrian pathways. [Amended 7-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-12]
(1) Pedestrian pathways, in accordance with § 195-88E of Chapter 195,
Zoning, shall be provided to provide improved circulation or access
within or between developments and to schools, playgrounds,
parks, shopping centers, restaurants, transportation, open spaces
and other facilities.
(2) Pedestrian path easements must be at least 10 feet in width and
have a travel surface of a least five feet in width. A minimum ten-
§ 173-27 PLUMBING § 173-27
144:371
§ 173-28. Monuments and markers.
foot right-of-way shall be provided for pedestrian paths which may
be located along the rear or side property lines.
(3) All pedestrian paths shall be constructed of a stone subbase and a
paved walking surface, with adequate stormwater drainage along
side and under the path, in accordance with the Township
pedestrian path plan and/or the discretion of the Township
Engineer. (See Exhibits X, XI, XII for examples.111) Pervious
pavement should be considered as a material of choice.
A. Specifications. Monuments and markers must be constructed as
follows:
Table 12. Monument and Marker Specifications
Material Minimum Size
Monument
Concrete 4 inches by 4 inches by
30 inches
Marker
Iron pipes or iron or
steel bars
15 inches by 3/4 inch
(diameter)
B. Placement and marking. Monuments and markers must be placed by a
registered engineer or surveyor so that the scored or marked point
coincides exactly with the point of intersection of the lines being
monumented. They must be set so that the top of the monument or
marker is level with the surface of the surrounding ground. The
monument must be permanently marked on top.
C. Location of monuments. Monuments must be set:
(1) At the intersection of lines forming angles in the boundaries of the
original tract of the development or subdivision.
(2) On the right-of-way lines of the streets at the following locations:
(a) At least one monument at each intersection.
(b) At changes in direction of street lines, excluding curb arcs at
intersections.
(c) At each end of curbed street line, excluding curb arcs at
intersections.
(d) An intermediate monument wherever topographical or other
conditions make it impossible to sight between two otherwise
required monuments.
111. Editor's Note: Exhibits X, XI and XII are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 173-27 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-28
144:372
§ 173-29. Erosion and sedimentation control approval and NPDES
permit. [Amended 3-21-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-3]
(e) At such other places along the line of streets as may be
determined by the Township to be necessary so that any street
may be readily defined in the future.
(3) The concrete monuments must be installed and inspected by the
Township prior to final plan approval. However, a modification of
requirements can be requested to post financial security in lieu of
installing monuments if it is determined that the monuments would
be disturbed by construction activities.
(4) Location of markers. Markers must be set:
(a) At the beginning and ending of curves along street property
lines.
(b) At points where lot lines intersect curves either front or rear.
(c) At angles in property lines of lots.
(d) At all other lot corners.
(5) Removal. Any monuments or markers that are removed must be
replaced by a registered engineer or surveyor at the expense of the
lot owner or person removing them.
A. For earth disturbance activities of 5,000 square feet or more, an erosion
and sedimentation control plan must be submitted to and approved by
the Dauphin County Conservation District in accordance with Chapter
102 regulations, Section 102.4.b.
B. For earth disturbance activities of one acre or more, an NPDES general
permit or individual permit must be obtained from the Dauphin County
Conservation District and/or Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
C. During construction, any earth disturbance activities of one acre or
more shall be required to meet the same stormwater peak flow
requirements as post-construction stormwater. [Added 6-4-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-10112]
D. A Township zoning permit must be obtained in accordance with Chapter
195, Zoning, § 195-97.
E. The above approvals and/or permits must be obtained prior to approval
of the final subdivision or land development plan and prior to the
commencement of earth disturbance activities.
112. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections C
through F as Subsections D through G, respectively.
§ 173-28 PLUMBING § 173-29
144:373
§ 173-30. Wetlands.
F. Besides subdivision and land development, erosion and sedimentation
control permits may also be required for installation of stormwater
facilities, forestry activities, large individual residential construction,
land clearing, and other earth disturbance. [Added 7-6-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-09]
G. Any earth disturbance activity which requires a permit which results in
either soil piles or barren ground shall require piles or barren ground to
be seeded within 20 days of formation, if no land development activities
are present on the site. [Added 7-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-09]
A. The applicant must determine if wetlands exist on the property in the
proposed subdivision or land development. The applicant must also
determine if any wetlands will be impacted off-site from the property.
This determination shall be made in accordance with the current
requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) and
the United States Army Corps of Engineers (USCOE).
B. If there are no wetlands on the property and no wetlands will be
impacted off-site, then the following certification note must be placed
on the plan:
"I, (signature of consultant and date), hereby certify that there are no
wetlands on the subject property, the proposed project will not impact
off-site wetlands, and wetland permits are not required from the state
or federal government."
C. If there are wetlands on the property and/or wetlands will be impacted
off-site, then the following is required:
(1) A wetland study must be submitted to the Township prepared in
accordance with the current requirements of the DEP and USCOE
and the following:
(a) A narrative describing the site features, including:
[1] Property address.
[2] Property tax number.
[3] Property owner's name.
[4] Location of the property in the Township.
[5] Date of the site survey.
[6] General conditions and findings of the site survey.
[7] Permit requirements.
§ 173-29 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-30
144:374
§ 173-31. Fire protection reservoirs.
(2) A drawing (scale one inch equals 100 feet), on a sheet or series of
sheets no larger than 17 inches by 22 inches in size, containing the
following information:
(a) The outline of the property and area being studied.
(b) Wetlands from the National Wetlands Inventory (NWI) and
Dauphin County Soil Survey, delineated.
(c) The extent and type of hydric soils, delineated and identified
using the Hydric Soils of Dauphin County.
(d) The extent of hydrophytic plans delineated and identified.
(e) Streams, watercourses and floodplains delineated and the
hydrology of the area.
(f) Wetland delineation.
(g) Drawing scale.
(h) Property tax number.
(3) A copy of any required completed permit applications such as a
water obstruction and encroachment permit or general permit
from the DEP and a Section 404 permit from USCOE.
(4) Wetlands shall be verified by a site visit.
D. The following certification notes shall be placed on the subdivision or
land development plan sheet that will be recorded and the notes shall
also be placed on the plan included in the wetlands study:
(1) "I, (signature of consultant and date), hereby certify that a
wetlands study was conducted in accordance with Township, state
and federal requirements and this plan accurately depicts the
extent of those wetlands."
(2) "I, (signature of applicant and date), hereby certify that I am in
receipt and aware of the results of the wetlands study."
E. Any approval by the Township shall be contingent on full compliance
with any requirements of any regulatory agency, and no action by the
Township shall be relied on in lieu of a permit issued by the appropriate
agency.
A. The Township may require that any subdivision of more than six lots,
and which includes a new public road, be provided with underground
water storage reservoirs for fire protection.
B. A maximum of one ten-thousand-gallon reservoir per up to 10 lots may
be required. Reservoirs shall be located in the public right-of-way or on
§ 173-30 PLUMBING § 173-31
144:375
§ 173-32. Water supply.
private lots with easements to be approved by the Township Solicitor.
Reservoir locations shall be approved by the Township and Fire
Company. Fire protection reservoirs shall be public improvements and
shall be maintained by the Fire Company.
C. Reservoirs shall be fiberglass or other approved material installed to
the standards required for oil storage tanks. Design and installation
shall be approved by the Township and the Fire Company.
D. Reservoirs shall have a standpipe and a fill valve designed and installed
to specifications approved by the Fire Company.
E. Reservoirs shall be included among the improvements which require
Township inspection during construction. Inspections shall be
conducted by the Township and the Fire Company. Before acceptance of
improvements by the Township and issuance of occupancy permits,
reservoirs shall be inspected and tested by the Fire Company and an
approval issued, in writing, by them.
F. Where a proposed subdivision includes an existing or proposed pond, a
dry hydrant may be required by the Township. Hydrants shall be
installed at the edge of the right-of-way of a street and shall be of a
material and shall have a connection approved by the Fire Company.
A. Each new dwelling created within the Township shall be individually
self-sufficient for water supply, and the water supply system shall be
public, community or individually owned, maintained and operated by
the owners of each dwelling. Individual or community wells may be
located within the undivided open space, with appropriate easements,
at the discretion of the Township.
B. The provisions of this section are intended to ensure that each dwelling
unit and each commercial or industrial building in all subdivisions and
land developments hereafter granted approval shall have an adequate
supply of potable water for domestic use and, where feasible, for fire
protection.
C. Water facilities feasibility report.
(1) A feasibility report concerning the availability and/or adaptability
of water facilities in or near a proposed land development shall be
prepared and submitted to the Township in the following cases:
(a) A subdivision involving six or more lots, or a subdivision
involving five lots or less and requiring new streets or other
public improvements.
(b) A land development involving 5,000 square feet or more of
total impervious coverage, whether existing or proposed.
§ 173-31 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-32
144:376
(2) This report shall be prepared by a professional engineer licensed in
the State of Pennsylvania. Two copies of the report shall be
submitted in conjunction with the preliminary plan. The Township
Codes and Zoning Officer shall distribute one copy of the report to
the Township Engineer for his review and recommendation. Water
facilities will be provided in accordance with the water facilities
feasibility report. Where there is a choice, the desired alternatives
in descending order are public, community and private.
(3) The feasibility report shall consist of an examination of the possible
use of an on-site water supply system(s) and the impact of such
system(s) on groundwater supplies, or connection to an existing
water supply system or the construction of a central community
system. The report shall include the distance from the nearest
public water system and the capacity of the existing system to
accommodate the proposed land development, where applicable.
D. On-lot water supply. Where there is no existing public water supply and
the feasibility report indicates that connection to a public water supply
system and a central community system is not feasible, each lot in the
development must be provided with an individual on-lot water supply
system in accordance with minimum standards approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. The Board of
Supervisors shall approve the use of individual on-lot water supply
systems (wells) when:
(1) This report indicates that justification of the project necessitates
consideration of this type of water supply.
(2) The anticipated water supply yield is adequate for the type of
development proposed.
(3) The installation of such systems will not endanger or decrease the
groundwater supplies to adjacent properties.
E. Public water supply.
(1) Where there is an existing public water supply system within 500
feet of a proposed subdivision of two lots or within 1,000 feet of a
proposed land development with 5,000 square feet or more of
existing and/or proposed impervious coverage, or a subdivision of
three lots or more, and such existing system has adequate planned
capacity and is willing to serve that subdivision or land
development, a complete water supply system connected to the
existing public water supply system must be provided. Fire
hydrants must be installed in accordance with § 173-32F(5).
(2) Where plans approved by a public water supplier provide for the
installation of such public water supply facilities within four years,
the developer shall provide a complete water supply system ready
to be connected to the proposed water main supply system.
§ 173-32 PLUMBING § 173-32
144:377
(3) Where connection to a public water supply is possible or feasible,
the plan for the installation of such water supply system must be
prepared for the development with cooperation of the appropriate
water utility company and approved by the Township Engineer.
Upon completion of the water supply system, a reproducible asbuilt
plan of the system must be filed with the Township.
F. Central community water supply.
(1) The design and installation of central community water supply
systems shall be subject to the approval of the Board and of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP),
and such system shall be further subject to satisfactory provisions
for its maintenance. Standards and materials for the construction
of any central water supply system shall meet or exceed those
requirements described in the Public Water Supply Manual of the
PADEP and shall be subject to the approval of the Township
Engineer. Where a permit is required by said Department, it shall
be presented as evidence of such review and approval before
construction commences.
(2) Ownership and maintenance of central community water supply
and distribution systems shall be the responsibility of an
organization formed and operated in accordance with the
provisions of § 173-34 of this chapter.
(3) Wherever a central community water supply system is proposed for
a development, a distribution system shall be designed to furnish
an adequate supply of water to each lot, with adequate water main
sizes and fire hydrant locations to meet the specifications of the
Middle States Department Association of Fire Underwriters.
(4) The developer shall be required to show proof through a water
feasibility study that the central community water system will have
an adequate supply of potable water for domestic or other
proposed use and that each unit or building will have an adequate
supply for purposes of fire protection and that such system meets
the minimum standards controlling water storage and production
capabilities for domestic and fire use. A technical study shall be
submitted for Township and Township Fire Company or Public
Safety Advisory Board review which shall include information as
described in the Public Water Supply Manual of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection as well as other
information as may be required by the Township Fire Company or
PADEP. [Amended 7-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-06]
(5) Wherever a central community water system is provided, fire
hydrants suitable for the coupling of equipment serving the
Township shall be installed as specified by the Insurance Services
Offices of Pennsylvania. Location of hydrants shall be approved by
the Township upon review and recommendation by the Township
§ 173-32 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-32
144:378
§ 173-33. Sewage service facilities.
Fire Company or Public Safety Advisory Board. [Amended
7-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-06]
(a) Generally, all fire hydrants will be located on an eight-inch line
or a looped six-inch line. Where a dead-end line is required to
contain a fire hydrant, the portion of the line between the main
loop and the hydrant shall be an eight-inch minimum diameter.
(b) Fire hydrants shall be spaced in a development so that all
proposed building(s) will be no more than 600 feet from the
hydrant measured along traveled ways.
(c) All central water systems must provide a minimum of 500 gpm
at a residual pressure of 20 pounds per square inch for a twohour
period.
A. Each new dwelling created within the Township shall be individually
self-sufficient for sewage disposal and the sewage disposal system shall
be public, community or individually owned, maintained and operated
by the owners of each dwelling. Individual or community sewage
facilities may be located within the undivided open space, with
appropriate easements, at the discretion of the Township.
B. All final plan submission shall include completed Sewage Facilities
Planning Modules for land development provided by PADEP. The final
plan review process shall not commence until completed Planning
Modules have been submitted, including test pit and percolation test
information for each proposed lot. The commencement of the final plan
review process shall thus coincide with the commencement of the
Planning Module review process.
(1) Planning Module review shall be in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act of 1965, P.L. 1535, No. 537, as
amended;113 PADEP's Chapter 71 regulations, Administration of
Sewage Facilities; the Township's 537 Plan; and this and other
Township ordinances.
C. The Planning Module, copies of Form A, Notification of Potential Effect
of Proposed Action on Archaeological and Historical Resources, and all
related correspondence to and from the Pennsylvania Historic and
Museum Commission (PHMC) shall be forwarded to the Township
Historical Commission and the Planning Commission. Such copies shall
be forwarded to the Township within one week of sending or receipt of
these materials by the applicant.
D. Measures to mitigate the impact of the proposed development upon
archaeological and historic resources, agreed to with PHMC, shall be
reviewed by the Township during the plan process, shall meet the
113. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 173-32 PLUMBING § 173-33
144:379
requirements of Township ordinances and shall be subject to review
and approval by the Board.
E. The developer shall provide the most advanced and highest type of
sanitary sewage disposal facility consistent with existing physical,
geographical and geological conditions of the site, and in conformance
with all applicable Township, state, county and federal ordinances and/
or regulations.
F. Based upon the results of the Planning Module, public, community or
individual sewage service facilities must be provided.
G. On-lot sewage disposal systems.
(1) Where public sanitary sewers are not feasible, the use of on-lot
sewage disposal systems shall be permitted. The use of such on-lot
systems is governed by regulations of the PADEP and enforced by
the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer (SEO).
(2) Prior to the approval of any plan showing on-lot sewage disposal
systems, the developer shall have had soils testing performed on
each lot to determine the suitability for such systems, and shall
have secured the approval of the Township SEO and/or PADEP
through the use of a Planning Module for Land Development. Each
on-lot sewage disposal system must be inspected and approved by
the Township SEO and/or PADEP.
(3) An individual sewage disposal system shall be located on the lot
which it serves, or within adjacent open space that is designated
for that purpose.
H. Public sanitary sewers.
(1) A subdivision of three or more lots or land development that is
proposed within the Ultimate (twenty-year) Service Area
designated within the Act 537 Plan shall connect to the public
sanitary sewer system.
(2) If connection to a public sanitary system is proposed, a written
application requesting the allocation and reservation of sanitary
sewer capacity for the development must be submitted with the
preliminary plan (where such reservation is required).
(3) The design and construction of the public sanitary sewer system
shall be in accordance with the following:
(a) Construction of the system shall be at the developer's own
expense and shall not commence until application has been
made to, and written authorization to proceed with such
construction has been obtained from, the Township. The plan
for the installation of a sanitary sewer system must be
prepared for the development and approved by the Township
Water and Sewer Authority and the DEP, when applicable. All
§ 173-33 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-33
144:380
construction shall be in conformance with such approved plans
and specifications. Upon completion of the sanitary sewer
installation, a reproducible as-built plan of the system must be
filed with the Township.
(b) Pipe sizes for sanitary sewer mains and sewer laterals and
locations for manholes shall meet current Township Water and
Sewer Authority specifications. The Township Water and Sewer
Authority must inspect the sewer line before it is covered.
(c) Sanitary sewers shall not be used to carry stormwater.
I. Community sewage systems.
(1) Community sewage systems shall be permitted if it can be shown
that such an approach would provide more reliable and effective
treatment of waste than individual on-lot systems or a community
system is required as part of open space planning.
(2) Community sewage systems may be installed only in subdivisions of
six lots or more. The maximum permitted building density, as
required by provisions of Chapter 195, Zoning, shall not be
permitted to be altered by installation of a community sewage
system.
(3) Systems shall be approved by and permission to construct any
facility shall be received from the DEP prior to construction.
(4) The community sewage system shall be located on a separate lot
under the ownership of an organization approved by the Township.
The lot shall be used solely for the community service system and
for no other purposes except passive or active recreation,
silviculture, horticulture and similar uses. The area of the lot shall
be of sufficient size to accommodate the system, the required area
for a complete alternate or replacement system and all required
setbacks.
(5) All facilities shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from the
property lines of the tract, private lots or from buildings. The limits
of spray fields of a spray irrigation system shall be set back a
minimum of 200 feet from property lines of the tract, private lots or
from buildings, or the requirements of PADEP, whichever is greater.
(6) A Level Three planting screen in accordance with Chapter 195,
Zoning, shall be provided to buffer the facility from private lots and
adjacent tracts.
(7) Ownership and maintenance of all systems and property shall be
the responsibility of an organization formed and operated in
accordance with the provisions of § 173-34 of this chapter.
(8) The Township shall have the right to professionally inspect and test
community service systems at any time. The Township may require
§ 173-33 PLUMBING § 173-33
144:381
§ 173-34. Common facilities.
the owner to provide the results of regular professional testing
of the system when the Township deems necessary. The costs of
inspections and testing shall be the responsibility of the owner.
J. All sewage service facilities shall be constructed and maintained in
compliance with the Township's Sewage Facilities Plan.
A. Ownership standards. Facilities to be held in common, such as central
community water supply or community sewage service systems, shall
be held using one of the following methods of ownership subject to the
approval of the Board:
(1) Homeowners' association. The facilities may be held in common
ownership by a homeowners' association. The association shall be
formed and operated in accordance with the provisions of
Subsection B of this section.
(2) Condominium. The facilities may be held as common element under
a condominium agreement. Such agreement shall be in
conformance with the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act of
1980.114
B. Homeowners' association regulations. The following regulations shall
be considered minimum standards governing the homeowners'
association:
(1) Bylaws describing the formation and the duties of the association,
including the responsibilities for maintenance of the common open
areas, shall be defined and presented to the Township for review
and approval as part of the final plan submission.
(2) Membership shall be mandatory by all residents served by the
facility. Membership and voting rights shall be defined.
(3) Rights and duties of the Township and members of the association,
in the event of a breach of the covenants and restrictions, shall be
defined.
(4) The bylaws shall include a statement which grants to the
association the legal authority to place liens on the properties of
members who are delinquent in the payment of their dues. The
bylaws shall also grant the Township such power, but not the duty,
to maintain the common facilities, and to assess the cost of the
same as provided within the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.115
C. Maintenance standards.
114. Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
115. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 173-33 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-34
144:382
(1) The common facility shall be operated and maintained by a
professional organization specializing in the required services and
approved by the Board. The agreement between the association or
condominium and the professional organization shall be subject to
review by the Township Solicitor and approval by the Board.
(2) The Township shall, upon request, be given access to all records of
the association or condominium and all records of the professional
organization relating to the common facility.
(3) Delinquency. In the event that the association or condominium
established to own and maintain the common facility, or any
successor organization, shall at any time after the establishment of
the common facility fail to maintain said facility in reasonable
working order and condition in accordance with established
standards, guidelines and agreements, the Board may serve
written notice upon the association or condominium and/or the
residents served by the common facility, stating:
(a) The manner in which the association or condominium has
failed to maintain the common facility in reasonable condition.
(b) A demand that such deficiencies of maintenance be corrected
within 30 days.
(c) The date and places of hearing which shall be held within 45
days of the notice.
(4) Public hearing. At such a hearing, the Board may amend the terms
of the original notice concerning the deficiencies and may give an
extension of time within which they shall be corrected. If the
deficiencies or any modifications thereof were not corrected within
30 days of the notice of delinquencies referred to above or within
any extension, the Township may enter upon the common facility
and maintain the same for a period of one year. Said maintenance
by the Township shall not constitute a taking of said common
facility, nor vest in the public any rights to use the same.
Maintenance of the common facility shall include all activities
related to operation of the facility, including but not limited to
administration, assessing and collecting of fees, testing and
necessary improvements.
(5) Burden of proof. Before the expiration of said year, the Township
shall, upon its initiative or upon request of the association or
condominium, call a public meeting upon notice to the association
or condominium and to the residents served by the facility. At the
hearing, the association or condominium or the residents shall
show cause why such maintenance by the Township shall not, at the
option of the Township, continue for a succeeding year. If the Board
shall determine that the association or condominium is ready,
willing and able to maintain said common facility in reasonable
working order and condition, the Township shall cease to maintain
§ 173-34 PLUMBING § 173-34
144:383
§ 173-35. Utilities.
the common facility at the end of said year. If the Board shall
determine that the association or condominium is not ready, willing
and able to maintain said common facility in a reasonable working
order and condition, the Township may, in its discretion, continue
to maintain said common facility during the next succeeding year
and, subject to a similar hearing and determination, in each year
thereafter.
(6) Any and all costs to the Township incurred as a result of
maintenance of the common facility and any additional penalties or
fees set by the Township shall be paid by the association or
condominium and the residents served by the facility. Any invoices
from the Township for such costs which remain unpaid following a
period of 45 days, shall be subject to an increase of 1.5% per month
(18% annually) and a lien which shall be filed against the premises
of the owner or resident in the same manner as other municipal
claims.
A. Underground wiring.
(1) All electric, telephone, television and other communication
facilities, both main and service lines servicing new developments,
shall be provided by underground wiring within easements or
dedicated public rights-of-way unless special conditions require
otherwise. Utilities shall be installed in accordance with the
prevailing standards and practices of the utility or other companies
providing such services.
(2) Lots which abut existing easements or public rights-of-way where
overhead electric or telephone distribution supply lines and service
connections have been previously installed may be supplied with
electric and telephone service from those overhead lines, but the
service connections from the utilities' overhead lines shall be
installed underground. In the case of existing overhead utilities,
should a road widening or an extension of service or other such
condition occur as a result of the subdivision and necessitate the
replacement or relocation of such utilities, such replacement or
relocation shall be underground.
(3) Where overhead lines are permitted as the exception, the
placement and alignment of poles shall be designed to lessen the
visual impact of overhead lines as follows: Alignments and pole
locations shall be carefully routed to avoid locations along
horizons; clearing swaths through tree areas shall be avoided by
selective cutting and a staggered alignment; trees shall be planted
in open areas and at key locations to minimize the view of the poles
and the alignments; and alignments shall follow rear lot lines and
other alignments where possible.
§ 173-34 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-35
144:384
§ 173-36. Utility, conservation and drainage easements.
(4) Year-round Level Three screening in accordance with Chapter 195,
Zoning, of any utility apparatus appearing above the surface of the
ground, other than utility poles, shall be required.
(5) All underground utilities shall be put in place, connected and
approved before the streets are constructed, where such utilities
lie under the proposed cartway, and before any person is permitted
to occupy any building to be served by such utility.
B. Underground utility notifications. In accordance with the provisions of
PA Act 38, as amended,116 any applicant shall contact all applicable
utilities and accurately determine and show the location and depths of
all underground utilities within the boundaries of the tract proposed for
development and in the vicinity of any proposed off-site improvement,
prior to excavation. A list of all the applicable utilities, their telephone
numbers and the PA One Call Service Number shall appear on the cover
page of plans submitted for review. [Amended 7-6-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-08]
C. Aboveground utilities. Not withstanding vertical separation distance
required by the utilities, no line shall sway closer than 15 feet above the
ground directly below the wire at any point along the line. [Added
7-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-08]
A. Width and location. Easements with a minimum width of 20 feet shall be
provided for poles, wires, conduits, storm and sanitary sewers, gas,
water and heat mains and/or other utility lines intended to service the
abutting lots and for access to facilities. Easements with a minimum
width of 20 feet shall be provided for pedestrian paths. Also, easements
shall be provided for all stormwater management facilities. Whenever
possible, such easements shall be centered on the side or rear lot lines
or along the front lines.
B. Petroleum, gas and electric transmission lines. Where any petroleum,
petroleum products, natural gas or electric transmission line traverses
a subdivision or a land development, the developer shall confer with the
applicable transmission or distribution company to determine the
minimum distance which shall be required between each structure and
the center line of such transmission line. Additionally, a letter from the
owner of the transmission line stating any conditions on the use of the
parcel and the right-of-way width, or a copy of the recorded agreement
which shall contain the above data, shall be required to be submitted
with a preliminary plan application.
C. Watercourse, drainage channel, stream, pond or lake. A drainage
easement shall be provided where a subdivision and/or land
development is traversed by a watercourse, drainage channel, stream,
116. Editor's Note: See 73 P.S. § 176 et seq.
§ 173-35 PLUMBING § 173-36
144:385
§ 173-37. Parkland and recreation requirements. [Amended
3-5-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-3; 9-2-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-06]
pond or lake. The easement width shall be determined by the Township
Engineer and it shall conform substantially with the line of the
watercourse, drainage channel, stream, pond or lake, and its width
shall be adequate to preserve the unimpeded flow of natural drainage
or for the purpose of widening, deepening, relocating, improving or
protecting such drainage facilities or for the purpose of installing a
stormwater sewer. Under no circumstances shall the easement be less
than 20 feet.
A. Purpose. All residential subdivisions or land development plans
submitted after the effective date of this chapter shall provide for
suitable open space and/or recreation land in the Township in order to:
(1) Ensure adequate recreational areas and facilities to serve the
future residents of the Township in accordance with the Township's
Comprehensive Recreation, Park, and Open Space Plan and the
Township Ped/Path Plan.
(2) Maintain compliance with Township recreational standards and
similar guidelines as developed by the National Recreation and
Parks Association.
(3) Reduce increasing use pressure on existing recreational areas and
facilities in the Township.
(4) Ensure that all present and future residents have the opportunity to
engage in many and varied recreational pursuits.
B. Exemptions from dedicating public land for public recreation:
(1) Any single- and/or multifamily residential subdivision or land
development plan for which preliminary or final plan has been
submitted prior to the effective date of this chapter which is
ultimately approved and development is substantially completed
within five years of approval.
(2) Any residential subdivision or land development plan, whether
single, and/or multifamily, that contains less than 50 dwelling units
may be exempted by the Board of Supervisors from dedicating land
for recreational purpose, but shall pay the fee-in-lieu of land
dedication as provided by this chapter. Requests for the exemption
of land dedications shall be in writing to the Board of Supervisors.
(3) Any nonresidential land development plan is exempted from
dedicating land for recreational purposes and shall be exempt from
paying the fee-in-lieu of land dedication. Mixed use developments
shall have the nonresidential component of the development
exempt from dedicating land for recreational purposes, and exempt
from paying the fee-in-lieu of dedicated land. The residential
§ 173-36 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-37
144:386
component of the mixed use development shall be required to
dedicate land and/or pay the fee-in-lieu.
(4) Minor subdivisions involving lot add-ons and yard extensions with
no new residential development shall be exempt from land
dedication. Requests for the exemption of land dedications shall be
in writing to the Board of Supervisors.
C. Land requirements for public park and recreation land (determining
"N").
(1) The amount of land in acres required to be provided for
recreational purposes for residential subdivisions or land
development plans not exempted from the provisions of this article
is based on the planned level of service (LOS) standard defined in
the "Methodology Report" of the West Hanover Township
Recreation, Park and Open Space Plan. The minimum land required
to be dedicated for public parks shall be calculated as follows:
(a) Single-family residential developments. In the case of a singlefamily
subdivision or land development project, the applicant
shall provide a minimum of 0.06 acres (approximately 2,613.60
square feet) of public recreation land for each building lot or
dwelling unit.
(b) Multifamily residential developments. In the case of a
multifamily land development project, the applicant shall
provide a minimum of 0.06 acres (approximately 2,613.60
square feet) of public recreational land for each dwelling unit
in the multifamily development.
(c) In mixed development projects involving any combination of
single-family, multifamily and/or nonresidential developments,
the applicant shall calculate the recreation land area
requirements for the residential component only in the
calculation of land area ("N").
(2) Land to be dedicated for public use shall conform to standards of
the West Hanover Township Comprehensive Park, Recreation and
Open Space Plan and/or Ped/Path Plan guidelines and § 173-37D of
this chapter.
(3) Such land set aside for recreation uses shall be suitable to serve the
purpose of active and/or passive recreation by reason of its size,
shape, location and topography in accordance with the guidelines
established in the Comprehensive Park, Recreation and Open
Space Plan and/or Ped/Path Plan and shall be subject to the
approval of the Board of Supervisors upon recommendation of the
West Hanover Township Parks and Recreation Board.
D. Recreation land area and location criteria. The Township Parks and
Recreation Board, Planning Commission and the Board of Supervisors,
§ 173-37 PLUMBING § 173-37
144:387
in exercising their duties regarding the approval of subdivision and land
development plans, shall consider the following criteria in determining
whether to approve the proposed location of public recreation land
within the applicant's subdivision or land development plans:
(1) Recreation areas and ped/path system land.
(a) Site or sites shall be in conformance with the Township's
Comprehensive Park, Recreation and Open Space Plan and/or
Ped/Path Plan.
(b) Site or sites to be used by the public shall be easily and safely
accessible from all areas of the development to be served, have
good ingress and egress and have access to a public road;
however, no public road shall traverse the site or sites.
(c) Site or sites shall have suitable topography and soil conditions
for use and development as a recreation area.
(d) Recreation areas shall consist of one contiguous tract of land
with a minimum size of two acres.
(e) Site or sites necessary for public park use shall be suitable for
development as a particular type of park may warrant. The
Township will categorize park sites using the standards
established by the National Recreation and Parks Association,
as amended, and the Township's Park and Recreation Plan
[e.g., Park, Recreation, Open Space and Greenway Guidelines
(1996), Park Planning Guidelines (2000)].
(f) Applicants designing and developing public recreation areas
shall consider standards established by the National
Recreation and Parks Association or similar standards and
provide evidence as to how these standards were incorporated
into the reservation and design of public park land.
(g) Site or sites for public use shall be easily accessible to essential
utilities, such as water, sewer and electric.
(h) Site or sites designed for play fields and general recreational
uses shall meet minimum size requirements for usable acreage
with respect to National Recreation and Parks Association
standards with 75% of such area having a maximum slope of
5%.
(i) If the site or sites have been disturbed or altered prior to
dedication, the applicant shall improve it (e.g., grading, topsoil
replacement, seeding, etc.) as near as possible to the condition
acceptable to the Township for use as public parkland.
E. Dedication of public recreational land to the Township.
§ 173-37 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-37
144:388
(1) The West Hanover Township Board of Supervisors shall determine
whether the land to be dedicated for public use is suitable for
public dedication and use. Prior to Board of Supervisor approval of
public recreation areas to be dedicated to the Township, the
Township Park and Recreation Board shall make its
recommendation in writing to the Board of Supervisors as whether
the dedication should be accepted by the Township based on the
following standards:
(a) Recreation land dedicated to the Township shall serve a valid
public purpose and shall be suitable for recreational purposes
by reason of size, shape, location topography and access.
(b) Recreation land dedicated to the Township shall meet the
recreation land criteria of § 173-37D(1) of this chapter and
other relevant recreational guidelines adopted by reference or
adopted by the Township in the West Hanover Township
Comprehensive Recreation, Park and Open Space Plan, as
amended.
(2) When the Board of Supervisors deems it to be in the public interest
to accept dedicated land, such acceptance shall be by means of a
signed resolution to which the property deed and description of the
dedicated recreation area shall be attached.
F. Private reservation of recreational land.
(1) As provided in § 173-37G of this chapter, the Board of Supervisors
may accept the private reservation of recreation areas as a
percentage of the required acreage of park and recreation land in
lieu of public land dedication. The private land set aside for these
purposes shall be suitable in size, dimensions and topography in
relation to the relation to the proposed use and shall meet all the
requirements of § 173-37D(1) of this chapter.
(2) The applicant shall satisfy to the Board of Supervisors that
adequate provisions are in place to assure permanent retention of
all parkland and that all future maintenance of such parkland or
common areas is appropriately addressed by the owner of the
property or a bona fide organization or by providing for and
establishing an organization responsible for the ownership and
maintenance of recreation areas.
(3) Such organization shall not be dissolved nor shall it dispose of the
private recreation area by sale or otherwise, except to an
organization conceived and established to own and maintain the
recreation area, without first offering to dedicate the same to the
Township.
G. Fee in lieu of public park and recreation land dedication.
§ 173-37 PLUMBING § 173-37
144:389
(1) In accordance with § 173-37B(2) and (3) of this chapter or upon
recommendation of the West Hanover Township Park and
Recreation Board, or where the Board of Supervisors agrees with
the applicant that because of size, shape, location, access,
topography or other physical features; or there is nonconformance
with the Township's Park and Recreation Plan; or that it is
impractical to dedicate recreation land to the Township or set aside
recreation land as required by this article, the Board of Supervisors
shall require a payment of a fee in lieu of dedication of such land.
The fee in lieu of land dedication shall be based on the fair market
value (FMV) of improved buildable lots on the property. [Amended
5-3-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-05]
(2) Standards for determining the fair market value (FMV) of buildable
lots.
(a) Where a fee contribution is made in lieu of required land
dedication, the value or amount of such contributions shall be
based upon "fair market value" (FMV) of buildable residential
land at the time of the filing of the final plan with the Township
or the first final plan phase of a subdivision or land
development plan consisting of multiple phases. [Amended
5-3-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-05]
(b) The Board of Supervisors shall determine the "fair market
value" (FMV) based upon a written appraisal report prepared
by the developer or applicant and signed by an appraiser
licensed as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and
certified by such appraiser to be a fair and reasonable
appraisal of such land. The FMV appraisal report shall be
submitted with the final plan application. The appraisal shall
be made prior to the filing of the final plan or final plan phase.
However, in no case shall a FMV appraisal be conducted more
than 120 days from the date of plan submission to the
Township. If more than one year lapses from the filing of the
final plan, the applicant/developer shall submit a new
appraisal.
(c) Fair market value (FMV) shall be based upon an appraisal of a
buildable acre of land, where "buildable" is defined for this
purpose as a typical area of land within the subdivision or land
development with a slope of less than 7%, and not located in an
area subject to flooding, containing stormwater management
facilities, easements, or other similar environmental
restrictions; and as though approved utilities are present.
[Amended 5-3-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-05]
(d) In accordance with § 173-37G(2)(b) above, the approved FMV
for a buildable acre shall be adjusted with each phased final
plan submission to keep current with actual land value if the
subdivision and land development is planned in development
§ 173-37 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-37
144:390
phases over multiple years as permitted by this chapter.
[Amended 5-3-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-05]
(e) The Township, upon the recommendation of the Board of
Supervisors, may refuse to accept any FMV appraisal from any
developer or applicant for good cause shown. If the applicant
or developer and the Township are unable to agree upon a
FMV appraisal, the appraisal shall be submitted to and
recertified by another professional appraiser licensed as such
in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and chosen mutually by
the Township and the applicant or developer. The appraisal
certified by the second appraiser shall be presumed fair and
reasonable and shall be the final FMV appraisal. In the event
that a second appraiser is chosen, fees for the services of said
appraisal shall be paid equally by the Township and the
applicant or developer. [Amended 5-3-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-05]
(3) Determining the amount of fee in lieu of land dedication. The
amount of fee to be paid in lieu of dedication of land shall be based
on the results of the applicant's FMV appraisal report and the
following formula, where "N" equals the required number of acres
of parkland as per § 173-37C of this chapter: [Amended 5-3-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-05]
"N" x (FMV of one buildable acre) = Fee
Examples:
SF Residential Development with 72 homes on 72 lots
(4.32 acres required) x (FMV per acre of $25,000) = $108,000
MF Residential with 48 units
(2.88 acres) x (FMV per acre of $25,000) = $72,000
(4) Any fees authorized under this subsection shall, upon its receipt by
the Township, be deposited in an interest bearing account, clearly
identifying the specific recreation facilities for which the fee was
received. Interest earned on such accounts shall become funds of
that account. Fees-in-lieu of public park and recreation land shall
be paid in one lump sum prior to recording the phase of the final
plan for which the fees are calculated. Funds from such accounts
shall be expended only in properly allocable portions of the cost to
construct the specific recreation facilities for which the funds were
collected.
(5) Upon request of any person who paid any fee under this subsection,
the Township shall refund such fee, plus interest accumulated
thereon from the date of payment, if the Township has failed to
utilize the fee paid for the purposes set forth in this section.
[Amended 8-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-07]
§ 173-37 PLUMBING § 173-37
144:391
H. Use of fee-in-lieu of public park and recreation land dedication. Upon
agreement by the applicant, the Township may accept fees-in-lieu of
public or private park and recreation land dedication. See Exhibit
XIII.117 The fees paid from the subdivision and/or land development
should be used for recreational purposes, which are reasonably
accessible to the inhabitants of the development that is the source of
the fees-in-lieu of land dedication. In addition, if determined by the
Board of Supervisors that the neighborhood area for which the fees
were collected is adequately served by recreation land and facilities,
the fees may be used for: [Amended 5-21-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-06; 8-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-07]
(1) Acquisition of land and development of facilities at a centralized
"community-wide park" as recommended in the Comprehensive
Recreation, Park and Open Space Plan of 2000, as amended,
provided that the development is within the borders of the
Township.
(2) Acquisition of land and development of facilities for a "communitywide
ped/path system" as planned in the West Hanover Township
Ped/Path Plan, as amended; provided that the development is
within the radius of the ped/path system as specified in the West
Hanover Township Ped/Path Plan, as amended.
(3) Acquisition of land and development of existing facilities within a
"neighborhood park or community park" as recommended by West
Hanover Comprehensive Recreation, Park and Open Space Plan of
2000 as amended; provided that the development is within the
radius recommended in the West Hanover Comprehensive
Recreation, Park and Open Space Plan of 2000, as amended.
(4) Improvement of planned and existing single common community
recreation facilities unique to the Township (e.g., movie screens,
rinks, swimming pools, specialized fields and other recreational
facilities).
(5) Operating and maintaining parks or recreational facilities.
I. Combination option for land dedication, facility improvements and fees.
Upon agreement by the applicant, the Township may accept the
construction of recreational facilities, the payment of fees-in-lieu
thereof, the private reservation of permanent recreational areas, the
dedication of land located in other areas of the Township, or a
combination of the above.
J. Timing of land dedication and payment of fees in lieu of land dedication
and/or required improvements.
(1) The process for dedicating public recreation areas, establishing
fees-in-lieu of land dedication, the construction of recreational
117. Editor's Note: Exhibit XIII is on file in the Township offices.
§ 173-37 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-37
144:392
facilities, the private reservation of permanent recreational areas,
the dedication of land located in other areas of the Township, or a
combination of the above may begin during the preapplication and
preliminary plan stages of the plan review process.
(2) The transfer of all land to be dedicated or reserved shall be
concluded immediately following final plan approval or approval of
the first final phase of a subdivision or land development plan
consisting of multiple phases. On the approved final plan, or the
approved first final plan phase of a subdivision or land development
plan consisting of multiple phases, the applicant shall include an
irrevocable statement of dedication guaranteeing that the required
park and recreation land described on the subdivision will be
dedicated to the Township.
(3) Where land dedication or private reserves are required, the
proposed deed(s) or dedication shall include the legal description
of the area and shall be submitted to the Township Solicitor for
review and approval during the final plan review process. Title to
the land to be dedicated shall be good and marketable and free of
all liens and encumbrances, construction debris, or other defects.
Following the approval by the Solicitor of the legal documents
related to the land dedication and all other aspects of the plan, the
Board shall accept the land dedication and approve the final
subdivision and land development and proceed with the recording
of the plan.
(4) Fees to be paid in lieu of land dedication and any other combination
of fees and agreed-upon recreational facility improvements shall be
agreed to in writing prior to final plan approval or approval of the
first final plan phase of a subdivision or land development plan
consisting of multiple phases. If the fees are to be paid in phases by
approved final plan phase, a new appraisal for land fair market
value (FMV) shall be submitted with each final plan phase.
(5) Where a fee-in-lieu of land dedication is accepted, the total fees
determined in accordance with this chapter shall be paid to the
Township prior to any recording of the final plan or recording of the
first final plan phase of a subdivision or land development plan
consisting of multiple phases. Upon approval by the Board of
Supervisors, a final plan shall be contingent upon paying all fees in
lieu, prior to the recording of the plan.
(6) Where a combination of land, fees and improvements is agreed
upon by the applicant, all requirements of § 173-37J(1), (2), and (3)
shall be met and the applicant shall describe in writing the
recreational improvements the applicant will make to the land to
make it suitable for its intended purposes, such as grading,
landscaping, facility construction, etc. Any agreed-upon park and
recreation improvements shall be itemized, addressed in a manner
consistent with other public improvements and processed in
§ 173-37 PLUMBING § 173-37
144:393
§ 173-37.1. Open space requirements. [Added 9-2-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-06]
accordance with the Township's public improvement guaranty
procedures.
A. Purpose. All residential subdivisions and/or land development plans
submitted after the effective date of this chapter shall provide for
suitable open space land in the Township in order to:
(1) Provide open space to serve the future residents of the Township in
accordance with the Township's Comprehensive Plan and the
Township Ped/Path Plan.
(2) Protect groundwater recharge areas to maintain adequate water
supply for future generations of the Township.
(3) Connect developments for the benefits of wildlife and nature trails.
(4) Protect stream corridors, wildlife corridors, environmentally
sensitive areas and open space corridors and to discourage forest
fragmentation.
B. Exemptions from dedicating land for open space. The following shall be
met in order to qualify:
(1) Any single- and/or multifamily residential subdivision or land
development plan for which preliminary or final plan has been
submitted prior to the effective date of this chapter which is
ultimately approved and development is substantially completed
within five years of approval.
(2) Minor subdivisions involving lot add-ons and yard extensions with
no new residential development shall be exempt from open space
land dedication.
C. Land requirements for open space.
(1) The amount of land in acres required to be provided for open space
for both residential subdivisions or land development plans and
nonresidential land developments not exempted from the
provisions of this article can be found in the West Hanover
Township Zoning Ordinance, § 195-86, Determining open space,
conservation features percentage, density and minimum lot size
calculations.
(2) Land to be dedicated for open space shall conform to standards of
§ 195-88, Requirements, and be defined by metes and bounds
descriptions which tie to a known point, and deeded as a
conservation easement.
§ 173-37 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-37.1
144:394
(3) Such land set aside for open space shall be suitable to serve the
purposes listed in § 195-87, Permitted uses, and Article XVI,
Environmental Protection Overlay District.
D. Open space location criteria. The Township Planning Commission and
the Board of Supervisors, in exercising their duties regarding the
approval of subdivision and land development plans, shall consider the
following criteria in determining whether to approve the proposed
location of open space land within the applicant's subdivision or land
development plans:
(1) Open space features intended or designated to be used for
recreation purposes shall be easily and safely accessible from all
areas of the development to be served, have good ingress and
egress and have access to a public road or sidewalk; however, no
public road shall traverse the site or sites. The Township shall
consider the requirements of § 195-87 and Article XVI if the open
space will have recreational uses.
(2) The open spaces size and shape shall be established in accordance
with Chapter 195, Zoning, when preserving conservation areas,
natural features or floodplains.
E. Dedication of open space to the Township.
(1) The West Hanover Township Board of Supervisors shall determine
whether the land to be dedicated is suitable for public dedication
and use. Prior to Board of Supervisor acceptance of open space
areas to be dedicated to the Township, the Township Planning
Commission shall make its recommendation in writing to the Board
of Supervisors as to whether the dedication should be accepted by
the Township based on § 195-83, Purpose, and § 195-85, Open
space areas defined, and Article XVI, Environmental Protection
Overlay Districts.
(2) When the Board of Supervisors deems it to be in the public interest
to accept dedicated land, such acceptance shall be by means of a
property deed prepared by the applicant/developer which upon
review by the Township Solicitor shall be recorded with the final
plan.
F. Private reservation of open space.
(1) The applicant shall satisfy to the Board of Supervisors that
adequate provisions are in place to assure permanent retention of
all permanent open space, and that all future maintenance of such
open areas is appropriately addressed by the owner of the property
or a bona fide organization or trust, or by providing for and
establishing an organization responsible for the ownership and
maintenance of these open space areas. Ownership and
maintenance requirements shall conform to § 195-90, Methods of
§ 173-37.1 PLUMBING § 173-37.1
144:395
§ 173-38. Existing tree and vegetation preservation.
ownership and maintenance, and § 195-91, Maintenance
standards.
(2) Such bona fide organization shall not be dissolved nor shall it
dispose of the open space by sale or otherwise, except to an
organization conceived and established to own and maintain that
area, without first offering to dedicate the same to the Township.
A. The purpose of this section is to conserve existing trees and natural
vegetation on the development site in order to protect the Township's
water and soil resources. It is the intent of this purpose to further meet
the following objectives.
(1) To preserve the existing natural systems and features of the
Township, particularly existing plant communities, habitats and
wildlife.
(2) To maintain visual buffers of natural vegetation between areas of
new development and adjacent roads and properties.
(3) To buffer the impacts of man-made developments from air
pollution, noise pollution, bright lights and glare.
(4) To assist in the control of surface stormwater runoff across lawn
and other open areas by preserving existing vegetation, hedgerows
and buffer areas of natural vegetation to slow and retain such
surface runoff.
(5) To preserve the rural character of the Township by preserving
interconnected buffer areas of natural vegetation between
developed areas.
(6) To minimize erosion and stabilize sloped areas on the development
site.
(7) To protect mature trees as assets of the site.
(8) To minimize the cost of providing and maintaining new
landscaping.
B. Conservation of existing trees and vegetation.
(1) The character and extent of existing trees and vegetation on a site
shall be fully and accurately described on the plan.
(2) Existing native trees and vegetation within a proposed
development shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
Proposed site improvements shall be located, designed and
constructed to minimize the loss of existing trees and vegetation,
particularly native woodlands, hedgerows and specimen trees.
§ 173-37.1 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-38
144:396
(3) The subdivision shall be designed to preserve existing native trees
and vegetation along roadways, property lines and lines occurring
within a site such as streams, swales, stone fences and hedgerows.
Such lines and the native vegetation associated with them shall be
preserved as buffers between adjacent properties and between
areas being subdivided within a property. Preservation shall
include ground, shrub, understory and canopy vegetation.
(4) Trees, with a caliper of six inches or more as measured at a height
of 41/2 feet above existing grade, shall not be removed unless they
are located:
(a) Within the proposed cartway or sidewalk portion of the street
right-of-way.
(b) A distance of 25 feet within the foundation area of a proposed
building.
(5) Where existing trees are removed along the street right-of-way,
supplemental planting of street trees shall be required in
accordance with Article XIX, § 195-123B, of Chapter 195, Zoning.
(6) In areas where trees are retained, the original grade level shall be
maintained, if possible, so as not to disturb trees.
(7) No clearing or earth disturbance (except for soil analysis for
proposed sewage disposal systems) shall be permitted on a site
before the completion of subdivision and land development
agreements. The determination of sight distance along roadways
shall be made graphically and not by clearing on-site prior to final
plan approval.
(8) During construction, no clearing shall be permitted on a site
beyond that minimally necessary for the specific construction
activity to be undertaken.
(9) Areas of a site which are to be preserved and areas which do not
need to be disturbed for construction of required subdivision site
improvements (roads, utilities, stormwater management facilities,
etc.) shall be protected with a limit of disturbance line.
(a) The limit of disturbance line shall be indicated on the
improvements plan.
(b) No construction activity, grading or disturbance shall be
permitted beyond the limit of the disturbance line.
(c) Limit of disturbance lines shall also be indicated for the
protection of individual specimen trees, groups of trees and
other natural features to be retained or preserved with a
development.
§ 173-38 PLUMBING § 173-38
144:397
§ 173-39. Blocks.
§ 173-40. Lots.
(d) Limit of disturbance lines shall be clearly marked in the field
prior to the start of construction activities. The lines shall be
indicated by use of snow fencing, flagged stakes or other
means acceptable to the Township for the specific condition or
feature to be protected. The lines shall be maintained
throughout the period of construction activity.
A. The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with due
regard to:
(1) Provisions of adequate sizes for buildings of the type proposed.
(2) Topography.
(3) Requirements for safe and convenient normal and emergency
vehicular and pedestrian circulation, including the avoidance of
unessential intersections with major public streets.
(4) Thoughtful and innovative design to create an attractive
community.
B. There shall be no minimum or maximum requirements for length of
blocks, except that the length(s) proposed shall not result in
inappropriate traffic patterns, unnecessary disturbance to topography
or other natural constraints, or any other conditions deemed
unsatisfactory and/or unsafe by the Township.
C. Residential blocks shall be of sufficient depth to accommodate two tiers
of lots, except where reverse frontage lots are required along a major
public street, or where prevented by the size, topographical conditions
or other inherent conditions of property, in which case the Township
may approve a single tier of lots.
A. Environmental self-sufficiency. Each new dwelling created within the
Township shall be individually self-sufficient for both water supply and
sewage disposal.
B. General standards.
(1) The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate to the
type of development and use contemplated. The average length to
width ratio for new lots shall be no greater than 4 to 1. Regarding
flag lots, only the "flag" area and not the "pole" portion shall be
required to meet this standard. Flag lots are not permitted except
in accordance with § 195-88L of Chapter 195, Zoning.
(2) Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
public street lines or radial to curved public street lines.
§ 173-38 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-40
144:398
(3) Lot area and bulk regulations shall not be less than specified by the
provisions of Chapter 195, Zoning, for the area in which the
development is located.
(4) Depth and width of lots intended for nonresidential uses shall be
adequate for the use proposed and sufficient to provide satisfactory
space for a well and on-site sewage disposal, on-site parking,
loading and unloading, setbacks and landscaping as required by
Chapter 195, Zoning.
(5) If, after subdividing, there exist substandard remnants of land, they
shall be incorporated in existing or proposed lots, or dedicated to
public use, if acceptable to the Township. Agreements dedicating
such remnants of land shall be approved by the Township Solicitor.
C. Lot frontage.
(1) Minimum lot frontage, width and area shall be controlled by the
provisions of Chapter 195, Zoning.
(2) All lots shall have direct access or access held in fee simple to a
public or private street and shall have frontage as required by
provisions of Chapter 195, Zoning.
(3) Lots utilizing driveways shall, in general, not have direct vehicular
access onto freeway, highway, arterial or collector streets. Reverse
frontage lots shall be used, wherever practical, along such streets
in order to limit traffic hazards and to provide for the efficient
movement of traffic.
(4) Double or reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where
required to prevent access onto arterial and collector streets or to
overcome specific disadvantages of topography.
D. Building setback lines. The minimum building setback lines shall be in
accordance with Chapter 195, Zoning, and the applicable sections of
this chapter.
E. Private streets. The subdivision of lots with access on private streets is
prohibited unless the private street conforms to the standards and
specifications for streets as set forth in § 173-25.
§ 173-40 PLUMBING § 173-40
144:399

ARTICLE VII
Stormwater Management
[Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-6; 11-15-1999 by Ord. No.
1999-18; 3-21-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-3]
§ 173-41. Authority.
West Hanover Township is empowered to regulate land use activities that
affect stormwater impacts, drainage and stormwater management activities
by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), the
"Stormwater Management Act," and by the Act of 1968, P.L. 805 (Act 247),
the "Municipalities Planning Code," as reenacted and amended.
§ 173-42. Applicability.
A drainage/stormwater management (hereafter referred to as "D/SWM"
plan) plan shall be submitted and approved by the Township prior to
undertaking all regulated earth disturbance activities, subdivision and land
developments and other applicable activities within the Township, in
accordance with Chapter 168, Stormwater Management.
§ 173-43. Other approvals. [Amended 6-4-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-05]
Compliance with Chapter 168, Stormwater Management, does not preclude
the need to obtain other permits and approvals as required by West Hanover
Township, Dauphin County, the Dauphin County Conservation District, the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the federal government and other
agencies. Other permits and approvals may include zoning and building
permits from the Township, an erosion and sedimentation pollution control
plan, National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit (NPDES),
water obstruction and encroachment permit, dam safety permit, submerged
lands license agreement, Sections 401 and 404 of the Clean Water Act,118
and others. The most stringent of all pertinent requirements shall apply.
All stormwater management plans shall be recorded, either as part of a
subdivision or land development plan, or an as individual document.
§ 173-44. Modification of requirements. [Amended 6-4-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-05]
A request for a modification of stormwater management and planning
requirements of Chapter 168, Stormwater Management, as part of a
subdivision or land development application, or a zoning permit application,
may be submitted, in writing, by the applicant to the Township setting forth
the grounds and all facts relied upon by the applicant in accordance with
Article XI.
§ 173-45. (Reserved)
118. Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. §§ 1341 and 1344, respectively.
§ 173-41 PLUMBING § 173-46
144:401
§ 173-46. (Reserved)
§ 173-47. (Reserved)
§ 173-48. (Reserved)
§ 173-46 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-48
144:402
ARTICLE VIII
Manufactured Home Parks
§ 173-49. Grant of power.
The Board of Supervisors of each municipality may regulate subdivision
and land development within the municipality by enacting a subdivision
and land development ordinance. Provisions regulating manufactured home
parks shall be set forth in separate and distinct articles of any subdivision
and land development ordinance adopted pursuant to the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended, Article V, § 501.119
§ 173-50. Purpose, authority and jurisdiction.
The purpose, authority and jurisdiction for a manufactured home park as
a land development are the same as those contained in Article II of this
chapter.
§ 173-51. Plan requirements and processing procedure.
The plan requirements and processing procedure for a manufactured home
park as a land development shall be in accordance with the requirements
contained in Article IV of this chapter, in addition to applicable provisions
of the West Hanover Township Manufactured Home Ordinance and Chapter
195, Zoning, as amended.
§ 173-52. Design standards and other requirements.
The arrangement and other design standards and improvements shall be
in accordance with the requirements contained in Article VI and Article
VII herein, except as otherwise specified in the West Hanover Township
Manufactured Home Ordinance and/or Chapter 195, Zoning, as amended.
A. Site location and design standards.
(1) Layout of lots.
(a) All lots shall abut a street. Side lot lines laid out in rectangular
blocks should be perpendicular or diagonal to the street at
angles not less than 30º from perpendicular. Front and rear lot
lines in rectangular blocks shall be straight and continuous.
(b) In cul-de-sac arrangements, the side lot lines shall be radial to
the street lines.
(2) Lot dimensions and area. The lot size shall be not less than 50 feet
wide at the building setback line for interior lots. Lot area shall be
in accordance with Article VIII and Article XVIII of Chapter 195,
Zoning, nor less than 5,000 square feet in area for all lots. In
119. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10501.
§ 173-49 PLUMBING § 173-52
144:403
addition, each manufactured home lot size shall: [Amended
7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-7[
(a) Fit dimensions of manufactured homes anticipated.
(b) Provide for manufactured home appurtenant structures and
appendages.
(3) Corner lots. Corner lots for manufactured home use shall have the
manufactured home situated to permit appropriate building
setback from both streets and allow proper sight distance.
(4) Building setback lines. The minimum setbacks from the lot line
shall be as follows:
(a) Park boundary property line: 10 feet.
(b) Front yard: 15 feet.
(c) Side yards.
[1] Minimum side yard: five feet
[2] Total of both side yards: 20 feet.
(d) Rear yard: 15 feet.
(5) Buffering and screening. Where a manufactured home park abuts
an interstate, principal arterial, minor arterial, collector, local
collector and/or local roads or is located adjacent to industrial or
commercial properties or districts, screening shall be provided
within a buffer yard 25 feet in width along the abutting right-of-way
or property separating the manufactured home park from the
adjacent land uses and roadways. Screening shall be provided in
accordance with Article XIX, § 195-124A, Level Two or Level Three
screening, of Chapter 195, Zoning.
B. Manufactured home park street system. The arrangement and other
design standards of streets shall be in accordance with the
requirements contained in Article VI of this chapter, except as specified
below.
(1) General requirements.
(a) A safe and convenient vehicular access shall be provided from
abutting public streets or roads.
(b) Streets shall be privately owned unless lots are intended for
sale.
(2) Design and construction requirements. The streets or roads in a
manufactured home park shall be located and built in accordance
with Article VI, § 173-25, of this chapter.
§ 173-52 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-52
144:404
C. Blocks. The size and shape of blocks shall be provided in accordance
with Article VI, § 173-39, of this chapter.
D. Sidewalks. Pedestrian interior walks may be required where essential
to assist circulation or pedestrian movement and safety to common or
important facilities in the park. These facilities shall be constructed in
accordance with Article VI, § 173-27, of this chapter.
E. Easements shall be provided in accordance with Article VI, § 173-36, of
this chapter.
F. Mailboxes. The owner shall provide and maintain a central location for
all mailboxes for persons living in the park.
G. Landscaping. Planting is required to the extent needed to provide for:
(1) Screening of objectionable views in accordance with § 195-124B of
Chapter 195, Zoning.
(2) Street trees in accordance with § 195-123B of Chapter 195, Zoning.
(3) Adequate shade in playground areas.
(4) A suitable setting for the manufactured homes and other settings.
Planting shall be in accordance with § 195-123C of Chapter 195,
Zoning, and shall be hardy, appropriate for use and location and
planted so as to thrive with normal maintenance.
H. Parking.
(1) A minimum of two off-street parking spaces shall be required per
manufactured home lot.
(2) One off-street parking space shall be located on the manufactured
home lot.
(3) Common parking areas shall be a minimum of 100 feet from a
manufactured home lot.
(4) Parking shall meet the requirements of Article XXII of Chapter 195,
Zoning.
I. Open space. Open space shall be provided in accordance with Article
XVII of Chapter 195, Zoning.
J. Recreation vehicle parking. In order to ensure that recreational
vehicles are not parked on the manufactured home park streets or on
the manufactured home lot, a landscaped recreation vehicle parking
area shall be provided in accordance with the following standards and
Article XXII of Chapter 195, Zoning:
(1) One recreation vehicle parking area shall be provided for each five
manufactured home lots.
§ 173-52 PLUMBING § 173-52
144:405
§ 173-53. Fuel supply and storage.
(2) The required parking area shall be 250 square feet for each space
required.
K. Skirting. Skirting shall be required around the entire perimeter of the
manufactured home. Skirting shall be installed in accordance with
Appendix A of the CABO One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code.
A. Natural gas system.
(1) Natural gas piping systems, when installed in manufactured home
parks, shall be maintained in conformity with accepted engineering
practices and the BOCA National Building Code.
(2) Each manufactured home lot provided with piped gas shall have an
approved shutoff valve installed upstream of the gas outlet. The
outlet shall be equipped with an approved cap to prevent
accidental discharge of gas when the outlet is not in use.
B. Liquefied petroleum gas systems.
(1) Liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) systems provided for manufactured
homes, service buildings or other structures when installed shall be
maintained in conformity with the rules and regulations of the
authority having jurisdiction and shall include the following:
(a) Systems shall be provided with safety devices to relieve
excessive pressures and shall be arranged so that the
discharge terminates at a safe location.
(b) Systems shall have at least one accessible means for shutting
off gas. Such means shall be located outside the manufactured
home and shall be maintained in effective operating condition.
(c) All LPG piping outside of the manufactured homes shall be
well-supported and protected against mechanical injury.
Undiluted liquefied petroleum gas in liquid form shall not be
conveyed through piping equipment and systems in
manufactured homes.
(d) Vessels of more than 12 and less than 60 U.S. gallons' gross
capacity may be installed on a manufactured home lot and
shall be securely but not permanently fastened to prevent
accidental overturning.
(e) No LPG vessel shall be stored or located inside or beneath any
storage cabinet, carport, manufactured home or any other
structure unless such installations are specially approved by
the authority having jurisdiction.
(f) Liquefied petroleum gas systems shall be installed in
accordance with the BOCA National Building Code.
§ 173-52 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-53
144:406
§ 173-54. Water supply facilities.
A potable water supply shall be supplied to all dwellings within a mobile
home park. The mobile home park shall be served by public water or one
central community water supply as defined by this chapter. Such systems
shall be installed according to the requirements and standards of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP). In addition to
such requirements, the water distribution system shall be constructed in
accordance with the following:
C. Fuel oil supply systems.
(1) All fuel oil supply systems provided for manufactured homes,
service buildings and other structures shall be installed and
maintained in conformity with the rules and regulations of the
authority having jurisdiction when provided.
(2) All piping from outside fuel storage tanks or cylinders to
manufactured homes shall be securely, but not permanently,
fastened in place.
(3) All fuel oil supply systems provided for manufactured homes,
service buildings and other structures shall have shutoff valves
located within five inches of storage tanks.
(4) All fuel storage tanks or cylinders shall be securely placed and shall
not be less than five feet from any manufactured home exit.
(5) Storage tanks located in areas subject to traffic shall be protected
against physical damage.
(6) Fuel oil supply systems shall be installed in accordance with the
BOCA National Building Code.
A. Individual water-riser pipes shall be located within the confined area of
the manufactured home stand at a point where the water connection
will approximate a vertical position.
B. The water-riser pipe shall extend at least four inches above ground
elevation. The pipe shall be at least 3/4 inch. The water outlet shall be
capped when a manufactured home does not occupy the lot.
C. Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of service lines,
valves and riser pipe and to protect risers from heaving and thawing
actions of the ground during freezing weather. Surface drainage shall
be diverted from the location of the riser pipe.
D. A shutoff valve below the frost line shall be provided near the waterriser
pipe of each manufactured home lot.
E. Underground stop and waste valves shall not be installed on any water
service.
§ 173-53 PLUMBING § 173-55
144:407
§ 173-55. Sewage service facilities.
Manufactured home parks shall be served by a public or one community
sewage system as defined by this chapter. For community systems, the
owner of the manufactured home park shall prepare an evaluation of the
various sewage disposal alternatives which addresses the following and
shall provide financial assurances for the repair or replacement of the
community system, providing:
§ 173-56. Required approvals of public sewer system.
All public sewer systems require approval and permitting by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. In addition, the
design of a community sewer system for a manufactured home park shall
be subject to the approval of the Township Board of Supervisors following
the review of the design by the Township Engineer. The design of a public
sewer system which represents an extension of an existing public sewer
system, owned and operated by a municipal authority, shall be subject to
the approval of the applicable municipal authority following the review of
the authority's engineer.
§ 173-57. Keeping of animals.
No animals, except domestic household pets, shall be permitted within the
park, and then only such animals as will not create a nuisance or disturb
other people.
§ 173-58. Improvement and construction requirements.
A. The cost of extending existing public sewers to the site. This shall
address the length of the extension, potential methods of conveyance
and the ability of the existing public sewer system to accommodate
flows from the site.
B. The cost of the community sewer system, including installation,
operation and maintenance costs, in comparison to the costs associated
with the extension of existing sewer lines to the site. This shall also
provide adequate justification for the selection of the community sewer
system.
A. All improvements, construction requirements and engineering
specifications for the improvements required shall be provided in
accordance with Article VI and Article VII of this chapter, in addition to
those required in the West Hanover Township Manufactured Home
Ordinance and Chapter 195, Zoning, as amended.
(1) Streetlights. Street- or on-site lights shall be provided to illuminate
streets, driveways and walkways for the safe movement of vehicles
and pedestrians at night. Their type and location shall be shown on
the subdivision or land development plan in accordance with
§ 173-25I.
§ 173-55 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-58
144:408
§ 173-59. Park rules and regulations.
The owner shall provide each occupant of the park with a copy of the
pertinent laws applicable to occupiers of manufactured home parks.
§ 173-60. Permits, fees and licenses.
B. Underground utilities. Electric, telephone and all other utilities
facilities shall be installed underground unless, in the opinion of the
Planning Commission, special conditions require otherwise.
A. Manufactured home park permits. Any person intending to develop a
tract of land as a manufactured home park shall have a permit from the
Township for each such park, issued in accordance with the
requirements contained in the West Hanover Township Manufactured
Home Ordinance and Chapter 195, Zoning, as amended.
B. Fees.
(1) At the time of filing the preliminary plan and the final plan for the
development of a tract of land for a manufactured home park, the
applicant shall be required to pay to West Hanover Township plan
processing and inspection fees as required for a subdivision or land
development in accordance with Article X of this chapter.
(2) The fee shall be required for each manufactured home lot to be
altered or added to the manufactured home park and shall
accompany all applications for alteration or extension in
accordance with Article X of this chapter.
(3) Upon final approval of the application by the West Hanover
Township Board of Supervisors, when it has been ascertained that
the proposed plan meets the requirements of this chapter and
regulations issued hereunder, a license and permit shall be issued.
C. Licenses. Any person intending to operate a manufactured home park
within the Township shall have a license from the Township for each
such park as follows:
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any manufactured
home park within West Hanover Township unless he holds a valid
license, in the name of such person, for the specific manufactured
home park. All license applications shall be made to the Township,
who shall issue a license upon compliance by the applicant with
provisions of this chapter and regulations issued hereunder and
other applicable legal requirements.
(2) Every person holding a license shall give notice, in writing, to the
Township within 10 days after having sold, transferred, or
otherwise disposed of interest in or control of any manufactured
home park. Such notice shall include the name and address of the
§ 173-58 PLUMBING § 173-60
144:409
person succeeding to the ownership or control of such
manufactured home park.
(3) Upon application, in writing, for transfer of the license and deposit
of a fee established by resolution, the license shall be transferred if
the manufactured home park is in compliance with all applicable
provisions of this chapter and regulations issued hereunder.
(4) Application for original licenses shall be in writing, signed by the
applicant, accompanied by an affidavit of the applicant as to the
truth of the application and by the deposit established by
resolution, and shall contain:
(a) The name and address of the applicant.
(b) The location and legal description of the manufactured home
park.
(c) The plan of the manufactured home park, approved by the
West Hanover Township Board of Supervisors, showing all
manufactured home lots, manufactured home stands,
structures, roads, walkways, service facilities, stormwater
drainage facilities and other pertinent information required
under Article IV of this chapter.
(5) The license shall be valid for a period of one year unless revoked by
the Township. Licensing fees shall be calculated, billed and
collected in January of each year. Fees for licenses shall be
prorated.
(6) Applications for renewal of licenses shall be made in writing by the
holders of the licenses and shall be accompanied by the fee
required by resolution for each manufactured home in the park
during the previous year; the latter shall be due and payable at the
end of each year regardless of whether or not a renewal application
is submitted. The application shall contain any change in the
information submitted since the original license was issued or the
latest renewal granted.
(7) Whenever, upon inspection of any manufactured home park, the
Township finds that conditions or practices exist which are in
violation of any provision of this chapter or regulations issued
hereunder, the Township shall give notice, in writing, in accordance
with Subsection A of this section, to the person to whom the license
was issued that unless such conditions or practices are corrected
within a reasonable period of time as specified in the notice by the
Township, the license shall be suspended. At the end of such period
the Township shall reinspect the manufactured home park and, if
such conditions or practices have not been corrected, the license
shall be suspended and notice given, in writing, of such suspension
to the person to whom the license is issued. Upon receipt of notice
of such suspension, such person shall cease operation of such
§ 173-60 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-60
144:410
§ 173-61. Inspection of manufactured home parks.
The Township of West Hanover is hereby authorized to make such
inspections as are necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with this
chapter and regulations issued hereunder.
manufactured home park, except as provided in § 173-62C(3) of
this chapter.
(8) Suspended license.
(a) Any person whose license has been suspended, or who has
received notice from the Township that his license will be
suspended unless certain conditions or practices at the
manufactured home park are corrected, may request and shall
be granted a hearing on the matter before the Township Board
of Supervisors or under the procedure provided by § 173-62 of
this chapter.
(b) Provided that, when no petition for such hearing shall have
been filed within 10 days following the day on which notice of
suspension was served, such license shall be deemed to have
been automatically revoked at the expiration of such ten-day
period.
(9) A temporary license, upon written request therefor, may be issued
by the Board of Supervisors for every manufactured home park in
existence at the effective date of this chapter, permitting the
manufactured home park to be operated during the period ending
180 days after the effective date of this chapter in accordance with
such conditions as the Township may require.
(10) The term of the temporary license shall be extended, upon written
request, for not to exceed one additional period of 180 days, if:
(a) The licensee shall have filed application for a license in
conformity with Subsection C of this section within 90 days
after the effective date of this chapter;
(b) The plans and specifications accompanying the application for
license comply with all provisions of this chapter and all other
applicable ordinances and statutes;
(c) The licensee shall have diligently endeavored to make the
existing manufactured home park conform fully to the plans
and specifications submitted with the application; and
(d) Failure to make the existing manufactured home park conform
fully to such plans and specifications shall have been due to
causes beyond the control of the licensee.
A. The Township shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon
any private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and
§ 173-60 PLUMBING § 173-61
144:411
§ 173-62. Notices, hearings and orders.
investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this chapter and
regulations issued hereunder.
B. The Township shall have the power to inspect the register containing a
record of all residents of the manufactured home park.
C. It shall be the duty of the owners or occupants of the manufactured
home park and manufactured homes contained therein, or of the person
in charge thereof, to give the Township access to such premises at
reasonable times for the purpose of inspection.
D. It shall be the duty of every occupant of the manufactured home park to
give the owner thereof or his agent or employee access to any part of
such manufactured home park or its premises at reasonable times for
the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to
effect compliance with this chapter and regulations issued hereunder,
or with any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
A. Notices. Whenever the Township determines that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of
this chapter or regulations issued hereunder, notice shall be given of
such alleged violation to the person to whom the permit or license was
issued, as hereafter provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing.
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for issuing the violation notice.
(3) Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act the
violation notice requires.
(4) Be served upon the owner or his agent as the case may require;
provided that such notice or orders shall be deemed to have been
properly served upon such owner or agent when a copy thereof has
been sent by certified mail to his last known address, or when he
has been served by such notice by any method authorized or
required by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(5) Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and regulations
issued hereunder.
B. Hearing.
(1) Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in
connection with the enforcement of any provisions of this chapter,
or regulation issued hereunder, may request a hearing on the
matter before the Board of Supervisors; provided that such a
person file in the office of the Township written petition requesting
§ 173-61 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-62
144:412
such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds
therefor within 10 days after the day the notice was served.
(2) The filing of the request for a hearing shall operate as a stay of the
notice and of the suspension except in the case of an order issued
under Subsection C(3) of this section. Upon receipt of such
petition, the Board of Supervisors shall set a time and place for
such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At
such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be
heard and to show why such notice should be modified or
withdrawn.
(3) The hearing shall be commenced not later than 10 days after the
day on which the petition was filed; provided that, upon application
of the petitioner, the Board of Supervisors may postpone the date of
the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such ten-day period
when, in its judgment, the petitioner has submitted good and
sufficient reasons for such postponement.
C. Order.
(1) After such hearing, the Board of Supervisors shall make findings as
to compliance with the provisions of this chapter and regulations
issued hereunder and shall issue an order, in writing, sustaining,
modifying or withdrawing the notice which shall be served as
provided in Subsection A of this section. Upon failure to comply
with any order sustaining or modifying a notice, the license of the
manufactured home park affected by the order shall be revoked.
(2) The proceedings at such a hearing, including the findings and
decision of the Board of Supervisors and together with a copy of
every notice and order related thereto, shall be entered as a matter
of public record of the Board of Supervisors. However, the
transcript of the proceedings need not be transcribed unless
judicial review of the decision is sought as provided by this section.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Supervisors
body may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent
jurisdiction, as provided by the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(3) Whenever the Township finds that an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect the public, it may, without
notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an
emergency and requiring that such action be taken as it may deem
necessary to meet the emergency, including the suspension of the
permit or license. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this
chapter, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to
whom such an order is directed shall comply therewith immediately
but, upon a petition to the Board of Supervisors, shall be afforded a
hearing as soon as possible. The provisions of Subsection B(1), (2)
§ 173-62 PLUMBING § 173-62
144:413
§ 173-63. Manufactured home removal permit.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, tenant or custodian of a manufactured
home to remove or attempt to remove from West Hanover Township a
manufactured home without first obtaining a removal permit from the
Township Tax Collector. A removal permit shall be granted upon payment of
a fee established by resolution and submission of the following information:
§ 173-64. Modification of requirements.
The application for a modification of requirements shall be in accordance
with the provisions of Article XI of this chapter.
§ 173-65. Administrative provisions.
The enforcement, amendments, remedies, severability and repealer
provisions shall be in accordance with the provisions of Article XII of this
chapter.
and (3) of this section shall be applicable to such hearing and the
order issued thereafter.
A. The street address of the manufactured home.
B. Names of the owners and of the occupants of the manufactured home.
C. Evidence of payment of all taxes duly assessed by the Township, the
county of Dauphin and the West Hanover Area School District.
§ 173-62 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-65
144:414
ARTICLE IX
Traffic Impact Studies
§ 173-66. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is as follows:
§ 173-67. When required. [Amended 10-2-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-11]
A transportation impact study shall be submitted regarding subdivision and
land developments which meet the following criteria:
§ 173-68. Preparation of study by engineer.
The study shall be prepared by a professional engineer registered in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania with sufficient prior traffic study
experience to qualify the engineer to perform the study and render any
opinions and recommendations set forth therein.
§ 173-69. Study area boundaries.
Study area boundaries shall be determined in accordance with the
publication referenced in § 173-70 and through discussion with the
Township Planning Commission and Township Engineer. A pre-study
conference between the applicant's traffic engineer and the Township is
encouraged.
A. To identify the adequacy of the existing transportation network and
potential impacts on the proposed subdivision and/or land
development.
B. To determine roadway improvements necessary to mitigate any impacts
resulting from the development.
A. Residential: involving 25 or more dwelling units.
B. Nonresidential: involving 100 or more new peak-hour trips.
C. Preapplication meeting: The Township Engineer may determine that a
traffic study or narrative is needed to demonstrate that the existing
traffic generated from the site will not require a modification of the
existing transportation network.
D. Other: whenever the Planning Commission or Board of Supervisors
shall find that there is a reasonable ground to believe that the existing
transportation network may be inadequate to handle the volume or
character of traffic likely to result from the proposed subdivision or
land development.
§ 173-66 PLUMBING § 173-70
144:415
§ 173-70. Contents.
The study shall be prepared in accordance with the Institute of
Transportation Engineers' Recommended Practice "Traffic Access and
Impact Studies for Site Development," current edition, and PennDOT
Publications 201 and 282, current edition, and the requirements contained
herein.
A. General site description. The site description shall include the size,
location, existing and proposed land uses, current zoning, construction
phasing, and completion date of the proposed land development. A brief
description of other major existing and proposed land developments
with the study area shall be provided.
B. Transportation facilities description.
(1) Proposed internal transportation system. Describe the proposed
vehicular bicycle and pedestrian circulation; ingress and egress
locations; existing or proposed internal roadways, including the
widths of cartways and rights-of-way; parking conditions; traffic
channelizations; and any other traffic control devices within the
site of the subdivision or land development.
(2) External transportation system. Describe the entire external
roadway system within the study area for the proposed subdivision
or land development, including major intersections, traffic control
devices, parking conditions, widths of cartways and rights-of-way,
and vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian circulation. Key intersections
in the study area shall be identified and described. All planned or
programmed public and/or private highway improvements,
including proposed roadway construction and traffic signalization,
shall be noted. Any proposed roadway improvements resulting
from surrounding developments shall also be recorded.
C. Existing traffic conditions. Existing traffic conditions shall be
determined for all roadways and intersections in the study area.
Existing traffic volumes for average daily traffic, peak highway hour(s)
traffic and peak development-generated hour(s) traffic shall be
collected. Manual traffic counts at key intersections in the study area
shall be conducted, encompassing the peak highway and developmentgenerated
hour(s). A volume capacity analysis based upon existing
volumes shall be performed during the peak-highway hour(s) and the
peak development-generated hour(s) for all roadways and key
intersections in the study area using the methodologies presented in
the current edition of the Transportation Research Board's Highway
Capacity Manual, current edition. Levels of service shall be determined
for all roadways and key intersections. Traffic signal warrant analyses
shall be conducted for all unsignalized intersections in accordance with
PennDOT Publication 201. Gap studies and queue length analysis shall
also be completed for the key intersections. The analysis of the existing
§ 173-70 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-70
144:416
road network will be based on the current geometric conditions and
traffic conditions.
D. Future trip projections.
(1) Estimation of vehicular trips to result from the proposed
development shall be completed for the average daily, peak
highway hour(s) and peak development-generated hour(s).
Vehicular trip generation rates to be used for this calculation shall
be based on ITE's Trip Generation Manual, current edition, and/or
data collected from sites with similar trip generation
characteristics. Also, an estimate of anticipated truck volumes is to
be provided. These development-generated traffic volumes shall be
provided for the in-bound and out-bound traffic movements, and
the reference source(s) and methodology followed shall be
documented. All turning movements shall be calculated. These
generated volumes shall be distributed to the study area and
assigned to the existing roadways and key intersections throughout
the study area.
(2) Provide a detailed distribution and assignment of any pass-by trips;
document all assumptions used in the distribution and assignment
phase in a manner which permits the duplication of these
calculations. Pedestrian volumes shall also be calculated, if
applicable. If school crossings are to be used, pedestrian volumes
shall be assigned to each crossing. Any characteristics of the site
that will cause particular trip generation problems shall be noted.
(3) Background growth and projected traffic from adjacent land
development shall be included in the projection of future traffic.
E. Transportation impacts.
(1) The study area roadway network is to be analyzed for safety and
capacity sufficiency for future network conditions without the
proposed development and future network conditions with the
proposed development. For each of these conditions, the following
analyses shall be completed:
(a) Mainline ADT volumes and turning movement volumes for all
key intersections within the study area will be determined for
the a.m. peak hours, p.m. peak hour and the proposed
development peak hours, if other than either the a.m. or p.m.
peak hours of the network.
(b) The effectiveness of the traffic signal control at all key
intersections will be evaluated by approach in terms of vehicle
stops and delays.
(c) Gap studies will be conducted at the proposed site access
points to evaluate the need for signal control, turn prohibitions
§ 173-70 PLUMBING § 173-70
144:417
§ 173-71. Final report.
A final report must be prepared to document the results of the traffic
impact study and the recommended improvements to accommodate the
projected traffic due to the proposed development. An executive summary
which provides a concise description of the study area, results of the
traffic analyses and any recommended improvements will be provided.
The presentation of data and analyses results should be accomplished on
or additional site access points to reduce the left-turn volume
from the site driveway(s).
(d) Queue length studies will be completed to evaluate the
potential for a backup of traffic from controlled intersections
which could impact other intersections including access points
to the proposed development.
(e) An analysis of the volume and capacity of the network and all
key intersections will be conducted utilizing the most current
Highway Capacity Manual procedures. Levels of service will be
determined and documented.
(2) The analysis of the future conditions without the proposed
development will document the adequacy of the study area network
to accommodate the traffic in the design year(s) without the
proposed development. This analysis must include a full
consideration of all committed roadway improvements to the study
area network when determining the expected levels of service.
(3) The analysis of the future conditions with the proposed
development will document the impacts created as a result of the
development.
F. Conclusions and recommended improvements. Levels of service for all
roadway segments and key intersections shall be presented in tabular
and graphic form. All roadway segments and/or key intersections
showing a level of service below D for roadway segments, signalized
intersections and unsignalized intersections shall be considered
deficient, and specific recommendations for the elimination of these
deficiencies shall be listed. This listing of recommended improvements
shall include but not be limited to the following elements: internal
circulation design, site access location and design, external roadway
and intersection design and improvements, traffic signal installation
and operation and transit design improvements. All physical roadway
improvements shall be shown on the preliminary plan. Existing and/or
future improvement transportation service shall also be addressed. For
each recommended improvement, a schematic drawing of existing and
proposed conditions, as well as a narrative description of the
improvement, including the cost and funding method of the
improvement and the implementation schedule for the improvement,
will be provided.
§ 173-70 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-71
144:418
either schematic diagrams of the study area or through the use of charts
and/or tables. All sources of data and methodologies which were used
in the study (including computer programs) must be properly referenced
and documented. Any modifications to the referenced procedures must be
properly documented to enable a review of the appropriateness of the
modification. All computer output and calculations in appendices will be
provided.
§ 173-71 PLUMBING § 173-71
144:419

ARTICLE X
Fees
§ 173-72. Filing.
At the time of filing, all plans shall be accompanied by a check, payable to
West Hanover Township, in the amount specified herein to defray the cost
of reviewing the proposed plans and required data.
§ 173-73. Fee schedule.
§ 173-74. Engineering fees.
A. The Board of Supervisors shall establish by resolution a Schedule of
Fees to be paid by the subdivider at the time of filing a preliminary or
final plan.
(1) Such fees shall include the reasonable and necessary charges by
the Township's professional consultants or Engineer for the review
and report to West Hanover Township. Such fees shall be
reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and customary
charges by the consultant or Township Engineer for similar service
in the Township, but in no event shall the fees exceed the rate or
cost charged by the consultant or Township Engineer to the
Township when fees are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on
applicants.
(2) In the event that the applicant disputes the amount of any such
fees, the applicant shall, within 10 days of the billing date, notify
the Township Secretary/Treasurer that such fees are disputed, in
which case the Township shall not delay or disapprove a
subdivision or land development application due to the applicant's
request over disputed fees.
(3) In the event that the Township and the applicant cannot agree on
the amount of review fees which are reasonable and necessary,
then the fees shall be recalculated and recertified by another
professional engineer licensed as such in this commonwealth or
consultant and chosen mutually by the Township and the applicant.
The estimate certified by the third engineer or consultant shall be
presumed fair and reasonable and shall be the final estimate. In the
event that a third engineer or consultant is so chosen, fees for the
services of said engineer or consultant shall be paid equally by the
Township and the applicant.
B. The Schedule of Fees shall be available in the Township office and in
such other places as the Township may designate.
C. No plan shall be considered by the Board of Supervisors or Planning
Commission unless all fees and charges are paid in full.
§ 173-72 PLUMBING § 173-74
144:421
§ 173-75. Attorney fees.
A. On or before the date on which the preliminary or final plan or land
development plan is to be considered by the Board of Supervisors, the
applicant shall pay or shall have paid by a check or checks, payable to
West Hanover Township, an amount determined or approved by the
Township Engineer sufficient to cover the costs of:
(1) Reviewing the plan's engineering details.
(2) Inspecting the site layout for conformance with the plan.
(3) Preparing cost estimates of required improvements (as applicable).
(4) Inspecting required improvements during installation.
(5) Final inspection on completion of installation of required
improvements.
(6) Other engineering verifications and/or administrative work
required by this chapter.
B. The engineering fees required to be paid by this section shall be
promptly paid to the Township by the applicant upon the submission of
bills to the applicant from time to time, as such fees are billed to the
Township or the West Hanover Township Water and Sewer Authority or
by their respective engineer(s). An applicant who disputes the amount
charged for engineering plan review fees shall have 14 days from
receipt of the bill to notify the municipality that the fees are being
disputed. [MPC Section 503, Subsection (1)(I)120] When fees are
disputed, the applicant and Township shall adhere to the procedure
described in Section 510(g) of the MPC, Act 247,121 and the professional
resolving the fee dispute shall be of the same profession as the
consultants whose fees are being disputed. [Amended 11-4-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-9]
A. On or before the date on which the preliminary or final plan or land
development plan is to be considered by the Board of Supervisors, the
applicant shall pay or shall have paid by a check or checks, payable to
West Hanover Township, an amount determined or approved by the
Township Solicitor sufficient to cover the legal costs, if any, incurred in:
(1) Reviewing the plan's compliance with the ordinances of the
Township or the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(2) Rendering legal services to the Township or the West Hanover
Township Water and Sewer Authority in any litigation arising from
a dispute between the applicant and the Township or Authority
pertaining to the plan.
120. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10503(1)(i).
121. See 53 P.S. 10510(g).
§ 173-74 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-75
144:422
§ 173-76. Other fees.
(3) Preparing or reviewing any special agreements related to the plan.
B. The attorney fees required to be paid by this section shall be promptly
paid to the Township by the applicant upon the submission of bills to the
applicant from time to time, as such fees are billed to the Township or
its Municipal Authority by its or their attorney(s).
A. Fees for all other permits required for and by the Township for opening
roads, connecting to municipal sewers, building construction,
manufactured home parks, etc., shall also be paid by a check payable to
the Township. At the time of filing, all plans shall be accompanied by a
check payable to the West Hanover Township Water and Sewer
Authority in an amount established by the Water and Sewer Authority to
defray the cost of reviewing the design and construction specifications
of the proposed sanitary sewers and appurtenances. [Amended
4-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-3]
B. The applicant at the time of application shall agree to pay any cost
associated with the advertising of any ordinance which may be required
to be adopted as a result of approval of the plan, or the cost of recording
any resolution associated with the acceptance of any deed of dedication
of any improvements required by the approved plan.
C. At the time of filing, all plans shall be accompanied by a check payable
to the Dauphin County Planning Commission, in the amount specified
by the county, to cover the costs of County Planning Commission review
and report.
§ 173-75 PLUMBING § 173-76
144:423

ARTICLE XI
Modification of Requirements
§ 173-77. General provisions.
Where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions
of these regulations will result in undue hardship because of peculiar
conditions pertaining to the land, the Board of Supervisors, on
recommendation of the Planning Commission, may make such reasonable
modification thereto as will not be contrary to the public interest and so
that the spirit of these regulations shall be observed and substantial justice
done.
§ 173-78. Application submission.
All requests for a modification of requirements shall be submitted, in
writing, by the applicant at the time the preliminary plan or final plan is
filed with the Planning Commission. The application shall state in full the
grounds and facts of reasonableness or hardship upon which the request
is based, the provision(s) of the ordinance involved and the minimum
modification necessary.
§ 173-79. Recording of approval.
In granting any modification of requirements, the Board of Supervisors
shall record its action and the grounds for granting any modification in its
minutes. The Board of Supervisors shall notify the applicant, in writing, of
the approval within 15 working days of the date of the Board's decision.
§ 173-80. Recording of denial.
Whenever a request for an alteration of requirements is denied, the Board
of Supervisors shall record its action and the grounds for such denial in
its minutes. The Board of Supervisors shall notify the applicant, in writing,
of its action and the grounds for such denial of any modification within 15
working days of the date of the Board's decision.
§ 173-81. Appeals.
Persons aggrieved by the granting or denial of a request from a modification
of requirements may appeal the Board of Supervisors' decision through the
use of the appeals procedure as outlined in the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.122
122. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 173-77 PLUMBING § 173-81
144:425

ARTICLE XII
Enforcement, Amendments and Remedies
§ 173-82. Administration and enforcement.
§ 173-83. Amendments.
Amendments to this chapter shall become effective only after a public
hearing held pursuant to public notice as defined, and in accordance with
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.123
A. The Board of Supervisors shall have the duty and authority for the
administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, as
specified or implied herein.
B. As directed by the Board, officials of the Township having regulatory
duties and authorities connected with or appurtenant to the
subdivision, use or development of land shall have the duty and
authority for the controlling enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter, as specified or implied herein or in other ordinances of the
Township.
C. Permits required by the Township for the erection or alteration of
buildings, the installation of sewers or sewage disposal systems or for
other appurtenant improvements to or use of the land shall not be
issued by any Township official responsible for such issuance until it has
been ascertained that the site for such building, alteration,
improvement or use is contained in a subdivision or land development
plan approved and publicly recorded in accordance with the provisions
of this and other applicable Township codes and ordinances.
D. The Township Sewage Enforcement Officer shall require that the
Sewage Module and applications for sewage disposal system permits
contain all the information necessary to ascertain that the sites for the
proposed systems are acceptable in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter, the Rules and Regulations of the Department of
Environmental Protection and applicable Township regulations.
E. The approval of a subdivision or land development plan or of any
improvement installed, or the granting of a permit for the erection or
use of a building or land therein, shall not constitute a representation,
guaranty or warranty of any kind or nature by the Township or any
official, employee or appointee thereof of the safety of any land,
improvement, property or use from any cause whatsoever, and shall
create no liability upon or a cause of action against the Township or
such official, employee or appointee for any damage that may result
pursuant thereto.
123. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 173-82 PLUMBING § 173-83
144:427
A. From the time an application for approval of a plan, whether
preliminary or final, is duly filed as provided in this chapter, and while
such application is pending approval or disapproval, no change or
amendment of this chapter, zoning or other governing ordinance or
plan shall affect the decision on such application adversely to the
applicant and the applicant shall be entitled to a decision in accordance
with the provisions of the governing ordinances or plans as they stood
at the time the application was duly approved.
B. The applicant shall be entitled to final approval in accordance with the
terms of the approved preliminary application as hereinafter provided.
However, if an application is properly and finally denied, any
subsequent application shall be subject to the intervening change in
governing regulation.
C. When an application for approval of a plan, whether preliminary or
final, has been approved without conditions or approved by the
applicant's acceptance of conditions, no subsequent change or
amendment in this chapter, zoning or other governing ordinance or
plan shall be applied to affect adversely the right of the applicant to
commence and to complete any aspect of the approved development in
accordance with the terms of such approval within five years from such
approval.
D. Where final approval is preceded by preliminary approval, the aforesaid
five-year period shall be counted from the date of the preliminary
approval. In the case of any doubt as to the terms of a preliminary
approval, the terms shall be construed in the light of the provisions of
this chapter or the governing ordinance or plans as they stood at the
time when the application for such approval was duly filed.
E. Where the applicant has substantially completed the required
improvements as depicted upon the final plan within the aforesaid fiveyear
limit, or any extension thereof as may be granted by the Board of
Supervisors, no change of any ordinance or plan enacted subsequent to
the date of filing of the preliminary plan shall modify or revoke any
aspect of the approved final plan pertaining to zoning classification or
density, lot, building, street or utility location.
F. In case of a preliminary plan calling for the installation of improvements
beyond the five-year period, a schedule shall be filed by the applicant
with the preliminary plan delineating all proposed sections as well as
deadlines within which applications for final plan approval of each
section are intended to be filed. Such schedule shall be updated
annually by the applicant on or before the anniversary of the
preliminary plan approval, until final plan approval of the final section
has been granted and any modification in the aforesaid schedule shall
be subject to approval of the Board of Supervisors in its discretion.
G. Each section in any residential subdivision or land development, except
for the last section, shall contain a minimum of 25% of the total number
§ 173-83 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-83
144:428
§ 173-84. Remedies and jurisdiction; violations and penalties.
of dwelling units as depicted on the preliminary plan, unless a lesser
percentage is approved by the Board of Supervisors in its discretion.
H. Provided that the applicant has not defaulted with regard to or violated
any of the conditions of the preliminary plan approval, including
compliance with the applicant's aforesaid schedule of submission of
final plans for the various sections, then the aforesaid protections
afforded by substantially completing the improvements depicted upon
the final plan within five years shall apply, and for any section or
sections, beyond the initial section, in which the required
improvements have not been substantially completed within said fiveyear
period, the aforesaid protections shall apply for an additional term
or terms of three years from the date of final plan approval for each
section.
I. Failure of the applicant to adhere to the aforesaid schedule of
submission of final plans for the various sections shall subject any such
section to any and all changes in this chapter, zoning and other
governing ordinance enacted by the Township subsequent to the date of
the initial preliminary plan submission.
A. Preventive remedies.
(1) In case any building, structure or land is, or is proposed to be,
erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted,
maintained, improved or used in violation of this chapter, the Board
of Supervisors or, with the Board's prior approval, an official of the
Township acting in the name of the Township may, in addition to
any other available remedies, institute and maintain appropriate
action(s) at law and/or equity to restrain, correct or abate
violations, to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or
premises.
(2) The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer
or other documents used in the process of selling or transferring
shall not exempt the seller or transferor from such penalties or
from the remedies herein provided. The Township may enjoin such
transfer or sale by action for injunction brought in any court having
jurisdiction of the subject matter and the parties.
(3) The Township may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval
necessary to further improve or develop any real property which
has been developed or which has resulted from a subdivision of real
property in violation of this chapter. This authority to deny such a
permit or approval shall apply to any of the following applicants:
(a) The owner of record at the time of such violation.
§ 173-83 PLUMBING § 173-84
144:429
(b) The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such
violation, without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee
had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(c) The current owner of record who acquired the property
subsequent to the time of violation, without regard as to
whether such current owner had actual or constructive
knowledge of the violation.
(d) The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who
acquired the property subsequent to the time of violation,
without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had actual
or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(4) As an additional condition for issuance of a permit of the granting
of an approval to any such owner, current owner, vendee or lessee
for the development of any such real property, the Township may
require compliance with the conditions that would have been
applicable to the property at the time the applicant acquired an
interest in such real property.
B. Enforcement remedies.
(1) Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated
the provisions of this subdivision or land development ordinance
shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by the Township, pay a judgment of not
more than $500 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney
fees incurred by the Township as a result thereof.
(2) No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until
the date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice. If
the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable
rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation, unless the District Justice
determining that there has been a violation further determines that
there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership or
corporation violating this chapter to have believed that there was
no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have
been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date of
the determination of a violation by the District Justice and
thereafter each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation.
(3) The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of
stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a
final adjudication of the violation and judgment.
(4) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted
to grant to any person or entity other than the Township the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
§ 173-84 WEST HANOVER CODE § 173-84
144:430
Chapter 178
TAXATION
§ 173-84 PLUMBING § 173-84
144:431

ARTICLE I
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 1-20-1986 as Ch. 24, Part 3, of the 1986 Code; amended in
its entirety 10-15-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-20]
§ 178-1. Definitions and word usage.
§ 178-2. Enactment and levy.
Pursuant to the authority granted by the Local Tax Enabling Act (53 P.S.
§ 6901 et seq.),124 the Township of West Hanover hereby levies and imposes
on each occupation engaged in by individuals within the Township of West
Hanover during the fiscal year 1986, and each fiscal year thereafter, a local
services tax. This tax shall be in addition to all other taxes of any kind
or nature heretofore levied by West Hanover Township and by any other
municipality or taxing body and shall be collected by the Manager of West
Hanover Township or by such other person as the Board of Supervisors may
from time to time hereafter appoint. Such tax shall continue in force on
a fiscal-year basis, without annual reenactment, unless the rate of tax is
subsequently changed.
A. The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
or language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
EMPLOYER — A person, partnership, association, corporation,
governmental body, agency or other entity employing one or more
individuals on a salary, wage, commission or other compensation basis,
including a self-employed person.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation
within the boundaries of the Township of West Hanover.
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business, employment or
undertaking of any type, kind or character, including services, domestic
or other, carried on or performed within the boundaries of the Township
of West Hanover for which compensation is charged or received in
salary, wages, commissions, fees for services rendered or any other
basis.
RESERVE COMPONENT OF THE ARMED FORCES — The United
States Army Reserve, United States Naval Reserve, United States
Marine Corps Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United
States Air Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
TAX — The local services tax in the amount of $52 levied by this article.
B. Word usage. "He," "his" or "him" shall include the singular and plural
number, as well as male, female and neuter genders.
124. Editor’s Note: See now 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 178-1 PLUMBING § 178-3
144:433
§ 178-3. Exemptions and exemptions claims process.
The following individuals shall be exempt from the Local Services Tax:
§ 178-4. Duties of employers.
Each employer within the Township of West Hanover, as well as those
employers situated outside of the Township of West Hanover but who have
employees who engage in business within the Township of West Hanover, is
hereby charged with the following duties:
A. Any person who served in any war or armed conflict in which the United
States was engaged and is honorably discharged or released under
honorable circumstances from active service if, as a result of military
service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double or quadruple
amputee or has a service connected disability declared by the United
State Veterans' Administration or its successor to be a total onehundred-
percent permanent disability.
B. Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the taxable
year.
C. Any individual subject to this tax who derives less than $12,000 in total
earned income per year from any occupation engaged in within the
boundaries of the Township of West Hanover, Dauphin County,
Pennsylvania, shall be exempt from the local services tax established by
this article.
D. Claim exemption process.
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
may annually file an exemption certificate with the Township and
with the individual's employer affirming that the individual
reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits from
all sources of less than $12,000 in the calendar year for which the
exemption certificate is filed.
(2) Required information for the exemption certificates: All exemption
certificates submitted to an employer and the Township shall have
attached to it a copy of all of the employee's last pay stub(s) or W-2
forms from employment within the Township for the year prior to
the fiscal year for which the employee is requesting to be exempt
from the local services tax.
(3) Upon receipt of the exemption certificate at the Township, the
Township Manager shall contact the respective employer in writing
and instruct the employer as to the status of the exemption claim.
A. To collect from each of his employees engaged by him and performing
duties or services for him within the Township of West Hanover the
aforesaid local services tax of $52 per annum. Each employee subject to
§ 178-3 WEST HANOVER CODE § 178-4
144:434
the local services tax shall be assessed a pro-rata share of the tax
for each payroll period in which the individual is engaging in an
occupation. The pro-rata share of the tax assessed on the individual for
a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the combined rate of
the local services tax for the calendar year by the number of payroll
periods established by the employer for the calendar year (example: tax
of $52 divided by 26 pay periods equals a pro-rated deduction of $2 per
pay period.).
B. To make a return and make payment of the local services tax collected
hereunder to the Manager of the Township of West Hanover, or to such
other person designated by the Board of Supervisors to collect such
taxes.
C. To deduct this tax from each employee in his employment, whether said
employee is paid by salary, wages or commissions, and whether or not
part or all of such services are performed within the Township of West
Hanover.
D. To secure from the Manager of the Township of West Hanover (or other
designated person) the tax return forms for reporting the taxes
collected. Employers are also required to secure copies of: the
exemption certificate forms; the uniform employee statement forms;
and any other relevant forms for its employees that are created by the
Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic Development.
E. To prepare and file a quarterly local services tax return showing the
computation of the pro-rated share of the tax on the forms supplied by
the Township. Each return and payment of the pro-rated tax collected
from each employee will also be accompanied by any exemption
certificates (see Subsection G) submitted by employees to the employer.
All employers shall remit the local services taxes collected, any
summary report, and any exemption forms to the Township after the
end of each quarter of the calendar year with the first payment due on
April 30. The remaining quarterly reports shall be made by each
employer on or before July 31, October 31 and January 31 of the
following year as reflected upon his employment records.
F. It is further provided that if the employer fails to file said return and pay
said tax, whether or not he makes collection thereof from the salary,
wages or commissions paid by him to said employee or employees, the
employer shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full, as
though the tax had originally been levied against him.
G. Exemption certificates:
(1) Upon receipt of an exemption certificate from an employee,
employers shall forward a copy of the exemption certificate to the
Township with the employer's quarterly return.
(2) Until otherwise instructed by the Township, the employer shall not
withhold the local services tax from an employee during the
§ 178-4 PLUMBING § 178-4
144:435
§ 178-5. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
Each employer shall use employment records from the first day of January
of each year for determining the number of employees from whom said
tax shall be deducted and paid over to the agent for collection of the
same designated by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of West
Hanover. The local services tax shall be applicable to employment in the
period beginning January 1 of the current year and ending December 31
of the current year. Taxes imposed for the first time shall become effective
from January 1 of the year and shall continue in force on a calendar year.
Supplemental reports shall be made by each employer with the quarterly
tax payments due on or before July 31, October 31 and January 31 of each
year for changes in employees as reflected upon his employment records
calendar year or the remainder of the calendar year for which the
exemption certificate applies.
(3) Employers shall ensure that exemption certificate forms are readily
available to employees at all times and shall furnish each new
employee with a form at the time of hiring.
H. Restoration of collection of tax if exemption status changes.
(1) All employers must "restart" withholding the local services tax from
an employee who files an exemption certificate in the following
circumstances:
(a) If instructed to do so by the Township;
(b) If notified by the employee that he is no longer eligible for the
exemption;
(c) If the employer pays the employee equal to or in excess of
$12,000 for the calendar year.
(2) If any of the circumstances listed above are met, the employer will
collect the local services tax from the previously exempted
employee for the remainder of that calendar year. The employer
shall withhold from the person, for the first payroll period after the
individual's earned income level causes him/her to be subject to the
tax, a lump sum equal to the amount of the tax that was not
withheld from the individual due to the exemption plus the prorated
per payroll amount due for that first pay period. The amount
of tax withheld per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods
in that calendar year shall be the same amount withheld in the
same manner as other nonexempt employees.
I. Tax obligation when exempt employee's employment is severed. In the
event the employment of an individual who was exempt and becomes
subject to the local services tax is subsequently severed in that calendar
year, the person shall be liable for any outstanding balance of the tax
due and the Township may pursue collection of the tax.
§ 178-4 WEST HANOVER CODE § 178-5
144:436
from April 1 to June 30, July 1 to September 30 and October 1 to December
31.
§ 178-6. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation.
A. Each individual who shall have more than one occupation within the
Township of West Hanover shall be subject to the payment of this tax on
his principal occupation, and his principal employer shall deduct this
tax and deliver to him evidence of deduction on a form to be furnished
to the employer by the Township of West Hanover, which form shall be
evidence of deduction having been made and, when presented to any
other employer, shall be authority for such employer not to deduct this
tax from the employee's wages, but shall, nevertheless, require the
employer to include such employee on his return of taxes and shall
require the employer to set forth his name and address, and the name
and account number of the employer who deducted this tax.
B. In the event that a person is engaged in more than one occupation, or
an occupation which requires his working in more than one political
subdivision during the calendar year, and thereby subjects the
employee to the possibility of payment of multiple local services taxes,
the priority of claim to collect such local services tax shall be in the
following order; first, the political subdivision in which a person
maintains his principal office or is principally employed; second, the
political subdivision in which the person resides and works, if such a tax
is levied by that political subdivision; and third, the political subdivision
in which a person is employed and which imposes the tax nearest in
miles to the person's home. The place of employment shall be
determined as of the day the taxpayer first becomes subject to the tax
during the calendar year. It is the intent of this provision that no person
shall pay more than $52 in local services taxes in any calendar year,
irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which such
person may be employed within any given calendar year. In case of
dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for a disputed calendar
year, declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment, shall
constitute prima facie certification of payment to all other political
subdivisions.
C. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the local services tax if the employee provides a recent pay
statement from a principal employer that includes the name of the
employer, the length of the payroll period and the amount of the local
services tax withheld, and a statement from the employee that the pay
statement is from the employee's principal employer and the employee
will notify other employers of a change in principal place of employment
within two weeks of its occurrence on uniform forms developed by the
Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic Development.
§ 178-5 PLUMBING § 178-7
144:437
§ 178-7. Self-employed individuals.
All self-employed individuals who perform services of any type or kind
or engage in any occupation or profession within the Township of West
Hanover shall be required to comply with this article and pay the tax to the
agent for collection of the same designated by the Board of Supervisors on
April 15 of each year, or as soon thereafter as he engages in an occupation.
§ 178-8. Nonresident employers and self-employed individuals.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their place
of business outside the Township of West Hanover but who perform services
of any type or kind, or engage in any occupation or profession, within West
Hanover Township do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under
this article with the same force and effect as though they were residents of
West Hanover Township. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation
within the Township of West Hanover who is an employee of a nonresident
employer may, for the purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed
person, and in the event that this tax is not paid, West Hanover Township
shall have the option of proceeding against either the employer or the
employee for the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 178-9. Administration of tax.
A. It shall be the duty of the agent for the collection of the local services
tax of the Township of West Hanover to accept and receive payments of
this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount received by
him from each employer or self-employed person, together with the
date the tax was received.
B. The agent for the collection of the local services tax is hereby charged
with the administration and enforcement of this article, and is hereby
charged and empowered to prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules and
regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and
enforcement of this article, including provisions for the examination of
payroll records of any employer subject to this article, the examination
and correction of any return made in compliance with this article, and
any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to which
overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the agent for the collection of the local
services tax shall have the right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas
of Dauphin County, as in other cases provided.
C. The agent for the collection of the local services tax, or his duly
authorized representative or agent, is hereby authorized to examine the
books and payroll records of any employer in order to verify the
accuracy of any return of taxes made by an employer or, if no return
was made, to ascertain the tax due. Each employer is hereby directed
and required to give the agent for the collection of the local services
§ 178-7 WEST HANOVER CODE § 178-9
144:438
§ 178-10. Enforcement.
§ 178-11. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return of taxes
required by this article, or whoever refuses inspection of his books, records
or accounts in his custody and control setting forth the number of
employees to this tax who are in his employment, or whoever fails or
refuses to file any return required by this article, or whoever fails or refuses
to pay any tax required by this article, shall, upon conviction before any
District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 for each
offense, plus costs. It is further provided that the action to enforce the
fine and penalty herein provided may be instituted against any person in
charge of the business of any employer who has failed or refused to file a
return required by this article. It is further provided that, upon judgment
tax, or his duly authorized representative or agent, the means, facilities
and opportunity for such examinations.
D. In accordance with Act 511 and HB 197, all tax proceeds from local
service taxes collected shall be used for police, fire and/or emergency
services; road construction and/or maintenance; and/or reduction of
property taxes. All taxes collected shall be deposited in the Local
Services Tax Fund established by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
E. The Township shall provide any local services taxpayer a receipt of
payment upon request by the taxpayer.
F. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the local
services tax or for the payment of the withheld tax money to a political
subdivision if the failure arises from incorrect information submitted by
the employee as to the employee's place or places of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally
employed. The employer shall also not be liable for payment of the local
services tax in an amount exceeding the amount withheld by the
employer if the employer complies with the provision of this article and
remits the amount so withheld accordingly.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the agent for the collection of
the tax may sue for the recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under
this article, together with interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 1 1/
2% per month on the amount of said tax shall be calculated beginning
with the due date of said tax, until paid, and a penalty of 10% shall be
added to the flat rate of said tax for nonpayment thereof. Suit may be
brought for the recovery of this tax and, where suit is brought, the
individual liable for the payment of the tax shall, in addition, be
responsible and liable for the costs of collection.
§ 178-9 PLUMBING § 178-11
144:439
against any person by summary conviction, or by proceedings by summons
on default of the payment of the fine or penalty imposed and the costs,
the defendant may be sentenced and committed to the county prison for a
period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 178-11 WEST HANOVER CODE § 178-11
144:440
ARTICLE II
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 12-15-1986 by Ord. No. 1986-9]
§ 178-12. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of West
Hanover Township."
§ 178-13. Authority.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within West
Hanover Township regardless of where the documents making the transfer
are made, executed or delivered, or where the actual settlements on such
transfer took place as authorized by Article XI-D, Local Real Estate Transfer
Tax, 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
§ 178-14. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
commonwealth, the United States or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include
a declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under
§ 178-19 of this article.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business of agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
Recreational activities such as but not limited to hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing;
A.
§ 178-12 PLUMBING § 178-14
144:441
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by the half-blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by the whole-blood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both, the term "person," as applied to associations, shall include the
responsible members of general partners thereof and, as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities;
B.
C. Fur farming;
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations; or
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within West Hanover Township,
including without limitation buildings, structures, fixtures, mines,
minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower
boundaries, trees and other improvements, immovables or interests
which by custom, usage or law pass with a conveyance or land, but
excluding permanently attached machinery and equipment in an
industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate; or
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established
market.
B.
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
A.
§ 178-14 WEST HANOVER CODE § 178-14
144:442
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
§ 178-15. Imposition of tax; interest.
years, including without limitation an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold; or
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including without limitation a leasehold interest or
possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term of
30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents, or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate; provided that where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the value thereof shall be determined from the price set
forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale;
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties, or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio factor developed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax base calculations;
B.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate the value of
which is not determinable under Subsection A or B, the actual monetary
worth of such interest; or
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principle of the grantor of a related
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
D.
§ 178-14 PLUMBING § 178-15
144:443
§ 178-16. Exempt parties.
The United States, the commonwealth or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 178-17. Excluded transactions.
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording shall be
subject to pay for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof, a
tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by such
document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp, writing or documentary license meter
impression by the Recorder of Deeds whereon the date of the payment
of the tax, amount of the tax and the signature of the collecting agent
shall be set forth.
C. It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed
herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations
prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., so that if any other political subdivision
shall impose or hereafter shall impose such tax on the same person or
transfer then the tax levied by West Hanover Township under the
authority of that Act shall, during the time such duplication of the tax
exists, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, be 1/2 of the rate and
such 1/2 rate shall become effective without any action on the part of
West Hanover Township; provided, however, that West Hanover
Township and any other political subdivision which impose such tax on
the same person or transfer may agree that, instead of limiting their
respective rates to 1/2 of the rate herein provided, they will impose
respectively different rates, the total of which shall not exceed the
maximum rate permitted under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
D. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate in
effect at the time the tax is due shall be added and collected.
A. The tax imposed by § 178-15 shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the commonwealth, or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions, by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings, or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
§ 178-15 WEST HANOVER CODE § 178-17
144:444
of condemnation, which reconveyance may include property fine
adjustments, provided that said reconveyance is made within one
year from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which West Hanover Township is prohibited from
taxing under the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school
district or county of a tax delinquent property at sheriff sale or tax
claim bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife; between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided that the property or interest therein subject to such
transfer was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife
prior to the granting of the final decree in divorce; between parent
and child or the spouse of such child; between brother or sister or
spouse of a brother or sister; and between a grandparent and
grandchild or the spouse of such grandchild, except that a
subsequent transfer by the grantee within one year shall be subject
to tax as if the grantor were making such transfer.
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
§ 178-17 PLUMBING § 178-17
144:445
(11) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal
and agent or straw party; or from or to an agent or straw party
where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would
be imposed under this article. Where the document by which title is
acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to set forth that
the property was acquired by the grantee from, or for the benefit
of, his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the
property is the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if
the grantee claims an exemption from taxation under this clause.
(12) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the department reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
(13) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
(14) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(15) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if the
grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary purpose
of manufacturing, fabricating compounding, processing,
publishing, research and development, transportation, energy
conversion, energy production, pollution control, warehousing or
agriculture; and the agency or authority has the full ownership
interest in the real estate transferred.
(16) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(17) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes.
(18) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax-exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of
1954, [68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has as its
§ 178-17 WEST HANOVER CODE § 178-17
144:446
§ 178-18. Documents relating to associations or corporations.
Except as otherwise provided in § 178-17, documents which make, confirm
or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between
associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or
stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For purposes of this article,
corporations and associations are entities separate from their members,
partners, stockholders or shareholders.
§ 178-19. Acquired companies.
primary purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational,
scenic, agricultural or open space opportunities.
(19) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(20) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
(21) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
(22) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of
Value may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural
gas or minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation
of the reason such document is not subject to tax under this article.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the changed
does not affect the continuity of the company; and of itself or together
with prior changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
C. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the Recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
§ 178-17 PLUMBING § 178-19
144:447
§ 178-20. Credits against tax.
§ 178-21. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 178-22. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid, and have priority out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made except the state realty transfer tax, and the sheriff or other
officer conducting said sale shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the first
moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale are
insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be
liable for the remaining tax.
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Declaration of Acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker, which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount or tax due, no refund or carryover credit shall be
allowed.
§ 178-19 WEST HANOVER CODE § 178-23
144:448
§ 178-23. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
§ 178-24. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof, or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction,
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under
this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of
Value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this subsection
shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt
from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented
for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction, showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 178-25. Civil penalties.
A. The Recorder of Deeds of Dauphin County is hereby designated the
collection agent for the realty transfer tax imposed herein, including
any amounts payable to West Hanover Township based on a
redetermination of the amount of tax due by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax, without
compensation from West Hanover Township.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Recorder shall not
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
C. On or before the 10th of each month, the Recorder shall pay over to
West Hanover Township all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2%
for use of the county, together with a report containing the information
as is required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting
collections of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The two-percent
commission shall be paid to the county.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Recorder shall rerecord the deed
or record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the
state and local amounts and a rerecording or recording fee has been
tendered.
A. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
§ 178-23 PLUMBING § 178-25
144:449
§ 178-26. Tax to become lien.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements or hereditaments, or any interest therein, lying, being situated,
wholly or in part, within the boundaries of West Hanover Township, which
lands, tenements, hereditaments or interest therein are described in or
conveyed by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax
imposed, assessed and levied by this article, said lien to begin at the time
when the tax under this article is due and payable, and continue until
discharge by payment, or in accordance with the law, and the Solicitor is
authorized to file a municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas
of Dauphin County, in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal
Claims and Liens Act of 1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements and
amendments.
§ 178-27. Recovery of taxes.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
§ 178-28. Enforcement and collection; incorporation of regulations.
The Treasurer of West Hanover Township is charged with enforcement
and collection of the tax and is empowered to promulgate and enforce
reasonable regulations for enforcement and collection of the tax. The
regulations which have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department
of Revenue under 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq. are incorporated into and made a
part of this article.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed thereof, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 178-25 WEST HANOVER CODE § 178-28
144:450
ARTICLE III
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 5-2-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-4]
§ 178-29. Statutory authority; title; effective date.
This article is enacted by West Hanover Township pursuant to the authority
granted by Act No. 511 of 1965, approved December 31, 1965 (known
as the "Local Tax Enabling Act"), as amended,125 and shall be known as
the "Earned Income Tax Ordinance." The provisions hereof shall become
effective on January 1, 1995.
§ 178-30. Incorporation of statute.
The provisions of Section 13 of the Local Tax Enabling Act (Act No. 511 of
1965)126 are incorporated herein by reference, as required by law. Where
options are provided in said Section 13, this article designates the option
selected, except that West Hanover Township reserves the right to change
the options regarding filing of returns and times of payment, by action duly
taken by West Hanover Township by regulation, resolution or ordinance, as
the case may require.
§ 178-31. Imposition of tax.
A. A tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed at the rate of 1%
on the following:
(1) Earned income received or earned on and after January 1, 1995, by
residents of West Hanover Township;
(2) Earned income received or earned on and after January 1, 1995, by
nonresidents of West Hanover Township within West Hanover
Township;
(3) Net profits received or earned on and after January 1, 1995, by
residents of West Hanover Township;
(4) Net profits received or earned on or after January 1, 1995, in West
Hanover Township by nonresidents of West Hanover Township from
businesses, professions or other activities conducted in West
Hanover Township.
B. The tax levied upon earned income shall relate to and be imposed upon
that earned income paid by an employer or his behalf to a taxpayer who
is employed by or renders service to him. The tax levied upon net profits
herein shall relate to and be imposed on the net profits of any business,
profession or other activity carried on by any taxpayer.
125. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
126. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6913.
§ 178-29 PLUMBING § 178-31
144:451
§ 178-32. Declaration, return and payment of tax.
§ 178-33. Collection at source.
C. The tax hereby levied and assessed shall be applicable to earned
income received and to net profits earned on and after January 1, 1995,
through December 31, 1995, and shall continue in force and effect for
each calendar year thereafter, as provided in the Local Tax Enabling
Act, Act No. 511 of the Session of 1965 of the General Assembly, as
amended.127
A. Net profits. Every taxpayer making net profits in any year beginning
with the year 1995 shall file on or before April 15 a declaration of his
estimated net profits for the current year; shall pay the tax due thereon
in quarterly installments, on or before April 15, June 15 and September
15 of the current year and January 15 of the succeeding year; and shall
file a final return and pay to the office or bureau the balance of the tax
due, on April 15 of the succeeding year, all as provided in Section 13,
IIIA(3), of the Local Tax Enabling Act.128
B. Earned Income. For each year beginning with the year 1995, every
taxpayer shall make and file a final return on or before April 15 and pay
the tax due, all as provided in Section 13, IIIB, first paragraph, of the
Local Tax Enabling Act.
C. Earned income not subject to withholding. Every taxpayer who is
employed for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation and
who received any earned income not subject to the provisions relating
to the collection at source shall, beginning with the year 1995, make
and file with the officer on a form prescribed or approved by the officer
a quarterly return on or before April 30 of the current year, July 31 of
the current year, October 31 of the current year and January 31 of the
succeeding year, setting forth the aggregate amount of earned income
not subject to withholding by him during the three-month periods
ending March 31 of the current year, June 30 of the current year,
September 30 of the current year and December 31 of the current year,
respectively, and subject to the tax, together with such other
information as the officer may require. Every taxpayer making such
return shall, at the time of filing thereof, pay to the officer the amount of
tax shown as due thereon, all as provided in Section 13, IIIB(2), of the
Local Tax Enabling Act.129
A. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within the geographical area of West Hanover
Township shall deduct the tax imposed by this article on the earned
income payable him to his employee or employees. Said employers shall
file quarterly returns and final returns and pay quarterly to the officer
127. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
128. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6913.
129. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6913.
§ 178-31 WEST HANOVER CODE § 178-33
144:452
§ 178-34. Administration.
The income tax officer or bureau shall be selected from time to time by
action of West Hanover Township. Such officer or bureau shall have the
powers and duties, and be subject to the penalties, provided in the Local
Tax Enabling Act, Act 511 of the 1965 Session of the General Assembly, as
amended.131
§ 178-35. Limitation on authority to impose tax.
The tax imposed in § 178-31 of this article shall not be levied on the net
profits of any person, institution or organization as to whom it is beyond the
power of West Hanover Township to impose said tax under existing law, the
Constitution of the United States of America or the Constitution and laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
the amount of taxes deducted, all set forth in Section 13, IV(b), of the
Local Tax Enabling Act.130 The returns shall be for calendar quarters
and shall be returned and the tax paid on or before April 30, July 31 and
October 31 of the current year and January 31 of the succeeding year.
(1) On or before February 28, 1996, and on each February 28
thereafter, every employer shall file with the officer:
(a) An annual return showing the total amount of earned income
paid, the total amount of tax deducted and the total amount of
tax paid to the officer for the period beginning January 1 and
ending December 31 of the prior year.
(b) A return withholding statement for each employee employed
during all or any part of the period beginning January 1 of the
prior year and ending December 31 of the prior year, setting
forth the employee's name, address and social security
number, the amount of earned income paid to the employee
during said period, the amount of tax deducted, the political
subdivisions imposing the tax upon such employee and the
amount of tax paid to the officer. Every employer shall furnish
two copies of the individual return to the employee for whom it
is filed.
B. Every employer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of any
year shall, within 30 days after discontinuance of business, file returns
and withholding statements hereinabove required and pay the tax due.
C. No employer shall be required to register, deduct taxes, file returns or
pay taxes in the cases of domestic servants.
130. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6913.
131. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 178-33 PLUMBING § 178-36
144:453
§ 178-36. Effective date; applicability; repealer.
The provisions of this article shall take effect January 1, 1995. Nothing
contained herein shall be considered to be a repealer by implication or
otherwise of the provisions of the Earned Income Tax Ordinance, enacted
December 16, 1968, as re-enacted thereafter, as it may apply to earned
income and net profits of taxpayers in calendar years ending December
31, 1994, or in fiscal years commencing prior thereto and ending prior
to December 31, 1995, which shall remain in full force and effect with
respect to such earned income and net profits. Subject to valid enactment
of this article without appeal effective January 1, 1995, all prior ordinances
or parts thereof inconsistent herewith are hereby modified, amended and
repealed by the provisions of this article which shall thereafter govern the
taxation of such earned income or net profits.
§ 178-36 WEST HANOVER CODE § 178-36
144:454
ARTICLE IV
Delinquent Tax Collector
[Adopted 2-19-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-1]
§ 178-37. Purpose.
The elected Tax Collector of West Hanover Township is hereby appointed,
authorized and directed to act as the collector of delinquent taxes within
the Township, for real estate taxes collected after the end of the tax year,
but before the taxes remaining unpaid are submitted to the county tax claim
bureau for collection.
§ 178-38. Duration of appointment.
This appointment and authorization shall remain in effect until the Board of
Supervisors, by ordinance, takes further action, as required by law.
§ 178-39. Vacancy.
In the event of a vacancy in the office of Tax Collector during the term of
this appointment, the successor tax collector shall automatically succeed to
the powers and duties set forth herein.
§ 178-40. Bond.
The collector of delinquent taxes shall not be required to give additional
bond on account of this appointment.
§ 178-41. Authority.
The collector of delinquent taxes shall have all the authority and power
now vested by law in the collector of nondelinquent Township taxes for the
collection of such delinquent taxes.
§ 178-42. Accounting to the Board of Supervisors.
The collector of delinquent taxes shall account to the Board of Supervisors
for all delinquent tax collections made in the same manner as required for
the reporting of nondelinquent tax collections.
§ 178-43. Compensation.
The collector of delinquent taxes shall be compensated in the same manner
as provided for the collection of nondelinquent taxes within the Township.
§ 178-44. When effective.
This article shall take effect on the 5th day after enactment.
§ 178-37 PLUMBING § 178-44
144:455

ARTICLE V
Tax Collector Fees
[Adopted 1-6-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
§ 178-45. Fees authorized.
The elected Tax Collector is authorized to charge the following fees for
services rendered in the performance of the duties and responsibilities
associated with the collection of real estate taxes for West Hanover
Township:
A. Fee to supply a copy of a tax bill, per bill, generally known as "duplicate
bill fee," as set forth by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
B. Fee to supply a lien certificate, per certificate, generally known as "tax
certification fee," as set forth by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
C. Fee for a check returned by bank due to insufficient funds, generally
known as "returned check fee," as set forth by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
§ 178-45 PLUMBING § 178-45
144:457
Chapter 182
TRANSIENT RETAIL AND MOBILE MERCHANT BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 92.
§ 182-1. Definitions and word usage.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
AUTHORIZATION — License, permit or registration.
LEGAL HOLIDAY — New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day,
Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas.
MOBILE MERCHANT BUSINESS — A person who temporarily sets up
business out of a vehicle, for the purpose of displaying goods for sale,
selling, or attempting to sell, and delivering goods, wares, products,
merchandise, or other personal property and who does not remain in
any one location for more than five hours at the same location.[Added
10-15-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15; amended 8-20-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-10]
PEDDLER — Any person who shall engage in peddling as herein
defined.
PEDDLING — The selling or offering for sale of any goods, wares,
services or merchandise for immediate delivery which the person
selling or offering for sale carries with him in traveling, or has in his
possession or control, upon any of the streets or sidewalks; from house
to house; by visitation to private residences; or by entering in or upon
private property within the Township.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, corporation
or other legal entity.
PROMOTER — Any person, as defined herein, who organizes the
gathering of five or more persons, as defined herein, engaged in
transient retail business.
SOLICITING — The seeking or taking of contracts or orders for any
goods, wares, services or merchandise for future deliver, or for
subscriptions or contributions, upon any of the streets or sidewalks;
from house to house; by visitation to private residences; or by entering
in or upon private property within the Township.
SOLICITOR — Any person who shall engage in soliciting as hereinabove
defined.
TEMPORARY — A period of time of 30 consecutive days or less.
§ 178-45 WEST HANOVER CODE § 182-1
144:458
§ 182-2. License required; conditions of issuance; fee. [Amended
5-21-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-05]
No person shall engage in any transient retail business within West Hanover
Township without first having obtained from the Zoning Administrator or his
designee a license, for which a fee shall be charged per the fee resolution
approved by the Board of Supervisors. Notwithstanding possession of a
valid license, no person shall peddle or solicit or attempt same at any
residence that displays a "Do Not Solicit" sign.
§ 182-3. Exceptions.
TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS —
TRANSIENT RETAIL MERCHANT — A person engaging in a transient
retail business activity, including agents and employees thereof.
Engaging in peddling, soliciting or taking orders, either by sample
or otherwise, for any goods, wares, merchandise or services upon
any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground, or from house to house,
within West Hanover Township; or [Amended 10-15-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-15]
(1)
Selling, soliciting or taking orders for any goods, wares,
merchandise or services from a fixed location within West Hanover
Township, on a temporary basis, which shall include but not be
limited to such activities conducted at the time of special occasions
or celebrations, for seasonal purposes or in advance of specific
yearly holidays.
(2)
B. The singular shall include the plural; the plural shall include the
singular; and the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
A. No license fee shall be charged:
(1) To farmers selling their own produce;
(2) For the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, donated by the
owners thereof, the proceeds whereof are to be applied to any
charitable or philanthropic purpose;
(3) (Reserved)
(4) To children under the age of 18 years who take orders for and
deliver newspapers, greeting cards, candy, bakery products and the
like or who represent the Boy Scouts or Girl Scouts or similar
organizations;
(5) To any honorably discharged member of any of the armed services;
(6) (Reserved)
(7) To any nonprofit organization for specific fund-raising events.
§ 182-1 PLUMBING § 182-3
144:459
§ 182-4. License application. [Amended 10-15-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-15]
Every person desiring a license under this chapter shall first make
application to the Zoning Administrator or his designee for such license.
They shall, when making such application, exhibit a valid driver's license
from any state and appropriate documents and certificates from other
county or state agencies. The applicant shall provide:
(8) To political activities associated with upcoming primary or general
elections.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing exemptions, all persons exempted shall
be required to register with the Zoning Administrator or his designee
and obtain a license without fee, provided that any person dealing in
one or more of the above-mentioned exempted categories, and dealing
with other goods, wares, merchandise, or services not so exempted,
shall be subject to the payment of the license fee fixed by resolution for
his activities in connection with the sale of goods, wares, merchandise
and services not in such exempted categories.
A. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted
of any crime, and if so, the nature of the offense or offenses and the
punishment imposed therefor.
B. Permanent address.
C. Name and address of employer or a statement that such applicant is
self-employed.
D. Type of goods, wares, merchandise or services offered for sale.
E. Length of time for which license is to be issued; date on which transient
retail activities will commence and the date on which such activities will
terminate.
F. Type and license plate number of any and all vehicles to be used.
G. Where a person makes application for himself and one or more agents,
employees and/or helpers, all applicable personal information,
including valid driver's licenses, specified above shall be given for each
agent, employee and helper.
H. Evidence of safe ingress and egress from streets if business is
conducted from a stationary location, per PennDOT Chapter 441.8.c
and Zoning Ordinance § 195-138F.
I. If food or beverages are sold, the applicant shall provide West Hanover
Township with documentation that indicates compliance with the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture, Bureau of
Food Safety and Laboratory Services. [Added 10-15-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-15]
§ 182-3 WEST HANOVER CODE § 182-4
144:460
§ 182-5. Issuance of license; custody, display and exhibit. [Amended
10-15-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15; 8-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-10]
Upon receipt of such application and the prescribed fee, the Zoning
Administrator, or his designee, if he shall find such application in order,
shall issue the license required under this chapter. Such license shall
contain the information required to be given on the application therefor.
Every license holder shall carry such license upon his person or shall display
such license at the location where they shall engage in such business if
doing so at a fixed location. They shall present such license, upon request,
to all police officers, municipal officials and citizens or residents of West
Hanover Township. A fee, as set forth from time to time by the Board of
Supervisors, shall be required for each renewal license.
§ 182-6. Prohibited acts. [Amended 10-15-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-15]
No person in any transient retail or mobile merchant business shall:
J. Provide West Hanover Township with written permission of the
property owner for any location to be used as a transient retail business
or for any location to be used by a mobile merchant business. [Added
10-15-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
K. Provide a site plan that identifies location on site where a transient
retail or mobile merchant business will be positioned. [Added
10-15-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
A. Transient retail business licenses shall be renewed yearly under a new
application in accordance with § 182-4, License application.
B. Mobile merchant business licenses shall be renewed yearly under a new
application in accordance with § 182-4, License application.
A. Sell any product or type of product not mentioned in his license.
B. Hawk or cry his wares upon any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or
public grounds in West Hanover Township.
C. When operating from a vehicle, stop or park such vehicle upon any of
the streets or alleys in West Hanover Township for longer than
necessary in order to sell therefrom to persons residing or working in
the immediate vicinity.
D. Park any vehicle upon any of the streets or alleys in West Hanover
Township for the purpose of sorting, rearranging or cleaning any of his
goods, wares or merchandise or disposing of any carton, wrapping
material or stock, wares or foodstuffs which have become unsalable
through handling, age or otherwise.
E. Engage in any house-to-house business activity on a Sunday or legal
holidays, except by prior appointment.
§ 182-4 PLUMBING § 182-6
144:461
§ 182-7. Supervision; records and reports.
The Zoning Administrator shall keep a record of all licenses issued
hereunder and shall make a report thereof periodically to the Board of
Supervisors.
§ 182-8. Suspension and revocation of license; appeal.
The Zoning Administrator or his designee is hereby authorized to suspend
or revoke any license issued under this chapter when he deems a violation
of any provision of this chapter or for giving false information upon any
application for a license hereunder. Appeals from any suspension or
revocation may be made to the Board of Supervisors at any time within
10 days after such suspension or revocation. No part of a license fee shall
be refunded to any person whose license shall have been suspended or
revoked.
§ 182-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $1,000 per day.
Every day a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate
offense. It is further provided that, upon judgment against any person
by summary conviction, or by proceedings by summons on default of the
payment of the fine or penalty imposed and the costs, the defendant may be
sentenced and committed to the county prison for a period not exceeding
30 days.
Chapter 183
SPECIAL EVENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 92.
F. Engage in any house-to-house business activity outside the hours of
8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, except by prior
appointment.
G. Transfer license under the provisions of this chapter to any other
person, business, developer or franchise.
H. Solicit or peddle or attempt same to residents who display "Do Not
Solicit" signage. The resident is required to report any violation by
filling out a Township complaint form and providing the violator's name,
address and contact information. [Added 5-21-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-05]
§ 182-6 WEST HANOVER CODE § 183-1
144:462
§ 183-1. Definitions and word usage.
§ 183-2. License required; fee.
No person shall engage in any special event within West Hanover Township
without first having obtained from the Zoning Administrator or his designee
a license, for which a fee shall be charged per the fee resolution approved
by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 183-3. Exceptions.
No license fee shall be charged for:
§ 183-4. License application.
Every person desiring a license under this chapter shall first make
application to the Zoning Administrator or his designee for such license.
They shall, when making such application, exhibit a valid driver's license
from any state and appropriate documents and certificates from other
county or state agencies. The applicant shall provide:
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
AUTHORIZATION — License, permit or registration.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, corporation
or other legal entity.
SPECIAL EVENT — A temporary event held by a property owner or
business owner as a temporary accessory use involving assemblies of
people of 150 or more (not involving retail sales), such as but not
limited to grand openings, promotions, vehicle shows, fairs, festivals,
concerts, athletic events, street fairs, art and craft shows, soapbox
derbies, rallies, indoor or outdoor concerts.
B. The singular shall include the plural; the plural shall include the
singular; and the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
A. Funeral processions.
B. Wedding processions.
C. Activities of government agencies.
D. Block parties authorized by the Board of Supervisors.
E. First Amendment activities.
F. Residential personal parties.
A. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted
of any crime, and if so, the nature of the offense or offenses and the
punishment imposed therefor.
§ 183-1 PLUMBING § 183-4
144:463
§ 183-5. Issuance of license; custody, display and exhibit.
Upon receipt of such application and the prescribed fee, the Zoning
Administrator, or his designee, if he shall find such application in order,
shall issue the license required under this chapter. Such license shall
contain the information required to be given on the application therefor.
Every license holder shall carry such license upon his person or shall display
such license at the location where they shall engage in such business if
doing so at a fixed location. They shall present such license, upon request,
to all police officers, municipal officials and citizens or residents of West
Hanover Township. A fee, as set forth from time to time by the Board of
Supervisors, shall be required for each renewal license.
§ 183-6. General requirements.
Special events shall meet the following requirements:
B. Permanent address.
C. Length of time for which the license is to be issued: date on which the
special event will commence and the date on which such activities will
terminate.
D. Where a person makes application for himself and one or more agents,
employees and/or helpers, all applicable personal information,
including valid driver's licenses, specified above, shall be given for each
agent, employee and helper.
E. Evidence of safe ingress and egress from streets if business is
conducted from a stationary location, per PennDOT Chapter 441.8.c
and Zoning Ordinance § 195-138F.
F. If food or beverages are sold, the applicant shall obtain a mobile
merchant license required by Chapter 182.
G. Written permission of the property owner for any location to be used for
a special event.
H. A site plan that identifies the location on site where the special event
will be held and meets the requirements of § 183-6O.
I. A statement on the number of persons expected to attend such event.
J. Restroom facilities.
A. Events such as but not limited to grand openings, promotions, vehicle
shows: Commercial Highway (CH), Interchange (I), and Industrial
Enterprise (IE) Zoning Districts.
B. Events such as but not limited to fairs, festivals, concerts and special
events held by wineries shall be permitted in Flexible Rural Agriculture
(FRA), Business Enterprise (BE), Neighbor Commercial (NC),
§ 183-4 WEST HANOVER CODE § 183-6
144:464
Commercial Highway (CH), Interchange (I), and Industrial Enterprise
(IE) Zoning Districts.
C. The use shall not obstruct safe sight distance for streets or driveways in
accordance with § 195-138J and the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance, Chapter 173.
D. A permanent access for the business is required for a special event.
However, access to and from the special event may also be by
temporary driveway entrance when a permanent access is not feasible.
The temporary access shall be clearly defined with signage. Such
temporary driveway shall be able to accommodate emergency vehicles.
There shall be no parking within 10 feet of the temporary driveway
entrance and exits.
E. Traffic control shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 212 of the
Pennsylvania Vehicle Code for 100 or more event trips in accordance
with the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, Article IX,
Traffic Impact Studies, § 173-67.
F. Shall be limited to one consecutive week.
G. Shall be held between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
H. There shall be no more than 12 special events in a calendar year.
I. Any temporary signs visible from the street shall comply with
§ 195-150U of the Zoning Ordinance.
J. Permitted uses listed in Chapter 195, Article XVI, can be within a fiftyfoot
setback in the environmental protection overlays. All other uses
associated with the special event shall be 50 feet from any stream,
wetlands, steep slopes, lake or pond or in accordance with Article XVI
of Chapter 195.
K. Parking is permitted in the grass, provided earth is not disturbed
creating erosion or mud or dirt dragged onto a public street right-ofway.
The property owner or business owner shall be responsible to
clean up any debris on a public street right-of-way as a result of the
special event.
L. Parking on a street right-of-way shall be prohibited when traffic flow
becomes restricted or a cartway is blocked.
M. A six-foot solid buffer fence shall be required at the property line to
serve as a buffer between a residential use or district when the special
event activities are within 25 feet.
N. The special event shall meet the requirements of Act 45, 7210-503(a)(2)
related to flame propagation in accordance with NFPA 701, ICC code
and IFC fire extinguishers.
§ 183-6 PLUMBING § 183-6
144:465
§ 183-7. Records and reports.
The Zoning Administrator shall keep a record of all licenses issued
hereunder and shall make a report thereof periodically to the Board of
Supervisors.
§ 183-8. Suspension and revocation of license; appeal.
The Zoning Administrator or his designee is hereby authorized to suspend
or revoke any license issued under this chapter when he deems a violation
of any provision of this chapter or for giving false information upon any
application for a license hereunder. Appeals from any suspension or
revocation may be made to the Board of Supervisors at any time within
10 days after such suspension or revocation. No part of a license fee shall
be refunded to any person whose license shall have been suspended or
revoked.
§ 183-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $1,000 per day.
Every day a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate
offense. It is further provided that, upon judgment against any person
by summary conviction, or by proceedings by summons on default of the
payment of the fine or penalty imposed and the costs, the defendant may be
sentenced and committed to the county prison for a period not exceeding
30 days.
Chapter 187
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
O. A permit for a special event is required. A plot plan indicating entrance
and exits, temporary structure locations, setbacks from the property
lines, size and location of temporary signs and any other pertinent
information shall accompany the permit application. A written
authorization is required if the applicant is not the property owner or
business owner.
P. The special event shall comply with all requirements in the zoning
district where located.
Q. Portable restroom facilities shall be provided as determined by the
Township's official based upon the estimated size of the event and the
availability to permanent restroom facilities.
§ 183-6 WEST HANOVER CODE § 183-9
144:466
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 187-1. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 187-2. Adoption of permanent traffic and parking regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances, as parts of ordinances, as amendments to ordinances or as
amendments to this chapter, except where the law specifically authorizes
less formal action.
§ 187-3. Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances and regulations in force immediately before the enactment of
this chapter, are intended as a continuation of those earlier ordinances and
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections or
parts to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code (the Act of June 17,
1976, P.L. 162, No. 81), as amended,132 except that, in this chapter, the
word "street" may be used interchangeably with the word "highway,"
and shall have the same meaning as the word "highway" as defined in
the Vehicle Code.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated: [Amended 8-3-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-15]
EMERGENCY VEHICLES — Appropriately identified vehicles from fire
departments, police departments, ambulance services, or disaster relief
services.
MOTOR VEHICLE — A self-propelled device used for transportation of
people or goods over land surfaces and licensed as a motor vehicle.
OVERWEIGHT VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle which exceeds a posted
weight limit on any highway in the Township or exceeds a weight limit
as specified in this chapter of the West Hanover Township Code of
Ordinances.
TRUCK — A motor vehicle designed primarily for the transportation of
property with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) exceeding 17,000
pounds. The term includes motor vehicles designed with seats that
may be readily removed and reinstalled if those vehicles are primarily
used for the transportation of property and have a gross vehicle weight
rating exceeding 17,000 pounds.[Added 11-5-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-21]
C. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular and the masculine shall include the feminine.
132. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 187-1 PLUMBING § 187-3
144:467
regulations, and not as new enactments. Nothing in this chapter shall affect
any act done or liability incurred or any suit or prosecution pending or
to be instituted under any of those repealed or superseded ordinances or
regulations.
§ 187-4. Temporary and emergency regulations.
§ 187-5. Experimental regulations.
A. The Chairman of the Board of Supervisors shall have the following
powers to regulate traffic and parking temporarily and in time of
emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations; and
(2) In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the
conduct of parades, processions or public events, to restrict or
prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not
more than 72 hours.
B. Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
state police in the same manner as permanent regulations. Any person
who shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any such
regulations, or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure or deface any
sign or marking erected, posted or made to give notice of any such
regulation, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such
nature, and, in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than
$25, together with costs of prosecution.
A. The Board of Supervisors may from time to time, by resolution,
designate places upon and along the highways in the township where,
for a period of not more than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking
regulations, prohibitions and restrictions shall be in force and effect,
and shall designate such locations by proper signs and markings. Such
regulations, prohibitions and restrictions shall be effective as if they
had been specified in this chapter. No person shall operate or park a
vehicle or tractor in violation of any such regulation, prohibition or
restriction, and no person shall move, remove, destroy or deface any
sign or marking erected, posted or made by authority of this section.
B. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set forth in the law or
elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature, and in case of a
violation for which no specific penalty is set forth in the law or
elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than $25, together with
costs of prosecution; provided that the purpose of this section is to
allow for the test and experimental determination of the feasibility and
§ 187-3 WEST HANOVER CODE § 187-5
144:468
§ 187-6. Traffic on streets closed or restricted for construction,
maintenance or special events.
§ 187-7. Use of streets by processions and assemblages.
desirability of permanent changes in the ordinances of the township
relative to traffic and parking.
A. The Board of Supervisors shall have authority to close any street or
specific part of a street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers or
station police officers at each end of the closed portion while
construction or maintenance work is under way or a special event is
being conducted on the closed portion. It shall be unlawful for any
person to drive a vehicle upon any such closed portion.
B. The Board of Supervisors shall have authority to establish a restricted
traffic area upon any street where construction or maintenance work is
under way and to station flagmen at each end of the restricted portion.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such
restricted traffic area at any time when the flagman is displaying a sign
directing that vehicle to stop, or is signaling that vehicle, by a flag or
other device, not to proceed.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. For the purpose of this section, the words "assemblage" and
"procession" shall have the following meanings:
ASSEMBLAGE — A gathering of people without vehicles which
interferes with the movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on any
street.
PROCESSION — A group of individuals, vehicles, animals and/or
objects moving along a street in a way that interferes with the normal
movement of traffic. A procession shall not include a funeral caravan or
military convoy.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
assemblage unless the person organizing or conducting the assemblage
first obtains a permit from the Board of Supervisors, which shall be
issued without a fee. Application for the permit shall be made at least
two weeks in advance of the day on which the assemblage is proposed
to be held, but in any case where a state-designated highway is
proposed to be used, application shall be made at least three weeks in
advance of the proposed date. The permit shall state the place where
and the date when the assemblage is to be held, the hour when the
assemblage may convene and the hour by which it shall have been
completely dispersed. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or to
participate in any assemblage unless the permit has been granted, or at
any time or place other than that authorized by the permit.
§ 187-5 PLUMBING § 187-7
144:469
§ 187-8. Enforcement.
The Code Enforcement Officer or his designee is hereby given authority to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 187-9. Authorization for use of speed-timing devices.
The state police are hereby authorized to use all mechanical or electrical
speed-timing devices for the determination of speed of a motor vehicle as
are approved or will be approved by the Department of Transportation of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, including but not limited to Vascar
systems. This section authorizes the use of said devices upon all highways
within the township, be they township, county or state highways, and does
also hereby elect to exercise all powers granted to "local authorities" under
the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 75 P.S. § 101 et seq.
(1977), as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the
General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
procession unless the person organizing or conducting the procession
first obtains a permit from the Board of Supervisors, which shall be
issued without fee. Application for the permit shall be made at least two
weeks in advance of the day when the procession is proposed to be
held, but in any case where a state-designated highway is proposed to
be used, application shall be made at least four weeks in advance of the
proposed date. The permit shall specify the date on which the
procession is to be held, the route to be followed by the procession, the
hour when and place where participants may commence to assemble
and form before the procession is under way, the time when the
procession may commence to move along its route and the time by
which the end of the procession shall have reached the end of the route
of the procession and the procession shall have been disbanded. It shall
be unlawful for any person to hold or to participate in any procession
unless the permit shall have been granted, or under any conditions as to
time or route or otherwise than those stated in the permit.
D. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 187-7 WEST HANOVER CODE § 187-9
144:470
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 187-10. Maximum speed limits established on certain streets.
A. Maximum speed limits are established on portions of specified streets,
as follows, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on
any part of a street where a maximum speed limit applies at a higher
speed than the maximum prescribed for that part of the street:
Street Location
Maximum
Speed Limit
(miles per hour)
Appleby Road [Added
2-20-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-3]
From Piketown Road
to West/East Hanover
Township line
35
Avondale Terrace Between Fairville
Avenue and Manor
Drive
25
Blue Ridge Avenue Between Piketown
Road and Route 22
35
Carl Street Between Umberger
Street and Slepian
Street
35
Chestnut Avenue Between Route 39
and Piketown Road
35
Clover Lane [Added
2-20-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-3]
From Allentown
Boulevard (US 22) to
Manor Drive
25
Clover Lane, South Between Route 22
and Green Hill Road
35
Daniel Drive [Added
2-20-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-3]
Full length of street 25
Devonshire Heights
Road
Between Lower
Paxton Township line
and East Hanover
Township line
35
Douglas Road [Added
9-19-1994 by Ord.
No. 1994-6]
Between Devonshire
Heights Road and the
West Hanover
Township line
30
Dove Drive [Added
2-20-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-3]
Full length of street 25
§ 187-10 PLUMBING § 187-10
144:471
Street Location
Maximum
Speed Limit
(miles per hour)
Fairville Avenue Between Manor Drive
and Avondale Terrace
25
Fairville Avenue
[Added 7-19-1999 by
Ord. No. 1999-11]
From Linglestown
Road to Piketown
Road
35
Farmdale Avenue Between Fairville
Avenue and Avondale
Terrace
35
Jonestown Road Between Blue Ridge
Avenue and Route 39
35
Jonestown Road
[Added 11-20-2006
by Ord. No. 2006-2]
Lower Paxton
Township Line to
Allentown Boulevard
(US 22)
25
Kiwanis Road [Added
12-7-1992 by Ord.
No. 1992-6]
Beginning at its
intersection with
Fairville Avenue and
traveling east a
distance of
approximately 1.10
miles
35
Knight Road [Added
4-5-1999 by Ord. No.
1999-5]
From the South
Hanover Township
line to Devonshire
Heights Road
25
Lawrence Drive Entire length 35
Manor Drive [Added
2-20-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-3]
From Allentown
Boulevard (US 22) to
Linglestown Road
(SR 0039)
35
Manor Drive Between Jonestown
Road and Route 39
35
Moyer Road [Added
2-20-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-3]
From Piketown Road
to West/East Hanover
Township line
35
Mumma Road Between Fishing
Creek Road and
Piketown Road
35
§ 187-10 WEST HANOVER CODE § 187-10
144:472
Street Location
Maximum
Speed Limit
(miles per hour)
North Fairville Avenue
[Added 2-20-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-3]
From Jonestown
Road to Linglestown
Road (SR 0039)
35
North Fairville Avenue
[Added 2-20-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-3]
From Manor Drive to
Jonestown Road
25
Pheasant Drive Between Piketown
Road and Fox Hill
Road
35
Piketown Road Between Lower
Paxton Township line
and Blue Ridge
Avenue
35
Piketown Road
[Added 2-20-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-3]
From SR 0039
(Linglestown Road)
to SR 443 (Fishing
Creek Valley Road)
35
Rabbit Lane [Added
12-7-1992 by Ord.
No. 1992-6]
Beginning at its
intersection with
Fairville Avenue
traveling east a
distance of
approximately 0.90
mile
35
Sandy Hollow Road Between Piketown
Road and Manor
Drive
35
Sarhelm Road [Added
6-2-1986 by Ord. No.
1986-5]
Between Jonestown
Road and Devonshire
Heights Road
35
Slate Ridge Road Entire length 35
Sleepy Hollow Road
[Added 2-20-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-3]
From SR 443 (Fishing
Creek Valley Road) to
Piketown Road
35
Slepian Street Between Carl Street
and South Hershey
Road
35
Sterling Road Between South
Clover Lane and Oak
Grove Road
35
§ 187-10 PLUMBING § 187-10
144:473
§ 187-11. Traffic signals at certain locations.
Street Location
Maximum
Speed Limit
(miles per hour)
Terrann Drive Between Wendon
Drive and Holly Drive
35
Umberger Street Between South
Hershey Road and
Carl Street
35
Walnut Avenue Between Route 39
and Hillside Road
35
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per
hour over the maximum speed limit.
A. At the following locations, traffic signals as indicated below shall be
erected (or are ratified if previously erected), and traffic at those
locations shall be directed by those signals: [Amended 5-19-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-05]
Location Type of Signal
Clover Lane (T-520) and
Allentown Boulevard (SR
0022)
Hershey Road (SR 0039) and
Allentown Boulevard (SR
0022)
Jonestown Road (T-601) and
Allentown Boulevard (SR
0022)
Jonestown Road (T-601) and
Hershey Road (SR 0039)
Linglestown Road (SR 0039)
and Fairville Avenue (T-537)
[Added 1-17-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-01]
Linglestown Road (SR 0039)
and I-81 NB ramps [Added
1-17-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-01]
§ 187-10 WEST HANOVER CODE § 187-11
144:474
§ 187-12. Intersections where turn prohibited on red signal.
§ 187-13. One-way streets established.
Location Type of Signal
Linglestown Road (SR 0039)
and I-81 SB ramps [Added
1-17-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-01]
Linglestown Road (SR 0039)
and TA/Wilco Plaza Drive
(private) [Added 1-17-2012
by Ord. No. 2012-01]
Manor Drive (T-465) and
Allentown Boulevard (SR
0039)
Piketown Road (T-560) and
Linglestown Road (SR 0039)
B. Any driver of a vehicle who disobeys the directions of any traffic signal
shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following are established as intersections where drivers of vehicles
headed in the direction or directions indicated are prohibited from
making a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street into another
one-way street) on a steady red signal:
Intersection
Vehicles
Traveling on Facing
(Reserved)
B. Any driver of a vehicle who violates any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following are established as one-way streets, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any one-way street other
than in the direction established for traffic on that street:
Street From To Direction of Travel
Harper Drive
(T-557) [Added
6-6-2011 by
Ord. No.
2011-08]
Jonestown
Road (T-601)
SR 0039
(Hershey
Road)
Northbound
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 187-11 PLUMBING § 187-14
144:475
§ 187-14. Turning at certain intersections prohibited or restricted.
§ 187-15. Right turns only permitted at certain intersections.
§ 187-16. U-turns prohibited at certain locations.
§ 187-17. No-passing zones established.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, of the type indicated,
traveling upon the first-named street at any of the following
intersections, in the direction or directions indicated in each case, to
make a left turn and/or a right turn into the second-named street, as
indicated, at any time when such a turn is prohibited by this section:
Vehicle
Traveling on
Directions
of Travel
Not to
Make Into When
Type of
Vehicle
Applicable
to
Route
39-Hershey
Road [Added
12-1-2003 by
Ord. No.
2003-15]
Eastbound Right turn
movement
Jonestown
Road -
T-601
All
times
Trucks
exceeding
30 tons,
except
local
deliveries
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, traveling upon the firstnamed
street at any of the following intersections, in the direction or
directions indicated in each case, to make other than a right turn, at
any time stated, both left turns and straight-across traffic being
prohibited:
Vehicles
Traveling on
Direction
of Travel Times
Not to Make Left
Turn Into or Travel
Straight Across
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle traveling upon any of
the following portions of streets, in the direction or directions indicated
for that street, to make a U-turn:
Street Portion Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 187-14 WEST HANOVER CODE § 187-17
144:476
§ 187-18. Through highways established.
§ 187-19. Stop intersections established. [Amended 1-5-1987 by
Ord. No. 1987-1; 5-1-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-5; 6-3-1991 by Ord. No.
1991-3; 7-1-1991 by Ord. No. 1991-4; 11-16-1992 by Ord. No.
1992-4; 8-19-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-6; 11-4-1996 by Ord. No.
1996-13; 2-18-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-4134]
A. The following are established as no-passing zones, and it shall be
unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to overtake or pass another
vehicle or to drive on the left side of the roadway in any no-passing
zone:
Street Direction of Travel Between
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following highways are established as through highways, thus
authorizing stop or yield signs to be erected facing traffic approaching
every intersection with the through highway except for those
intersections with traffic signals, or with exceptions or modifications as
indicated below. Every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop or yield
sign authorized by this section shall stop the vehicle or yield right-ofway
as required by § 3323(b) or 3323(c) of the Vehicle Code,133 as the
case may be, and shall not proceed into or across the through highway
until he has followed all applicable requirements of that section of the
law.
Highway Between
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the
through highways established by § 187-18) are established as stop
intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected (or are ratified if
previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street (the intersecting or through street) on the firstnamed
street (the stop street) in the direction or directions indicated
for that intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the
intersection on the first-named street or stop street, in the direction
indicated in each case, shall not proceed into or across the secondnamed
or intersecting or through street until he has followed all
applicable requirements of that section of the law.
133. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3323(b) and (c).
134. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 187-17 PLUMBING § 187-19
144:477
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Althea Avenue Fairville Avenue West
Appalachian Trail Piketown Road East
Appleby Road Mumma Road North and South
A.V. Acri Sleepy Hollow Road North
Avondale Terrace Manor Drive East
Baseshore Drive Florence Drive East and West
Berkstone Circle Manada View Drive North
Berkstone Drive Jonestown Road
Manada View Drive
North
North and South
Birchwood Road Mountain Road West
Blue Ridge Avenue Jonestown Road
Piketown Road
South
South
Candlewood Drive Althea Avenue
Allentown Boulevard
Skyline Drive
Sunset Drive
Valleyview Avenue
North and South
North and South
North and South
North and South
North and South
Cassel Avenue Avondale Terrace
Hershey Road
East and West
East and West
Catherine Drive Hanover Lane East and West
Cedar Lane Jonestown Road North
Chestnut Avenue Linglestown Road South
Clover Lane Hillcrest Avenue
Jonestown Road
Manor Drive
North and South
North and South
North
Daniel Drive [Added
2-20-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-3]
North Fairville
Avenue
Easterly direction on
circle
Devonshire Heights
Road
Oak Grove
Green Hill Road
Hershey Road
East and West
East
East and West
Dewey Drive Myrtle Road
Johnstown Road
West
South
§ 187-19 WEST HANOVER CODE § 187-19
144:478
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Doris Court Lawrence Drive South
Douglas Road Devonshire Heights
Road
South
Douglas Road [Added
4-15-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-04]
Maple Street South
Dove Drive Fairville Avenue East
Evening Star Drive Hershey Road
North Star Drive
East
West
Evergreen Lane Pine Tree Avenue East
Fairville Avenue Allentown Boulevard
Althea Avenue
Farmdale Avenue
Jonestown Road
Linglestown Road
Manor Drive
Moyer Road
Piketown Road
Sunset Avenue
South
North and South
North and South
North and South
North
North and South
North and South
North and South
North and South
Farmdale Avenue Candlewood Drive
Fairville Avenue
Glenview Avenue
Manor Drive
East and West
East and West
East and West
East and West
Farmdale Lane Fairville Avenue
Manor Drive
North and South
North and South
Fern Drive Florence Drive West
Fernando Drive Orlando Drive North and South
Fishing Creek Valley
Road
None
Florence Drive None
Forney Way [Added
10-15-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-20]
Hanoverdale East and West
§ 187-19 PLUMBING § 187-19
144:479
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Forney Way [Added
2-1-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-01; amended
10-15-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-20]
Village Way East and west
Fox Hill Road Compton Drive East and West
Franklin Drive Florence Drive East and West
Glenview Avenue Avondale Terrace
Sunset Drive
Valleyview Avenue
North and South
North and South
North and South
Green Hill Road Oak Grove Road East and West
Hanoverdale [Added
10-15-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-20]
Forney Way North and South
Hanover Lane Catherine Drive South
Hanover Road None
Harper Drive Jonestown Road
Hershey Road
North
West
Hemlock Road Mountain Road West
Hershey Road None
Hillcrest Avenue Candlewood Drive
Clover Lane
Fairville Avenue
East and West
East and West
East and West
Hillside Road Manor Drive
Piketown Road
Walnut Avenue
West
West
Hinkle Street Manada View Drive
Monroe Street
North and South
North and South
Hollow Drive Sandy Hollow Road North and South
Holstein Road Manor Drive West
Jay Drive Alva Drive East and West
Jonestown Road Blue Ridge Avenue West
Kingswood Drive Florence Drive East
Kiwanis Road Fairville Avenue West
§ 187-19 WEST HANOVER CODE § 187-19
144:480
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Knight Road Devonshire Heights
Road
North
Lakeside Avenue Clover Lane
Fairville Avenue
Manor Drive
East and West
East and West
East and West
Lawrence Drive Sterling Road South
Linglestown Road None
Manada View Drive Berkstone Drive
Hershey Road
East and West
East and West
Manor Drive Fairville Avenue
Hershey Road
Jonestown Road
Sandy Hollow Road
Valleyview Avenue
Linglestown Road
North and South
East
North and South
North and South
North and South
North
Maple Street Douglas Road South
Maplewood Road None
Meadow Run Place Sarhelm Road
Millrace Road None
Minute Road Florence Drive
Kingswood Drive
West
West
Mockingbird Lane Moyer Road North
Monroe Street Hershey Road East
Morningstar Avenue Clover Lane
Fairville Avenue
East and West
East and West
Mountain Road Fishing Creek Valley
Road
South
Mountain Top Road None
Moyer Road Fairville Avenue
Piketown Road
East and West
East and West
Mumma Road Appleby Road
Fishing Creek Valley
Road
South
North
§ 187-19 PLUMBING § 187-19
144:481
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Myrtle Drive Dewey Drive
Jonestown Road
South
South
Nagle Court Sterling Road North
New Oxford Road Sarhelm Road East
North Clover Lane Jonestown Road South
North Star Drive Manor Drive
Rider Lane
North and South
North and South
Oak Grove Road Allentown Boulevard
Jonestown Road
North and South
North
Oak Tree Road Devonshire Heights
Road
North
Oldfield Road None
Orchard Road Hershey Road West
Orlando Street Fernando Street East
Patterson Drive Clover Lane West
Piketown Road Appleby Road
Linglestown Road
South
North and South
Pine Road Laurel Road
Mountain Road
East and West
East and West
Pine Tree Avenue Sleepy Hollow Road
Fishing Creek
Valley Road
South
North
Pheasant Road Fox Hill Road
Piketown Road
North and South
East
Rabbit Lane Fairville Avenue West
Rauch Street Clover Lane
Fairville Avenue
East
East
Red Pine Road Clover Lane East
Redstone Drive Berkstone Drive West
Red Top Road Hershey Road East
Regent Road New Oxford Road
Sterling Road
Sarhelm Road
North and South
North and South
South
§ 187-19 WEST HANOVER CODE § 187-19
144:482
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Rider Lane Hershey Road East and West
Sandy Hollow Road Piketown Road West
Sarhelm Road Devonshire Heights
Road
Jonestown Road
New Oxford Road
[Added 12-21-2009
by Ord. No.
2009-18]
South
West
North and South
Sawmill Road Moyer Road South
Shannon Drive None
Shelahammer Road Moyer Road South
Short Street Althea Avenue
Avondale Terrace
Farmdale Avenue
South
North
North and South
Silver Lake Drive Jonestown Road South
Skyline Drive Avondale Terrace
Manor Drive
East and West
East and West
Slate Ridge Road Manor Drive West
Sleepy Hollow Road Piketown Road
Fishing Creek Valley
Road
South
West
Slepian Street Carl Street
Hershey Road
West
East
Sterling Road Clover Lane
New Oxford
Sarhelm Road
East and West
North and South
East and West
Sunset Avenue Manor Drive East and West
Sunset Drive Avondale Terrace
Fairville Avenue
Manor Drive
East and West
East and West
East and West
Terrann Drive Hollow Drive East
Timber Lane None
Townman Road Allentown Boulevard North
§ 187-19 PLUMBING § 187-19
144:483
§ 187-20. Yield intersections established.
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Tucker Street Piketown Road East and West
Umberger Street Carl Street West
Valleyview Road Avondale Avenue
Hershey Road
Manor Drive
East
East
East and West
Village Way [Added
2-1-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-01; amended
10-15-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-20]
Forney Way North and South
Walnut Avenue Linglestown Road South
Wells Drive Manor Drive West
Westford Circle Sterling Road South
Wheaton Place Jonestown Road
Wilson Court Lawrence Drive
Windcrest Drive Northstar East
East and West
Woodside Avenue Fairville Avenue
Florence Drive
North Clover Lane
Manor Drive
East and West
West
West
East and West
Yellowstone Drive Berkstone Drive West
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the
through highways established by § 187-18) are established as yield
intersections, and official yield signs shall be erected (or are ratified if
previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street (the through street) on the first-named street (the
yield street) in the direction or directions indicated for that
intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection on
the first-named or yield street, in the direction indicated in each case,
shall slow down or stop the vehicle as required by § 3323(c) of the
§ 187-19 WEST HANOVER CODE § 187-20
144:484
Vehicle Code,135 and then yield the right-of-way as required by that
subsection of the Vehicle Code.
Yield Street Through Street Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
135. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3323(c).
§ 187-20 PLUMBING § 187-20
144:485

ARTICLE III
Size, Weight and Type of Vehicle and Load
[Amended 2-17-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-1]
§ 187-21. Prohibition on size and weight based on condition of
highway or bridge. [Amended 8-3-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-15]
No vehicle or combination of vehicles shall be operated upon the highways
or bridges of West Hanover Township where highway construction was
designed to accommodate normal traffic, which has an outside width,
including any load, greater than eight feet, or which has a trailer overall
length, including any load and bumpers, greater than 53 feet, or which has
a gross weight, including any load, in excess of 78,000 pounds.
§ 187-22. Prohibition on size and weight based on safety in
residential areas. [Amended 8-3-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-15]
No vehicle or combination of vehicles shall be operated upon the highways
or bridges of West Hanover Township within an established residential area
which has an outside width, including any load, greater than eight feet, or
which has an overall length, including any load and bumpers, greater than
40 feet, or which has a gross weight, including any load, in excess of 30,000
pounds.
§ 187-23. Truck and bus traffic restricted on certain streets based
on condition of highway and/or traffic conditions. [Amended
4-2-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-7; 8-6-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-15;
5-19-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-05]
A. No over-weight vehicle, except for local traffic authorized under Part IV,
Chapter 49, Subsection D, of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, 75
Pa.C.S.A., as amended,136 shall be driven on a posted highway with a
gross weight in excess of the posted weight limit unless the Township
has issued a permit for the vehicle or vehicles in accordance with
Chapter 49, Subsection D, of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, 75
Pa.C.S.A., as amended. The following locations are established as local
streets with special weight restrictions:137
136. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4961 et seq.
137. Editor's Note: References to Chapter 189.3 and Chapter 189.4 are to §§ 189.3 and 189.4 of
the Pennsylvania Code.
§ 187-21 PLUMBING § 187-23
144:487
Local Traffic
and Vehicles
Traveling On
Directions of
Travel/
Location
Weight Limit
Restriction When
Jonestown Road
(T-601)
Eastbound and
westbound
traffic between
Blue Ridge
Avenue (T-561)
and SR 0039
(Hershey Road)
Local traffic and
nonlocal traffic
exceeding 30
tons
All times, or in
accordance with
vehicle use
permit
Manor Drive
(T-465) [Added
11-5-2012 by
Ord. No.
2012-21]
Northbound and
southbound
traffic between
SR 0022
(Allentown
Boulevard) and
SR 0039
(Hershey Road)
Local traffic and
nonlocal traffic
exceeding 15
tons
All times, or in
accordance with
vehicle use
permit
Manor Drive Northbound and
southbound
traffic between
Jonestown Road
(T-601) and SR
0039
(Linglestown
Road)
Local traffic and
nonlocal traffic
exceeding 15
tons
All times, or in
accordance with
vehicle use
permit
B. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any truck, truck tractor with trailer,
or bus to travel upon any of the following portions of local streets in the
direction or directions indicated for that street, except for local
deliveries as posted:
Local Traffic and
Vehicles Traveling
On Directions of Travel/Location When
Clover Lane (T-520)
[Added 1-22-2013
by Ord. No.
2013-03]
Northbound and southbound on
street segments 7 through 11
between Manor Drive (T-465) and
SR 0022 (Allentown Boulevard) At all times
Harper Drive (T-557)
[Repealed
6-6-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-08]
§ 187-23 WEST HANOVER CODE § 187-23
144:488
Local Traffic and
Vehicles Traveling
On Directions of Travel/Location When
Jonestown Road
(T-601)
Eastbound and westbound traffic
on the street segment east of the
intersection of Jonestown Road
(T-601) and Blue Ridge Avenue
(T-561) to SR 0039 (Hershey
Road), with the exception of the
eastbound lane of Jonestown Road
(T-601) a distance measured
approximately 420 feet to the west
of SR 0039 (Hershey Road)
At all times
Manada View Drive
(T-453)
Eastbound and westbound traffic
on the street segment located to
the east of the intersection of SR
0039 (Hershey Road) toward East
Hanover Township
At all times
Manor Drive (T-465)
[Added 11-5-2012
by Ord. No.
2012-21]
Northbound and southbound on
street segments 11 through 20
between Sandy Hollow Road
(T-621) and SR 0022 (Allentown
Boulevard)
At all times
N. Fairville Avenue
(T-537) [Added
11-5-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-21]
Northbound and southbound on
street segments 6 through 12
between Jonestown Road (T-601)
and SR 0022 (Allentown
Boulevard)
At all times
C. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any truck, truck tractor with trailer,
or bus to travel upon any of the following portions of local streets in the
direction or directions indicated for that street, except for residential
deliveries as posted: [Amended 11-5-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-21]
Local Traffic and
Vehicles Traveling
On Directions of Travel/Location When
Bolton Drive
(T-623-1)
Northbound and southbound
traffic between Wells Drive (T-519)
and Slate Ridge Road (T-622)
At all times
Daniel Drive
(T-609-1)
Eastbound and westbound
between N. Fairville Avenue
(T-537) and Dove Drive (T-610)
At all times
Dewey Drive (T-602) Northbound and southbound
between Myrtle Drive (T-604) and
Jonestown Road (T-601)
At all times
§ 187-23 PLUMBING § 187-23
144:489
§ 187-24. Bridge weight restrictions. [Added 8-3-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-15138]
No overweight vehicle, except for emergency vehicles, shall be driven
on a posted bridge with a gross weight in excess of the posted weight
limit. The following locations are established as bridges with special weight
restrictions:
Local Traffic and
Vehicles Traveling
On Directions of Travel/Location When
Dove Drive (T-610-1) Eastbound and westbound
between Daniel Drive (T-609) and
N. Fairville Avenue (T-537)
At all times
Manada View Drive
(T-453)
Eastbound and westbound traffic
on street segments 1 through 5
between Joanna Street (T-490) and
the Township Line
At all times
Monroe Street
(T-492)
Eastbound and westbound traffic
on street segments 1 and 2
between Joanna Street (T-490) and
SR 0039 (Hershey Road)
At all times
Myrtle Drive (T-604) Northbound and southbound
between Dewey Drive (T-602) and
Jonestown Road (T-601)
At all times
N. Clover Lane (T-
471-1)
Northbound and southbound
between Jonestown Road (T-601)
and Rauch Street (T-620)
At all times
Rauch Street
(T-620-1)
Eastbound and westbound
between N. Clover Lane (T-471)
and N. Fairville Avenue (T-537)
At all times
Slate Ridge Road
(T-622-1)
Eastbound and westbound
between Manor Drive (T-465) and
Bolton Drive (T-623)
At all times
Slepian Street
(T-469)
Eastbound and westbound traffic
between Carl Street (T-464) and
SR 0039 (Hershey Road)
At all times
Umberger Street
(T-463)
Eastbound and westbound traffic
between Carl Street (T-464) and
SR 0039 (Hershey Road)
At all times
Wells Drive (T-519-1) Eastbound and westbound
between Manor Drive (T-465) and
Bolton Drive (T-623-1)
At all times
138. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former §§ 187-24,
187-25 and 187-26 as §§ 187-25, 187-26 and 187-26.1, respectively.
§ 187-23 WEST HANOVER CODE § 187-24
144:490
Bridge Location
Weight Limit
(tons)
Bridge on Jonestown Road over
Beaver Creek (T-601-1)
20
§ 187-25. Posting of signs; exemptions.
§ 187-26. Permit and security requirements. [Amended 8-3-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-15]
Any person desiring to operate a vehicle upon the highways of West
Hanover Township which exceeds the posted weight limitations set forth
in §§ 187-21, 187-22, 187-23 and 187-24 shall first apply for and secure a
permit for such operation from West Hanover Township, shall pay a permit
fee as set forth from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
A permit and appropriate financial security is required for all nonexempt
vehicle traffic that exceeds any posted weight limits on a posted Township
street. All permits and security will be prepared and required as per the
requirements of Chapter 49 issued under Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, 75
Pa.C.S.A., as amended.140
§ 187-26.1. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-3-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-15]
Any person operating a vehicle or combination of vehicles in violation of a
prohibition imposed in §§ 187-21, 187-22, 187-23 and 187-24 or in violation
of the terms of a permit issued under § 187-26 shall be guilty of a summary
offense and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $75, except
that any person convicted of operating a vehicle with a gross weight in
excess of a posted weight shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine
of $150, plus $150 for each 500 pounds or part thereof in excess of 3,000
pounds over the maximum weight allowable upon the posted highway or by
issued permit.
A. The provisions of this article shall be effective only upon those
highways or portions of highways designated as “restricted” by the
Board of Supervisors of West Hanover Township and only after the
erection of signs designating the restrictions shall be located at each
end of the restricted highways and/or portions thereof.
B. Exemptions. Local traffic authorized under Chapter 49, Subsection D, of
the Pennsyvania Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A.,139 as amended, school
buses, emergency vehicles, municipal vehicles and vehicles making
local deliveries or pickups shall be exempt from the provisions of this
article. [Amended 8-3-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-15]
139. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4901 et seq.
140. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4901 et seq.
§ 187-24 PLUMBING § 187-26.1
144:491

ARTICLE IV
General Parking Regulations
§ 187-27. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.
Wherever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an individual
vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within the lines
bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of this article for any person
to park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
§ 187-28. Parking prohibited at all times.
Parking shall be prohibited at all times in the following locations:
Street Side Between
Alva Drive West Jay Drive and Minute Road
Aynlee Way (T-588)
[Added 4-6-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-01]
Both, and
both sides of
boulevard
island
Entire length of the boulevard
island plus an additional 8 feet
from each end of the island
Aynlee Way (T-588)
[Added 4-6-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-01]
Both sides of
traffic circle
and islands
Both sides of the traffic circle
plus an additional 8 feet from
each end of the traffic islands on
Aynlee Way and Village Way
Aynlee Way (T-588)
[Added 4-6-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-01]
Both, and
both sides of
boulevard
island
From the intersection at Clover
Lane to the intersection at
Woodruff Way
Bradford Boulevard
(T-497) [Added
12-5-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-13]
West Between Jonestown Road and
circle at Buckley Street
Bradford Boulevard
Traffic Circle (T-497)
[Added 9-16-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-07]
Both sides of
traffic circle
The traffic circle at the
intersection of Bradford
Boulevard and Buckley Drive
Brynfield Traffic Circle
(T-586) [Added
4-6-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-01]
Both sides of
traffic circle
The traffic circle at the
intersections of Brynfield Way,
Quiggley Circle, Baumgardner
Drive, and Hanoverdale
Brynfield Way (T-586)
[Added 4-6-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-01]
Both, and
both sides of
boulevard
island
The intersection of SR 0039
(Hershey Road) and Brynfield
Way to the intersection of
Brynfield Way and North Star
Drive
§ 187-27 PLUMBING § 187-28
144:493
Street Side Between
Brynfield Way (T-586)
[Added 4-6-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-01]
North The intersection of Brynfield Way
at North Star Drive to the
Brynfield Traffic Circle
Chervil Court (T-587)
[Added 4-6-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-01]
Right side
and left side
of street culde-
sac bulb
circumference
From the northern property line
at 312 Chervil Court around the
cul-de-sac and back to the
starting point
Coriander Way (T-590)
[Added 4-6-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-01]
Right side
and left side
of street culde-
sac bulb
circumference
From the driveway of 7633
Coriander Way around the cul-desac
and back to the starting point
Fairville Avenue [Added
3-3-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-1]
Both 540 feet north from State Route
0039 (Linglestown Road)
Forney Way (T-583-3)
[Added 2-22-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-02]
Right and
left sides of
street cul-desac
bulb
circumference
From the driveway of 7552
Forney Way around the cul-de-sac
to the driveway of 7555 Forney
Way
Forney Way (T-583)
[Added 4-6-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-01]
Right and
left sides of
street cul-desac
bulb
circumference
From the driveway of 7703
Forney Way around the cul-de-sac
to the driveway of 7704 Forney
Way
Hanoverdale Drive
(T-584) [Added
4-6-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-01]
Both, and
both sides of
boulevard
island
Entire length of the boulevard
island plus an additional 8 feet
from each end of the island
Hanoverdale Drive
(T-584) [Added
4-6-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-01]
Right and
left sides of
street cul-desac
bulb
circumference
From the northern property line
at 7712 Hanoverdale Drive
around the cul-de-sac to the
driveway of 7715 Hanoverdale
Drive
Hanover View Circle
(T-493) [Added
4-6-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-01]
Outside
circumference
of Hanover
View Circle
Entire length of Hanover View
Circle from the intersection at
Brynfield Way around to the
intersection at Brynfield Way
J. L. Moyer Court (T-581)
[Added 4-6-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-01]
Right and
left sides of
street cul-desac
bulb
circumference
The circumference of the cul-desac
from the driveway at 7715 J.
L. Moyer Court
§ 187-28 WEST HANOVER CODE § 187-28
144:494
Street Side Between
Jonestown Road [Added
3-3-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-1]
Both 815 feet west from State Route
0039 (Hershey Road)
Minute Road North Alva Drive and Florence Drive
North Star Drive (T-485)
[Added 4-6-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-01]
Right and
left sides of
street cul-desac
bulb
circumference
From the southern property line
of 510 North Star Drive around
the cul-de-sac to the northern
property line of 531 North Star
Drive
Schaffner Drive (T-582)
[Added 4-6-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-01]
Both, and
both sides of
boulevard
island
Entire length of the boulevard
island plus an additional 8 feet
from each end of the island
Village Way (T-589)
[Added 2-1-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-01]
Right and
left sides of
street cul-desac
bulb
circumference
From the northern property line
of 413 Village Way around the
cul-de-sac and back to the
starting point
Woodruff Way (T-585)
[Added 4-6-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-01]
Both, and
both sides of
boulevard
island
Entire length of the boulevard
island plus an additional 8 feet
from each end of the island
Woodruff Way (T-585)
[Added 4-6-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-01]
Right and
left sides of
street cul-desac
bulb
circumference
From the eastern property line at
461 Woodruff Way around the
cul-de-sac to the eastern property
line of 472 Woodruff Way
Woodruff Way (T-585)
[Added 4-6-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-01]
Right and
left sides of
street cul-desac
bulb
circumference
From the southern property line
at 312 Woodruff Way around the
cul-de-sac to the northern
property line at 315 Woodruff
Way
§ 187-29. Parking prohibited certain days and hours.
Parking shall be prohibited in the following locations at all times on the days
and between the hours indicated in this section, as follows:
Street Side Between Days Hours
(Reserved)
§ 187-30. Parking of trucks, buses and certain other vehicles
prohibited in certain locations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or to allow to remain parked
on any of the following streets or parts of streets any vehicle other than a
§ 187-28 PLUMBING § 187-30
144:495
passenger car (which shall not include any bus, motor home or passenger
car attached to a trailer of any kind):
Street Between
(Reserved)
§ 187-31. Parking time limited certain days and hours.
No person shall park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked for longer than
the time indicated in any of the following locations at any time on the days
and between the hours indicated:
Parking
Street Side Between Days Hours Time Limit
(Reserved)
§ 187-32. Special purpose parking zones established; parking
otherwise prohibited.
The following are established as special purpose parking zones, and it shall
be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or to allow it to remain parked
in any such zone except as specifically provided for that zone:
Type of Zone Street Location
Restriction/
Authorized
Purpose
Fire hydrant
access no
parking zone
SR 0039
Linglestown Road
[Added
12-18-2006 by
Ord. No.
2006-10]
Southbound side of SR
0039, adjacent to
public fire hydrant in
posted area, between
private driveway and
the Exit 77 southbound
I-81 ramp entrance
ramp
No parking/
emergency and
authorized
vehicle access
only
§ 187-33. Standing or parking on roadway for loading or unloading.
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle (other
than a pedalcycle) on the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked
at the edge or curb of any street, except that standing or parking for the
purpose of loading or unloading persons or property shall be permitted
Monday through Saturday between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:30 a.m.
and between the hours of 1:30 p.m. and 4:00 p.m., and for no longer than
necessary for the loading or unloading.
Street Side Between
(Reserved)
§ 187-30 WEST HANOVER CODE § 187-34
144:496
§ 187-34. Parking or use of major recreational equipment and
major commercial vehicles. [Added 7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-7]
§ 187-35. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $15 and costs.
A. For purposes of this section, major recreational equipment includes
boats and boat trailers, travel trailers, pickup campers or coaches
(designed to be mounted on automotive vehicles), motorized dwellings,
converted school buses, tent trailers and the like, in cases or boxes used
for transporting recreational equipment, whether occupied by such
equipment or not.
B. For purposes of this section, a "major commercial vehicle" shall be
those vehicles not normally and customarily associated with or
adaptable to passenger use, such as tractor-trailer trucks or bulldozers.
C. No major recreational vehicle or major commercial vehicle shall be
parked or stored on any street or publicly dedicated right-of-way except
for the temporary purposes of loading or unloading, and such
temporary purposes shall not exceed a twenty-four-hour period.
D. No major recreational vehicle or major commercial vehicle shall be
used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes when parked upon a
street or publicly dedicated right-of-way, or when parked or stored upon
a residential lot, or when parked or stored in any location not approved
for such use.
§ 187-34 PLUMBING § 187-35
144:497

ARTICLE V
Removal and Impoundment of Illegally Parked Vehicles
§ 187-36. Statutory authority; applicability and scope.
This part is enacted under authority of § 6109(a)(22) of the Vehicle Code141
and gives authority to the Township of West Hanover to remove and
impound those vehicles which are parked in a tow-away zone and in
violation of parking regulations of this chapter. Vehicles which have been
abandoned (as defined by the Vehicle Code) or which are parked in such a
manner as to interfere with traffic or pose a hazard to others may be towed
under the provisions of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code.
§ 187-37. Authority to remove and impound.
The Township shall have authority to remove and impound or to order
the removal and impounding of any vehicle parked overtime or otherwise
illegally, provided that the circumstances of its parking were within the
conditions stated in § 187-36 of this article, and further provided that no
such vehicle shall be removed or impounded except in strict adherence to
the provisions of this article or the provisions of the Pennsylvania Vehicle
Code.
§ 187-38. Tow-away zones designated.
The following designated streets and/or parking lots are hereby established
as tow-away zones. Signs shall be posted to place the public on notice
that their vehicles may be towed for violation of the Township parking
regulations.
Street or Parking Lot Side Between
Alva Drive (T-473) [Added
10-16-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-05]
East,
West
Florence Road (T-478) and
Jay Drive (T-616)
Bradford Boulevard (T-497)
[Added 4-16-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-03]
West Jonestown Road (T-601) and
Buckley Drive (T-494)
Florence Road (T-478) – Houck
Memorial Park [Added
10-16-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-05]
North,
South
Kingwood Drive (T-470) and
Holstein Road (T-440)
Jay Drive (T-616) [Added
10-16-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-05]
North,
South
Franklin Drive (T-476) and
Minute Road (T-474)
Jonestown Road (T-601) [Added
10-16-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-05]
South North Oak Grove Road
(T-522) intersection – 700
feet west and 700 feet east
141. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6109(a)(22).
§ 187-36 PLUMBING § 187-38
144:499
Street or Parking Lot Side Between
North Oak Grove Road (T-522)
[Added 10-16-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-05]
East,
West
Allentown Boulevard (PA
Route 22) and Jonestown
Road (T-601)
§ 187-39. Designation of approved storage garages; bonding;
towing and storage.
Removal and impounding of vehicles under this chapter shall be done only
by approved storage garages that shall be designated from time to time by
the Board of Supervisors. Every such garage shall submit evidence to the
Board of Supervisors that it is bonded or has acquired liability insurance
in an amount satisfactory to the Board of Supervisors as sufficient to
indemnify owners of impounded vehicles against loss or damage to those
vehicles while in the custody of the garage keeper for the purpose of
towing or storage. The approved storage garage shall submit to the Board
of Supervisors its schedule of charges for towing and storage of vehicles
under this chapter, and, when the schedule is approved by the Board of
Supervisors, those charges shall be adhered to by the approved storage
garage; no different schedule of charges shall be demanded of or collected
from any person whose vehicle is removed or impounded under this chapter
by any approved storage garage. The Board of Supervisors shall delete from
its list of approved storage garages any garage that makes any unapproved
charge in connection with any vehicle removed or impounded under this
chapter.
§ 187-40. Payment of towing and storage charges.
The payment of towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or
driver of any vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation
of the provision of this chapter for which the vehicle was removed or
impounded.
§ 187-41. Reclamation costs. [Amended 7-17-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-7]
In order to reclaim his vehicle, the owner shall pay towing and storage
costs, plus a fee as set forth from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors, of which an amount as set forth from time to time by resolution
of the Board of Supervisors shall be transferred to the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation by the garage to which the vehicle was taken.
§ 187-42. Records of vehicles removed and impounded.
The township shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles impounded
under this article and shall be able at all reasonable times to furnish the
owners or the agents of the owners of those vehicles with information as to
the place of storage of the vehicle.
§ 187-38 WEST HANOVER CODE § 187-43
144:500
§ 187-43. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article or the Vehicle
Code if, at the time of the intended removal, the owner or the person for the
time being in charge of the vehicle is present and expresses a willingness
and intention to remove the vehicle immediately.
§ 187-44. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-17-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-7]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $50 together with all costs
of disposing of the vehicle under provisions of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 7301 et seq. (1977), as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or
reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
§ 187-45. Reports and disposition of unclaimed vehicles.
If after a period of 15 days the vehicle in storage remains unclaimed, a
report shall be filed with the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PennDOT), in accordance with § 7311 of the Vehicle Code,142 by the person
having legal custody of the vehicle. If the vehicle has not been claimed after
30 days, the vehicle may be transferred to a licensed salvor who will then
be responsible for filing the proper reports and disposing of the vehicle in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 73 of the Pennsylvania Motor
Vehicle Code (75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq., as amended).
142. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7311.
§ 187-43 PLUMBING § 187-45
144:501

ARTICLE VI
Snow and Ice Emergencies
[Amended 8-6-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-11]
§ 187-46. Declaration of snow and ice emergency.
In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards
of snow and ice on the snow emergency routes named in § 187-48 of
this article, the Township Manager, Public Works Director, Road Master or
designated representative in consultation with the Emergency Management
Coordinator may declare a snow and ice emergency (designated in this
article as a "snow emergency"). Information on the existence of a snow
emergency may be given by the Township through radio, newspaper or
other available media, and information on the termination of the emergency
may be given by use of the same media. A snow emergency is deemed to
exist when three or more inches of snow has accumulated on streets within
the Township or as specified by the Dauphin County EMA, PEMA or other
higher public safety authorities.
§ 187-47. Restrictions on use of snow emergency routes during
emergency.
After any snow emergency is declared, it shall be unlawful, at any time
during the continuance of the emergency, for any person:
§ 187-48. Snow emergency routes designated.
The following are designated as snow emergency routes:
Street Name Description of Segment
Appalachian Trail East (T-533) From Piketown Road to end of road
Appleby Road (T-531) From Piketown Road to Fishing
Creek Valley Road
Avondale Terrace (T-608) From Fairville Avenue to Manor
Drive and from Manor Drive to
Cassel Avenue
Aynlee Way (T-588) From Clover Lane to Villa Way
Blue Ridge Avenue (T-561) From Piketown Road to Jonestown
Road
Brynfield Way (T-586) From Hanoverdale Drive to Hershey
Road (SR 0039)
A. To park a motor vehicle or to allow that vehicle to remain parked
anywhere on any snow emergency route designated in § 187-48 of this
article; or
B. To drive any motor vehicle on any such snow emergency route, unless
that vehicle is equipped with snow tires or chains.
§ 187-46 PLUMBING § 187-48
144:503
Street Name Description of Segment
Cassell Avenue (T-617) From Avondale Terrace to Hershey
Road (SR 0039)
Clover Lane (T-520) From Manor Drive to Allentown
Boulevard (US 22) and from
Allentown Boulevard to Green Hill
Road
Daniel Drive (T-609) From Fairville Avenue to Dove Drive
Devonshire Heights Road (T-431) Beaver Creek to Oak Grove Road
Douglas Road (T-516) From Devonshire Heights Road to
Township line
Fairville Avenue (T-537) From Piketown Road to Moyer Road
and from Moyer Road to
Linglestown Road (SR 0039); from
Linglestown Road to Daniel Drive
from Daniel Drive to Allentown
Boulevard (US 22) and from
Allentown Boulevard (US 22) to
Avondale Terrace
Florence Drive (T-478) From Manor Drive to Alden Drive
Hanoverdale Drive (T-584) From Villa Way to Brynfield Way
Hillside Road (T-444) From Piketown Road to Walnut
Avenue
Jonestown Road (T-601) From Beaver Creek to the Township
line
Manor Drive (T-465) From Linglestown Road (SR 0039)
to Allentown Boulevard (US 22) and
from Allentown Boulevard (US 22)
to Hershey Road (SR 0039)
Mountain Road (T-549) From Fishing Creek Valley Road
north to Birchwood
Moyer Road (T-513) From Piketown Road to the
Township line
Pheasant Road (T-445) From Compton Drive to Piketown
Road
Piketown Road (T-560) From Blue Ridge Avenue to
Linglestown Road (SR 0039); from
Linglestown Road (SR 0039) to
Fishing Creek Valley Road (SR 443)
Pine Tree Avenue (T-525) From Sleepy Hollow to Fishing
Creek Valley Road
Sandy Hollow Road (T-621) From Manor Drive to Piketown Road
§ 187-48 WEST HANOVER CODE § 187-48
144:504
Street Name Description of Segment
Sarhelm Road (T-518) From Jonestown Road to Devonshire
Heights Road
Sleepy Hollow Road (T-529) From Fishing Creek Valley Road to
Piketown Road
Sterling Road (T-451) From Oak Grove Road to Clover
Lane
Village Way (T-589) From Aynlee Way to Hanoverdale
Drive
Walnut Avenue (T-534) From Hillside Drive to Linglestown
Road (SR 0039)
§ 187-49. Signs to be placed.
In order to assist the drivers of motor vehicles in determining the streets
designated as snow emergency routes, signs stating "No parking during
snow emergency, snow tires or chains required during snow emergency"
shall be placed along said streets or portions thereof so designated in
§ 187-48 with no greater distance between signs than 1/2 mile.
§ 187-50. Authority to remove and impound vehicles. [Amended
10-18-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-14]
The Police Department and/or Township Public Works official have the
authority to remove and/or impound or to order the removal and/or
impounding of any vehicle violating the provision of § 187-47. The Police
Department and Public Works official shall follow the procedures in Article
V dealing with the removal and impoundment of vehicles. Vehicles removed
from snow emergency routes may be removed and impounded or may be
moved to the closest street off of the snow emergency route and left at
said site. Such factors as storm severity, number of vehicles to be removed,
number of tow trucks available and the time delay for impounding vehicles
will be considered by the at-scene police officer or Public Works official
prior to any decision for moving vehicles to the closest street adjacent to
the snow emergency route.
§ 187-51. Violations and penalties.
A. If at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under
§ 187-46 of this article a person shall park a motor vehicle or allow a
motor vehicle to remain parked anywhere upon a snow emergency
route, that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article and, upon
conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $15 and
costs.
B. If at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under
§ 187-46 of this article a person shall drive a motor vehicle upon a snow
emergency route without having that vehicle equipped with snow tires
§ 187-48 PLUMBING § 187-51
144:505
or chains, that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article and,
upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 187-51 WEST HANOVER CODE § 187-51
144:506
Chapter 195
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 52.
Building construction — See Ch. 78.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 108.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 170.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
173.
§ 187-51 PLUMBING § 187-51
144:507

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 195-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the "West Hanover
Township Zoning Ordinance" (hereinafter referred to as "chapter").
§ 195-2. Statutory authority.
This chapter is enacted and ordained under the grant of powers by the
General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Act 247, the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, July 31, 1968, as reenacted and
amended by Act 170, December 21, 1988.143
§ 195-3. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted for the following purposes:
A. To generally implement the Comprehensive Plan and to promote,
protect, and facilitate any or all of the following: the public health,
safety, morals, and the general welfare; coordinated and practical
community development and proper density of population; emergency
management practices, disaster evacuation, the provision of adequate
light and air, police protection, vehicle parking and loading space,
transportation, water, sewerage, schools, recreational facilities, public
grounds, the provision of safe, reliable and adequate water supply for
domestic, commercial, agricultural, or industrial use, and other public
requirements, as well as preservation of the natural, scenic, and
historic values in the environment and preservation of forests,
wetlands, aquifers, floodplains and open space. [Amended 11-4-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-8A; 9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2005-8]
B. To prevent one or more of the following: overcrowding of land, blight,
danger and congestion in travel and transportation, loss of health, life
or property from fire, flood, panic or other dangers.
C. To preserve prime agriculture and farmland, considering topography,
soil type and classification and present use.
D. To provide for the use of land within the municipality for residential
housing of various dwelling types encompassing all basic forms of
housing, including single-family and two-family dwellings, and a
reasonable range of multifamily dwellings in various arrangements.
E. To accommodate reasonable overall community growth, including
population and employment growth, and opportunities for development
of a variety of residential dwelling types and nonresidential uses.
143. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 195-1 PLUMBING § 195-4
144:509
§ 195-4. Community development objectives.
This chapter is to render a legal basis and framework to the future land
use plan and development goals established in the West Hanover Township
Comprehensive Plan (hereinafter referred to as "Comprehensive Plan") as
prepared by the Planning Commission and adopted by the Board of
Supervisors. The objectives of guiding future growth and improvement
of existing development within the Township are to promote the most
economical and efficient provision of municipal services; eliminate
hazardous and detrimental land uses while encouraging beneficial and
compatible land uses; maintain a healthful residential environment with
adequate recreational, commercial and industrial supporting areas; protect
and conserve open spaces, agricultural lands, drainageways and floodplains
and other environmentally sensitive areas; and to avoid the problems of
random development inconsistent with the Township-wide goals and
objectives. This chapter is found to be in accordance with the intent and
goals of the Comprehensive Plan.
§ 195-5. Interpretation. [Amended 3-5-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-1]
In interpreting and applying this chapter, its provisions shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for promotion of health, safety, morals and
general welfare of the Township. Any use permitted subject to the
regulations prescribed by the provisions of this chapter shall conform with
all regulations and is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, annul,
supersede or cancel any reservations contained in deeds or other
agreements, but that if this chapter imposes more stringent restrictions
upon the use of buildings and land than are contained in the deeds or
agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall control. To assist in the
interpretation of this chapter, land use planning or zoning reference
materials such as planning reports, books, etc., may be used.
§ 195-6. Applicability. [Amended 11-4-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-8A]
The provisions, regulations, limitations and restrictions of this chapter shall
apply to all structures, buildings, uses, signs and land, and their accessory
structures, buildings, uses and signs, except to the extent that certain
activities are regulated by other federal or state statutes in accordance with
Section 603.B of the MPC, Act 247.144
§ 195-7. Proposed land uses.
All proposed uses for land in the Township must be reviewed by the Zoning
Officer. No use may be initiated without a valid zoning permit which is
issued in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
144. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10603(b).
§ 195-4 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-7
144:510
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 195-8. Purpose.
The following words are defined in order to facilitate the interpretation of
this chapter for administrative purposes and in the carrying out of duties by
appropriate officers and by the Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 195-9. Interpretation. [Amended 3-5-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-1;
9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2005-8]
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words shall, for the
purpose of this chapter, have the meanings herein indicated. Words used
in the present tense include the future tense. The singular includes the
plural. The word “person” includes any individual or group of individuals, a
corporation, partnership or any other similar entity. The word "lot" includes
the words "plot" or "parcel." The term "shall" is always mandatory. The
word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be
construed to include the words “intended, arranged or designed to be used
or occupied.” Any words not included in the following definitions shall be as
described in the North American Industrial Classification System (NAICS)
other planning related materials, or in Webster’s Dictionary.
§ 195-10. Definitions.
The following is a list of definitions:
ABANDONMENT — The relinquishment of property, or a cessation of the
use of the property, by the owner with the intention neither of transferring
rights to the property to another owner nor of resuming the use of the
property.
ABUT — To physically touch or border upon; or to share a common property
line.
ACADEMIC CLINICAL RESEARCH CENTER — An accredited medical
school within this commonwealth that operates or partners with an acute
care hospital licensed within this commonwealth.[Added 3-19-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-02]
ACCESS DRIVE — A paved surface, other than a street, which provides
vehicular access from a street or private road to a lot.
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building subordinate to and detached from the
main building on the same lot and used for purposes customarily incidental
to the main building. (See Illustration 1.145)
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A subordinate structure detached from but
located on the same lot as the principal structure, the use of which is
incidental and accessory to that of the principal structure.
145. Editor's Note: Illustration 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 195-8 PLUMBING § 195-10
144:511
ACCESSORY USE —
ADDITION —
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICES — An establishment primarily engaged in
overall management and general supervisory functions, such as executive,
personnel, finance, legal and sales activities, performed in a single location
or building for other branches or divisions of the same company.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USES — An establishment consisting of,
including or having the characteristics of any or all of the following:
A. A use incidental to, and on the same lot as, a principal use.
A structure or use that is clearly incidental to and customarily found in
connection with a principal building or use; is subordinate to and serves
a principal building or a principal use; is subordinate in area, extent or
purpose to the principal building or principal use served; contributes
to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants, business or
industry in the principal building or principal use served; and is located
on the same lot as the principal building or use served.
B.
A structure added to the original structure after issuance of the
certificate of occupancy upon completion of the original.
A.
An extension or increase in floor area or height of a building or
structure.
B.
ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE OR ADULT VIDEO
STORE [Amended 6-16-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-9] —
A commercial establishment, which, as one of its principal
purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form or consideration any
one or more of the following:
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or video
reproductions, slides, or other visual representatives which
are characterized by the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or
(a)
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia, which are designed for
use in connection with specified sexual activities.
(b)
(1)
A commercial establishment may have other principal business
purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of
material depicting or describing specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas and still be categorized as adult
bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store. Such other
business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial
establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult
novelty store or adult video store so long as one of its business
purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the
(2)
A.
§ 195-10 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-10
144:512
specified materials which are characterized by the depiction of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features: [Amended 6-16-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-9]
(1) Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity,
Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomica1 areas or by specified sexual activities, or
(2)
Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
(3)
B.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building used for
presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or related to specified anatomical areas or
to specified sexual activities for observation by patrons therein.
C.
EROTIC MASSAGE PARLOR — An enclosed building, tent or other
structure wherein a substantial or significant portion of the business
or nonbusiness activity involves performing masturbation, the
engagement in any form of sexual intercourse or involves the erotic
fondling, touching or manipulation of the covered or uncovered
genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts, whether such
conduct is engaged in between members of the same or opposite sex or
between humans and animals.
D.
ESCORT — A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as
companion, guide or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person. [Added 11-6-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-10]
E.
ESCORT SERVICE OR AGENCY — A person or business association
that furnishes, offers to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one
of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
[Added 11-6-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-10]
F.
LIVE ADULT EXHIBITION — A display for observation by patrons
within an enclosed building, tent or other structure of specified
anatomical areas of the human body or a demonstration of specified
sexual activities.
G.
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated, slug-operated, or for any form of consideration,
or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motionpicture
machines, projectors, video or laser disc players, or other
image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or
fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images
H.
§ 195-10 PLUMBING § 195-10
144:513
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear
in a state of nudity or seminudity, or live performances which are
characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified
sexual activities.[Added 6-16-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-9]
AGRICULTURAL OPERATION — An enterprise that is actively engaged in
the commercial production and preparation for market of crops, livestock
and livestock products and in the production, harvesting and preparation
for market or use of agricultural, agronomic, horticultural, silvicultural and
aquacultural crops and commodities. The term includes an enterprise that
implements changes in production practices and procedures or types of
crops, livestock, livestock products or commodities produced consistent
with practices and procedures that are normally engaged by farmers or
are consistent with technological development within the agricultural
industry.[Added 11-4-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-8A; amended 8-15-2005
by Ord. No. 2004-12]
AGRICULTURE — The production, keeping or maintenance, for sale or
lease, of plants and animals useful to man, including but not limited to
forages and sod crops; grains and seed crops; dairy animals and dairy
products; poultry and poultry products; livestock, including beef cattle,
sheep, swine, horses, ponies, mules or goats, or any mutations of hybrids
thereof, including the breeding and grazing of any or all of such animals;
bees and apiary products; fur animals; trees and forest products; fruits of
all kinds, including grapes, nuts and berries; vegetables; nursery, floral,
ornamental and greenhouse products; or lands devoted to a soil
conservation or forestry management program.
AIR POLLUTION — The presence of contaminants in the air in
concentrations that prevent the normal dispensive ability of the air and that
interfere directly or indirectly with public health, safety or comfort or with
the full use and enjoyment of individual property.
AIRPORT — A nonpublic designated landing area for small private use fixedwing
aircraft, with appurtenant uses such as, but not limited to, fueling,
servicing, and storage.[Added 5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-1]
AIRPORT SAFETY ZONE — A height- and use-restricted zone around an
airport providing safe glide paths for aircraft operation.[Added 5-7-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-1]
AIR RIGHTS — The right to use space above ground level.
AISLE — The traveled way by which cars enter and depart parking spaces.
ALLEY — A public thoroughfare other than a minor street which affords
only a secondary means of access to abutting property and not intended for
general traffic circulation.
so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or
describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
[Added 6-16-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-9]
§ 195-10 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-10
144:514
ALLUVIAL SOILS — A soil developing from recently deposited alluvium
and exhibiting essentially no horizon development or modifications of the
recently deposited material.
ALTERATIONS — As applied to a building or structure, any change or
rearrangement in the structural parts or in the existing facilities, or an
enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height, or
the moving from one location or position to another.
AMENDMENT — A change in use in any district which includes revisions
to the zoning text and/or the Official Zoning Map; and the authority for any
amendment lies solely with the Board of Supervisors.
AMUSEMENT ARCADE — An establishment which has as its principal
business offering to patrons mechanical or electrical amusement devices or
games such pinball machines, ping pong, darts, shooting galleries or similar
devices and games.
ANIMAL EQUIVALENT UNIT (AEU) — Defined under Pennsylvania Nutrient
Management Act as 1,000 pounds of live weight of any animal.[Added
8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATION (AFO) — An operation that confines
animals for at least 45 days in a twelve-month period with on grass or
other vegetation in the confinement area during the normal growing
season.[Added 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — A building used for the treatment, housing or
boarding of small domestic animals such as dogs, cats, rabbits and birds or
fowl by a veterinarian.
ANIMAL KENNEL — Any structure or premises in which animals are kept,
boarded, bred, groomed or trained for commercial gain.
ANIMAL SERVICES — An establishment primarily engaged in performing
services, except veterinary, for cattle, hogs, sheep, goats, poultry, pets,
equines and other animals.
ANTENNA — Any exterior apparatus composed of a system of wires, poles,
rods, reflecting discs, or similar devices designed for cellular, radio, or
television communication through the sending and/or receiving of
electromagnetic waves.[Amended 8-4-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-12]
ANTENNA, SATELLITE DISH — A device incorporating a reflective surface
that is solid, open mesh or bar configured and is in the shape of a shallow
dish, cone, horn or cornucopia. Such device shall be used to transmit and/
or receive radio or electromagnetic waves between terrestrially and/or
orbitally-based uses. This definition is meant to include but not be limited to
what are commonly referred to as "satellite earth stations," "TV RO's" and
"satellite microwave antennas."
ALLUVIUM — A general term for all detrital material deposited or in
transit by streams, including gravel, sand, silt, clay and all variations
and mixtures of these. Unless otherwise noted, alluvium is
unconsolidated.
A.
§ 195-10 PLUMBING § 195-10
144:515
APARTMENT — A dwelling unit within a multifamily dwelling. This
classification includes apartments in apartment houses, efficiency
apartments, bachelor apartments, studio apartments and kitchenette
apartments.
APARTMENT, ACCESSORY — An independent dwelling unit, incorporated
within an existing single-family detached dwelling, established for the
purpose of providing an independent living unit for a person or persons
related by marriage or blood to the occupant of the principal dwelling unit;
or one live-in assistant who works for the occupant of the dwelling unit
in the health care, elder care, or living-assistance field, and for which the
owner receives no payment for use of the apartment.[Amended 5-7-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-6]
APARTMENT, CONVERSION — An existing dwelling unit that is or was
converted to a dwelling for more than one family without substantially
altering the exterior of the building.
APARTMENT, GARDEN — A two-story multifamily dwelling containing onestory
dwelling units.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer or other person who has filed an
application for development, building permit, zoning permit, approval to
engage in any regulated earth disturbance activity, etc., at a property or
project site within West Hanover Township.[Amended 4-4-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-2]
AREA, BUILDING — The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at
the main grade level of the principal building and all accessory buildings,
exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces and steps.
AUTO BODY SHOP — Any structure or any building or part thereof that is
used for the repair or painting of bodies, chassis, wheels, fenders, bumpers
and/or accessories of automobiles and other vehicles of conveyance.
AUTOMOBILE — A self-propelled, free-moving vehicle, primarily for
conveyance on a street or roadway, to include vans, passenger cars, station
wagons and pickup trucks, but excluding tractor cabs, trailers, dump trucks
and excavating vehicles and equipment.
AUTOMOBILE DETAILING BUSINESS — An establishment which provides
automobile related services, such as interior and exterior cleaning, engine
degreasing, applying cloth and paint protective coatings, but no mechanical
or body repairs or servicing.[Added 9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2005-8]
AUTOMOBILE GARAGE — A building on a lot designed and/or used
primarily for mechanical and/or body repairs, storage, rental, servicing or
supplying of gasoline or oil to automobiles, trucks or similar motor vehicles.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION — Any area of land, including any
structures thereon, or any building or part thereof, that is used for the retail
sale of gasoline, oil, other fuel or accessories for motor vehicles, and which
may include facilities used for polishing, greasing, washing, dry cleaning or
otherwise cleaning or servicing such motor vehicles.
§ 195-10 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-10
144:516
AUTOMOBILE WASHING (CAR WASH) — A building on a lot designed and
used primarily for the washing and polishing of automobiles and which may
provide accessory services set forth herein for automobile service stations.
AUTOMOBILE WASHING/MOTOR VEHICLE WASHING (EXTERIOR DRIVETHROUGH)
— Any motor vehicle laundry where exterior cleaning and/
or washing services are provided by driving through an automated drivethrough.[
Added 11-6-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-10]
AUTOMOBILE WASHING/MOTOR VEHICLE WASHING (FULL-SERVICE)
— Any motor vehicle laundry providing interior and exterior washing and
cleaning services for vehicles.[Added 11-6-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-10]
AUTOMOBILE WASHING/MOTOR VEHICLE WASHING (SELF-SERVICE)
— Any motor vehicle laundry where equipment and/or facilities are provided
for the self-service cleaning and/or washing of motor vehicles.[Added
11-6-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-10]
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD (see also "junkyard") — The dismantling
or wrecking of used motor vehicles or trailers or the storage, sale or
dumping of dismantled or wrecked vehicles or their parts. The presence in
the open on any lot or parcel of two or more motor vehicles which, for a
period exceeding 30 days, have not been capable of operating under their
own power and from which parts have been or are to be removed for reuse
or sale shall constitute prima facie evidence of an automobile wrecking
yard. This definition shall not include dropoff recycle centers for household
recyclables.[Amended 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-14]
BAR — Premises use primarily for the sale or dispensing of liquor by
the drink for on-site consumption and where food may be available for
consumption on the premises as accessory to the principle use.
BARN — A usually large building for the storage of farm products for feed
and usually for the housing of farm animals and farm equipment.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (formally called the "one-hundred-year
flood").[Added 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-18]
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, and A1-30 that indicates
the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. (Also see
"regulatory flood elevation.")[Amended 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-18]
BASEMENT — That portion of a building that is partially or wholly below
ground level. This portion serves as a substructure or foundation for a
building. A basement shall be counted as a story for the purpose of height
measurement, if the vertical distance between the ceiling and the average
level of the adjoining ground is more than five feet. (See Illustration 13.146)
BED-AND-BREAKFAST HOME — A privately owned detached dwelling
having a maximum of eight rooms, all without cooking facilities, rented to
146. Editor's Note: Illustration 13 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 195-10 PLUMBING § 195-10
144:517
guests on a daily basis with the service of providing breakfast to the guests
by the proprietor facility.[Amended 12-19-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-07]
BEER DISTRIBUTOR — An establishment for retail sales primarily of beer
and liquor products sold in carryout containers.[Added 9-5-2006 by Ord.
No. 2005-8]
BERM — A landscaped mound of earth or the act of pushing earth into a
mound to shield, screen and buffer two separate, incompatible land uses.
Berms may be used to provide visual interest, decrease noise and control
the direction of water flow.
BIG BOX STORE — A retail store, or combination of retail stores under one
roof, which exceeds 75,000 square feet primarily on one floor, has a higher
parking to building area ratio, and has a regional sales market.[Added
4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-02]
BLOCK — An area bounded by streets.
BOARD — Any body granted jurisdiction under a land use ordinance to
render final adjudications. See "governing body" and "Zoning Hearing
Board."
BOARDINGHOUSE — A building arranged or used for the lodging, with
or without meals, for compensation, by either transient or permanent
residents. This definition includes rooming houses and lodging houses.
BRIDGE — A structure having a clear span of more than 20 feet designed to
convey vehicles and/or pedestrians over a watercourse, railroad, public or
private right-of-way or any depression.
BUFFER — An area within a property or site generally adjacent to and
parallel with the property line, either consisting of natural existing
vegetation or created by the use of trees, shrubs, fences and/or berms,
designed to limit continuously the view, sound and/or light from the site to
adjacent sites or properties. (See Illustration 20.147)
BUILDABLE AREA — The area of a lot remaining after the minimum yard
and open space requirements of this chapter have been met.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls
and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or
property, including covered porches or bay windows and chimneys.
BUILDING COVERAGE — Total horizontal area per floor level measured
from the center line of joint partitions and/or from outside wall faces.
(Another term is “building footprint”.)[Amended 9-4-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-10]
BUILDING, DETACHED — A building surrounded by open space on the
same lot.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF — The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front of the building to
147. Editor's Note: Illustration 20 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 195-10 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-10
144:518
the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard
roofs and to the mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip
and gambrel roofs. Chimneys, towers, spires, elevator penthouses, tanks
and similar appurtenant structures or equipment may project above the
maximum building height. Architectural screening of rooftop projections
may also be exempted from height restrictions, provided that such
structures are set back from the exterior wall of the building by a distance
equal to or greater than their height. (See Illustration 2.148)
BUILDING LINE — A line parallel to the front, side or rear lot line so as to
provide the required yards.
BUILDING PERMIT — Written permission issued by the proper Township
official for the construction, repair, alteration or addition to a structure.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The line within a property defining the
required minimum distance permitted between any structure and the
adjacent street right-of-way ("street line"), and the line defining side and
rear yards, where required.
BUILDING STRUCTURE — The contiguous exterior walls of a structure,
regardless of interior configuration, number of dwelling units or
businesses.[Added 9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2005-8]
BUSINESS OFFICE — A building housing administrative, executive,
professional, research, or similar organizations, having limited contact with
the public; providing no merchandise or merchandise services are for sale
except those incidental to the principal permitted use.[Added 9-5-2006 by
Ord. No. 2005-8]
BUSINESS SERVICES — Establishments primarily engaged in rendering
services to business establishments on a fee or contract basis, such as
advertising and mailing, building maintenance, employment services,
management and consulting services, protective services, equipment rental
and leasing, commercial research, development and testing, photo finishing
and personal supply services.
BUS SHELTER — A small roofed structure, usually having three walls,
located near a street and designated primarily for the protection and
convenience of bus passengers waiting for transportation.[Added
5-4-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-07]
CALIPER — The diameter of a tree trunk, measured in inches, six inches
above ground level for trees up to four inches in diameter and 12 inches
above ground level for trees over four inches in diameter. (See Illustration
3.149)
CAMPGROUND — A plot of ground upon which two or more campsites
are located, established or maintained for occupancy by camping units of
the general public as temporary living quarters of recreation, education or
vacation purposes.
148. Editor's Note: Illustration 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
149. Editor's Note: Illustration 3 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 195-10 PLUMBING § 195-10
144:519
CAMPING UNIT — Any tent, camper, trailer, lean-to or similar structure
established or maintained and operated in a campground as temporary
living quarters for recreation, education or vacation purposes.
CAMPSITE — Any plot of ground within a campground intended for the
exclusive occupancy by a camping unit or units under the control of the
individual occupying the campsite.
CAREGIVER — The individual designated by a patient to deliver medical
marijuana.[Added 3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-02]
CARPORT — A covered space, open on at least three sides, for the storage
of one or more vehicles and accessory to a main or accessory building.
CARTWAY — That portion of a street or alley which is improved, designed
or intended for vehicular use.
CELLAR — A story partly underground and having more than 1/2 of its clear
height below the average level of the adjoining ground. A cellar shall not be
considered in determining the maximum number of stories.
CEMETERY — Property used for the interring of the dead.
CERTIFIED MEDICAL USE — The acquisition, possession, use or
transportation of medical marijuana by a patient, or the acquisition,
possession, delivery, transportation or administration of medical marijuana
by a caregiver, for use as part of the treatment of the patient's serious
medical condition, as authorized by certification by the
commonwealth.[Added 3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-02]
CHILD/ADULT DAY-CARE CENTER — A facility offering adult care, child
care and/or baby-sitting services for six or more individuals unrelated to the
owner/operator and where tuition, fees or other forms of compensation for
the care is charged, and which meets all applicable licensing/registration
requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare.
CHURCH or PLACE OF WORSHIP — A nonprofit use of land or a building
or buildings as a place of worship, convent, monastery or similar religious
institution, including rectory and parish houses, for an organization solely
or primarily used as a religious institution when located on the same
premises.[Added 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
CLEAR CUTTING — A method of timber harvesting which removes virtually
all tree growth within a specified area, leaving only slash and
undergrowth.[Added 2-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2010-4]
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — A triangular-shaped portion of land
established at street intersections in which nothing is erected, placed,
planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight
distance of motorists entering or leaving the intersection. (Refer to Exhibit
VI.150)
CLINICAL REGISTRANT — An entity that:
150. Editor's Note: See Exhibit VI, Minimum Safe Stopping Sight Distance Chart, in Ch. 173,
Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 195-10 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-10
144:520
CLUB — A group of people organized for a common purpose to pursue
common goals, interests or activities and usually characterized by certain
membership qualifications, payment of fees and dues, regular meetings and
a constitution and bylaws.
COMMERCIAL — Pertaining to an occupation, employment or enterprise
that is carried on for profit by the owner, lessee or licensee.
COMMON ELEMENTS — Land amenities, parts of buildings, central
services and utilities, and any other elements and facilities owned and used
by all condominium unit owners and designated in the master deed as
common elements.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water,
or a combination of land and water, within a development site and designed
and intended for the use and enjoyment of residents or a development,
not including streets, off-street parking area and areas set aside for public
facilities.[Amended 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
COMMUNITY ACTIVITY BUILDING — A building used for recreational,
social, educational and cultural activities, open to the public or a designated
part of the public, usually owned and operated by a public or nonprofit
group or agency.
COMMUNITY ASSOCIATION — A homeowners' association organized to
own, maintain and operate common facilities and to enhance and protect
their common interests.
COMMUNITY RESIDENTIAL HOME — A residence licensed to serve clients
of the appropriate governmental agency that provides a living environment
for unrelated residents who operate as the functional equivalent of a family,
including such supervision and care by supportive staff as may be necessary
to meet the physical, emotional and social needs of an aged person, a
physically disabled or handicapped person, a developmentally disabled
person, a nondangerous mentally ill person and/or child. This definition
does not include clients or residents of work release centers, detention
centers, and/or halfway houses/treatment centers.[Amended 2-17-2009
by Ord. No. 2008-18]
COMPANION ANIMAL — A second mammal not necessarily of the same
species to keep company with a single equine.[Added 4-6-2009 by Ord.
No. 2008-07]
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — An official document adopted by the Board
of Supervisors in accordance with the Municipalities Planning Code, Act
A. Holds a permit both as a grower/processor and a dispensary; and
Has a contractual relationship with an academic clinical research
center under which the academic clinical research center or its affiliate
provides advice to the entity regarding, among other areas, patient
health and safety, medical applications and dispensing and
management of controlled substances. [Added 3-19-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-02]
B.
§ 195-10 PLUMBING § 195-10
144:521
247,151 setting forth its policies regarding the long-term development of
the Township, the preparation of which is based on careful studies of
existing conditions and prospect for future growth of the Township. The
Comprehensive Plan shall include but need not be limited to plans for
the use of land, transportation of goods and people, community facilities
and services, and a map and statement indicating the relationship of the
Township and its proposed development to adjacent municipalities.
CONCENTRATED ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATION (CAFO) — An operation
meeting the definition of both a “concentrated animal operation (CAO)” and
“animal feeding operation (AFO)” and defined as a point source under the
Clean Water Act (CWA). The CWA prohibits discharges of pollutants from
point sources, including CAFOs to surface water, unless in compliance with
a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit.[Added
8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
CONCENTRATED ANIMAL OPERATION (CAO) — Any animal operation
with no more than 2,500 pounds of live weight per acre (two AEU per
acre) of land available to spread manure.[Added 8-15-2005 by Ord. No.
2004-12]
CONCESSION STAND — A structure or booth in which equipment is stored
and refreshments are sold to the general public.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use that, owing to some special characteristics
attendant to its operation or installation (for example, potential danger,
smoke or noise), is permitted in a district subject to approval by the Board of
Supervisors, and subject to special requirements, different from those usual
requirements for the district in which the conditional use may be located.
CONDOMINIUM — Real estate, portions of which are designated for
separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common
ownership solely by the owners of those portions. Real estate is not a
condominium unless the undivided interests in the common elements are
vested in the unit owners.
CONDOMINIUM ASSOCIATION — The community association which
administers and maintains the common property and common elements of
a condominium.
CONGREGATE CARE RESIDENCES — Apartments and dwellings with
communal dining facilities and services, such as housekeeping, organized
social and recreational activities, transportation services and other support
services appropriate for the residents. This definition does not include
clients or residents of work release centers, detention centers, and/or
halfway houses/treatment centers.[Amended 2-17-2009 by Ord. No.
2008-18]
CONSERVATION ORGANIZATION (CONSERVANCY) — A private or quasipublic
nonprofit organization or area designated to preserve and protect
natural resources from exploitation and damage through planned
management.
151. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 195-10 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-10
144:522
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair,
extension, expansion, alteration or relocation of a building structure,
including the placement of manufactured homes.
CONTOURS — A line (as on a map) connecting the points on a land surface
that have the same elevation.
CONTRACTOR — Businesses engaged in heavy construction involving
highway, streets, bridges, sewage systems, water systems, railroads, flood
control projects and other similar activities. "Contractor" also includes
general contractors engaged in managing construction projects for others
on a contract or fee basis but assuming no responsibility for the completion
of a construction project. "Contractor" also includes businesses engaged
in activities of a type that are specialized either to building construction
and/or nonbuilding construction projects such as painting, line painting,
electrical, carpentry, plumbing, air conditioning, sheet metal, grading,
asphalt and concrete construction, and landscaping. "Contractor" shall not
include service- and/or repair-oriented businesses.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE — A drug, substance or immediate precursor
as defined in Schedules 1 through 5 of the Pennsylvania Controlled
Substance, Drug Device and Cosmetic Act, 35 P.S. § 780-104, or any
amendments thereto.
CONVENIENCE STORE — A retail store with a floor space of less than
5,000 square feet that sells groceries and may also sell gasoline; does
not include automotive service stations or vehicle repair shops.[Amended
9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2005-8]
COOPERATIVE — Ownership in common with others of a parcel of land
and of a building or buildings thereon which would normally be used by all
occupants, together with individual rights of occupancy of a particular unit
or apartment in such building or buildings or on such parcel of land and may
include dwellings, offices and other types of space in commercial buildings
or on property and where the lease, sale or exchange of a unit is subject to
the agreement of the group of persons having common ownership. 152
COURT — An unoccupied open space, other than a yard, on the same lot
with a building, which is bounded on two or more sides by the walls of such
building.
COURT, INNER — A court enclosed on all sides by exterior walls of a
building or by exterior walls and lot lines on which walls are allowable, and
the court does not extend to a street, alley, yard or other outer court.
COURT, OUTER — A court enclosed on not more than three sides by exterior
walls and lot lines on which walls are allowable, with one side or end open
to a street, driveway, alley or yard.
COVERAGE — That portion or percentage of the lot area covered by
impervious materials, to include buildings and paved surfaces.
152. Editor's Note: The former definition of "country club," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 3-5-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-1.
§ 195-10 PLUMBING § 195-10
144:523
CRITICAL AREAS — An area with one or more of the following
environmental characteristics: steep slopes; floodplain; soils classified as
having high water tables; soils classified as highly erodible, subject to
erosion or highly acidic; land incapable of meeting percolation
requirements; land formerly used for landfill operations or hazardous
industrial use; fault areas; stream corridors; estuaries; mature stands of
native vegetation; aquifer recharge and discharge areas; wetlands and
wetland transition areas; and habitats of endangered species.
DATA CENTER, STAND-ALONE — A single building that primarily houses
computing and communication devices used in the day-to-day operations
of an off-site business. Although there is generally some limited office
space provided in a stand-alone data center building, such office space is
ancillary to the principal data center use.[Added 12-15-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-20]
DAY CAMP — A plot of ground upon which recreation facilities are located,
established or maintained for daytime use for recreational and educational
purposes.
DAY-CARE CENTER — See the definition of "child/adult day-care center."
DBH (DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT) — A standard of measurement of
the size of a tree at 4 1/2 feet above the forest floor on the uphill side of the
tree.[Added 2-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2010-4]
DECISION — Final adjudication of any board or other body granted
jurisdiction under any land use ordinance or this chapter to do so, either by
reason of the grant of exclusive jurisdiction or by reason of appeals from
determinations. All decisions shall be appealable to the court of common
pleas of the county and judicial district wherein the Township lies.
DECOMMISSIONING — The act of dismantling, disassembling, and removal
from the premises of any building, structure, system or facility which has
been out of service for 12 mouths or more, or after the abandonment of the
function of said building, structure, system or facility.[Added 4-6-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-04]
DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per acre of land.
DENSITY BONUS — The granting of the approving authority of additional
development capacity (lots, dwelling units) in exchange for the developer
providing a public benefit or amenity.
DESIGNATED GROWTH AREA — A region in a municipal or multimunicipal
plan that preferably includes and surrounds a city, borough, or village,
within which both residential and mixed-use development is permitted or
planned at densities of one unit per acre or more. Commercial, industrial,
and institutional uses are permitted or planned and public infrastructure
services are provided or planned.[Added 11-4-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-8A]
DETENTION BASIN — A storage facility for the temporary storage of
stormwater runoff.
§ 195-10 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-10
144:524
DETENTION CENTER — A facility providing housing and supervision for
individuals convicted of various criminal offenses, including, but not limited
to, heavy security, loss of rights and privileges, loss of freedom of
movement.[Added 2-17-2009 by Ord. No. 2008-18]
DETERMINATION — Final action by an officer, body or agency charged with
the administration of any land use ordinance or applications thereunder,
except the following:
DEVELOPER — A landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with
permission from such landowner who makes or seeks to under undertake
subdivision of land, land development or any regulated earth disturbance
activities at a project site in the Township.[Amended 4-4-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-2]
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures,
the placement of manufactured homes, streets, and other paving, utilities,
filling, grading and excavation, mining, dredging, or drilling operations,
storage of equipment or materials, and the subdivision of land.[Amended
4-4-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-2; 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-18]
DEVELOPMENT AREA — The area of the subject property to be utilized
for infrastructure and buildings under unified control, so as to be planned
and developed as a whole in a single development operation or a definitely
programmed series of development operations or phases with shared or
common use of infrastructure improvements (e.g., utilities, roadways, open
space, parkland, etc.) as depicted on the unified development plan at the
time of submission of the preliminary plan.[Added 4-3-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-03]
DEVELOPMENT OF REGIONAL SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT — Any land
development, due to its character, magnitude, or location, that will have a
substantial effect on the health, safety, or welfare of the citizens in more
than one municipality.[Added 11-4-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-8A]
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development, including a
planned residential development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants
relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity
of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking facilities,
common open space and public facilities. (NOTE: Public facilities include
A. The Board of Supervisors;
B. The Zoning Hearing Board; or
The Planning Commission, only if and to the extent the Planning
Commission is charged with final decision on preliminary or final plans
under Chapter 173, Subdivision and Land Development, or planned
residential development ordinances. Determinations shall be
appealable only to the boards designated as having jurisdiction for such
appeal.
C.
§ 195-10 PLUMBING § 195-10
144:525
utility easements for sewer collection, water, electric, telephone and gas
distribution, transformer, pumping stations, telecommunications, etc.) The
phrase "provisions of development plan" when used in this chapter shall
mean the written and graphic materials referred to in this definition.
DISPENSARY — A person, including a natural person, corporation,
partnership, association, trust or other entity, or any combination thereof,
which holds a permit issued by the Department of Health (DOH) of the
commonwealth to dispense medical marijuana.[Added 3-19-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-02]
DISTRIBUTION CENTER — An establishment engaged in the receipt,
storage and distribution of goods, products, cargo and materials, including
transshipment by boat, rail, air or motor vehicle.
DOMESTIC PETS — Dogs and cats kept under the control of their owner,
and other animals which can be legally bought and sold in the
Commonwealth.[Added 4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2008-07]
DRAINAGE — Surface water runoff; the removal of surface water or
groundwater from land by drains, grading or other means, which include
runoff controls to minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after
construction or development.
DRAINAGE AREA — That area in which all of the surface runoff resulting
from precipitation is concentrated into a particular stream.
DRAINAGEWAY — Any natural or artificial watercourse, channel, trench,
ditch, pipe, swale or similar depression into which surface water
flows.[Amended 4-4-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-2]
DRIVE-IN FACILITY — An establishment that, by design of physical facilities
or by service or packaging procedures, encourages or permits customers
to receive a service or obtain a product that may be used or consumed in
a motor vehicle on the premises or to be entertained while remaining in
an automobile; any portion of a building or structure from which business
is transacted, or is capable of being transacted, directly with customers
located in a motor vehicle during such business transactions.
DRIVEWAY — A private roadway providing access for vehicles to a parking
space, garage, dwelling or other structure.
DUMP — A lot or land or part thereof used primarily for disposal, by
abandonment, dumping, burial or other means and for whatever purpose, of
garbage, sewage, trash, refuse, junk, discarded machinery, vehicles or part
thereof, or waste material of any kind.
DWELLING — A single unit providing complete independent living facilities
for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping,
eating, cooking and sanitation.
DWELLING, ATTACHED — A one-family dwelling attached to two or more
one-family dwellings by common vertical walls.
DWELLING, DETACHED — A dwelling that is not attached to any other
dwelling by any means.
§ 195-10 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-10
144:526
DWELLING, DUPLEX — A building containing two single-family dwelling
units totally separated from each other by an unpierced wall extending from
ground to roof. Each unit is located on its own separate lot.
DWELLING, GARDEN APARTMENT — One or more two- or three-story
multifamily structures, generally built at a gross density of 10 to 15 dwelling
units per acre, with each structure containing eight to 20 dwelling units and
including off-street parking, open space and recreation.
DWELLING GROUP — A group of two or more single-family, two-family or
multifamily dwellings occupying a lot in one ownership.153
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building used by three or more families
living independently of each other and doing their own cooking.
DWELLING, PATIO HOME — A one-family dwelling on a separate lot with
open space setbacks on three sides with a court. (See Illustration 5.154)
DWELLING, QUADRUPLEX — Four attached dwellings in one building in
which each has two open space exposures and shares one or two walls with
adjoining unit or units. (See Illustration 6.155)
DWELLING, SEASONAL — A dwelling unit not used as a principal residence
that may be occupied weekends and for brief periods during the year.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED — A dwelling used for one family
and having two party walls in common with other buildings (such as a row
house or townhouse). (See Illustration 9.156)
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A building used by one family,
having only one dwelling unit and having two side yards. (See Illustration
7.157)[Amended 12-19-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED — A dwelling used by one
family, having one side yard and one party wall common with another
building. (See Illustration 8.158)
DWELLING, STACKED FLAT — A building containing a series of two or
more one-family dwellings that are arranged in a vertical and horizontal
configuration such that a dwelling is located on one or more floors of the
building. (See Illustration 8A.159)[Added 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-03]
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE — A one-family dwelling in a row of at least
three such units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to
the outside, no unit is located over another unit and each is separated from
153. Editor’s Note: The former definitions of “dwelling, manufactured,” “dwelling, mobile
home” and “dwelling, modular,” which immediately followed this definition, were repealed
8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12.
154. Editor's Note: Illustration 5 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
155. Editor's Note: Illustration 6 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
156. Editor's Note: Illustration 9 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
157. Editor's Note: Illustration 7 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
158. Editor's Note: Illustration 8 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
159. Editor's Note: Illustration 8A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 195-10 PLUMBING § 195-10
144:527
any other unit by one or more vertical common fire-resistant walls. (See
Illustration 9.160)
DWELLING, TRIPLEX — A building containing three dwelling units, each of
which has direct access to the outside or to a common hall.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building on a single lot containing two
dwelling units, each of which is totally separated from the other by an
unpierced wall extending from ground to roof or an unpierced ceiling and
floor extending from exterior wall to exterior wall, except for a common
stairwell exterior to both dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete independent living
facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human activity
which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited to, clearing
and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, road maintenance,
building construction and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of
soil, rock or earth materials.[Amended 4-4-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-2]
EASEMENT — A grant of one or more property rights by the property owner
to and/or for the use by the public, a corporation or another person or
entity.[Amended 4-4-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-2]
EASEMENT, CONSERVATION — An easement for the preservation of
natural features that precludes future or additional development to the
land.
EASEMENT, DRAINAGE — An easement required for the installation and
maintenance of stormwater sewers, drainage ditches other drainage
facilities and/or required for the preservation or maintenance of a natural
watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream.[Amended 4-4-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-2]
ELDERLY HOUSING — A multifamily development devoted entirely for the
provision of housing for senior citizens 55 years of age or older.
ELECTRIC SUBSTATION — An assemblage of equipment for purposes other
than generation or utilization, through which electric energy in bulk is
passed for the purpose of switching or modifying its characteristics to meet
the needs of the general public.
ELECTRIC TRANSMISSION AND DISTRIBUTION FACILITIES — Electric
public utility transmission and distribution facilities, including substations.
ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the engineer for the
Township.
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREAS — An area on a development
site with one or more of the following characteristics: slopes in excess
of 20%; floodways and floodplains; soils determined by the United States
160. Editor's Note: Illustration 9 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 195-10 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-10
144:528
Department of Agriculture and Soil as having a high water table; land
incapable of meeting percolation requirements for on-lot sewage treatment;
stream corridors; mature stands of native vegetation; soils determined as
prime agriculture soils by the United States Department of Agriculture and
Soil Conservation Service; and wetlands as delineated in accordance with
the Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands.
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT (EDU) — A measurement of sanitary
sewage effluent equaling 350 gallons of effluent per day.
ESTABLISHMENT, SEXUALLY ORIENTED — Includes any of the
following:[Added 6-16-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-9]
EXISTING USE — The use of a lot or structure at the time of the enactment
of this chapter.
FACTORY AND INDUSTRIAL, LOW HAZARD — In accordance with the
BOCA National Building Code, as amended.
FACTORY AND INDUSTRIAL, MODERATE HAZARD — In accordance with
the BOCA National Building Code, as amended.
FALL ZONE — The horizontal distance from the base of the tower in
which the entire tower structure would collapse in the event of a
catastrophe.[Added 8-4-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-12]
FAMILY — A single individual doing his/her own cooking and living upon
the premises as a separate housekeeping unit, or a collective body of
persons doing their own cooking and living together upon the premises as
a separate housekeeping unit in a domestic relationship based upon birth,
legal marriage or other domestic bond. This definition does not include a
collective body of persons occupying a hotel, dormitory, lodge, boarding/
rooming house, commune or institution.
FAMILY CARE FACILITY — An institutional facility providing shelter,
counseling and other rehabilitative services in a family-like environment
for four to eight residents, plus such minimum supervisory personnel as
may be required to meet standards of the licensing agency. Residents under
supervisory care may not be legally related to the facility operators or
supervisors and, by reason of mental or physical disability, chemical or
alcohol dependency, or family or school adjustment problems, require a
minimal level of supervision but do not require medical or nursing care or
general supervision. A family care facility must be licensed and/or approved
by the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare and may include uses
The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a
new business;
A.
The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
B.
The addition or any sexually oriented business to any other existing
sexually oriented business; or
C.
D. The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
§ 195-10 PLUMBING § 195-10
144:529
such as foster homes, community residential alternative facilities or home
individual programs.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — A residence offering baby-sitting services
and child care services for two to five children unrelated to the resident
household and meeting all applicable licensing/registration requirements of
the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare.
FARM — A parcel of land used for agriculture activities.161
FARMLAND — A parcel of land used for agricultural activities.
FENCE — A freestanding and artificially constructed barrier of any material
or combination of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land.
FILL —
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION — Establishments operating primarily in the
fields of finance. The finance includes depository institutions, nondepository
credit institutions, holding companies, other investment companies, brokers
and dealers in securities and commodity contracts, and security and
commodity exchanges.
FIXED-WING AIRCRAFT — A mode of transportation that involves a
heavier-than-air craft, which is driven by a propeller or jet engine, causing
lift by motion of air over the wings. Ultralights and parasails are excluded
from this definition.[Added 5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-1]
FLAG LOT — A lot not meeting the minimum lot frontage requirements
of the zoning district and where access to a public street is by a narrow,
private right-of-way or driveway.
FLEA MARKET — An occasional or periodic market held in an open area
or structure where groups of individual sellers offer goods for sale to the
public.
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD, BASE (ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD) — A flood that, on the
average, is likely to occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one-percent
chance of occurring each year, although the flood may occur in any year).
FLOOD FRINGE — That portion of the floodplain outside the floodway.
Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is
placed, pushed, dumped, transported or moved to a new location above
the natural surface of the ground or on top of the stripped surface and
shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
A.
The difference in elevation between a point on the original ground and
a designated point of higher elevation on the final grade.
B.
C. The material used to make a fill.
161. Editor's Note: The former definition of "farm animal," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2008-07.
§ 195-10 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-10
144:530
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance
Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and
the risk premium zones applicable to the community.[Added 9-4-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-18]
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood
Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.[Added 9-4-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-18]
FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR — The person or persons appointed by
the Board of Supervisors to administer and enforce both Article XV of this
chapter and Chapter 108, Floodplain Management. For this chapter, this
would be the Zoning Administrator or his designee.[Added 9-4-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-18]
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their content.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.[Amended 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-18]
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the
several floors of a building measured from the exterior face of exterior
walls, or from the center line of a wall separating two buildings, but not
including interior parking spaces, loading space for motor vehicles or any
space where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than six feet.
FLOOR AREA, HABITABLE — The aggregate of the horizontal areas of
all rooms used for habitation, such as living room, dining room, kitchen
and bedroom, but not including hallways, stairways, cellars, attics, service
rooms or utility rooms, bathroom, closets, nor unheated areas such as
enclosed porches, nor rooms without at least one window or skylight
opening onto an outside yard or court. At least 1/2 of the floor area of every
habitable room shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven feet and
the floor area of that part of any room where the ceiling height is less than
five feet shall not be considered as part of the habitable floor area.
FLOOR AREA, NET — The total of all floor areas of a building, excluding
stairwells and elevator shafts, equipment rooms, storage, interior vehicular
parking or loading; and all floors below the first or ground floor, except
when used or intended to be used for human habitation or service to the
public.
§ 195-10 PLUMBING § 195-10
144:531
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The gross floor area of all buildings on a lot divided
by the lot area.
FLOOR AREA, RETAIL NET — All that space relegated to use by the
customer and the retail employee to consummate retail sales and to include
display area used to indicate the variety of goods available for the customer
but not to include office space, storage space and other general
administrative areas.
FOOD PROCESSING — An establishment in which food is processed or
otherwise prepared for eventual human consumption but not consumed on
the premises.
FOREST MANAGEMENT — The practice of accepted silvicultural
principles, through periodic development, cultivation, harvesting,
transporting and selling of trees for commercial purposes, and which does
not involve any land development plans. Forest management practices may
include, but are not limited to, a goals and operations plan, site preparation,
planting, harvesting, skid road construction, erosion controls, insect and
disease control, inventory, fire protection and best management practices
(BMPs) as described in "best management practices for PA Forests."[Added
8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12; amended 2-7-2011 by Ord. No.
2010-4]
FORM OF MEDICAL MARIJUANA — The characteristics of the medical
marijuana recommended or limited for a particular patient, including the
method of consumption and any particular dosage, strain, variety and
quantity or percentage of medical marijuana or particular active
ingredient.[Added 3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-02]
FREIGHT HANDLING FACILITY — Terminals with the capability of handling
a large variety of goods involving various forms of transportation and
providing multimodal shipping capabilities, such as rail to truck and truck
to air.
FUELING STATION — A facility for the purpose of storing and dispensing
fuel.[Added 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-7]
FUTURE GROWTH AREA — The area of a municipal or multimunicipal plan
outside of and adjacent to a designated growth area where development is
permitted or planned at varying densities and public infrastructure services
may or may not be provided. Future development at greater densities
is planned to accompany the orderly extension of public
infrastructure.[Added 11-4-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-8A]
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An enclosed or covered space for the storage of
one or more vehicles or vessels, provided that no business, occupation or
service is conducted for profit therein.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A building designed and used for the storage of
automotive vehicles operated as a business enterprise with a service charge
or fee being paid to the owner or operator for the parking or storage of
privately owned vehicles.
§ 195-10 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-10
144:532
GARAGE, REPAIR — (See also "service station.") A building designed and
used for the storage, care, repair or refinishing of motor vehicles, including
both minor and major mechanical overhauling, paint and body work; any
building, premises or land in which or upon which a business, service or
industry involving the maintenance, servicing, repair or painting of motor
vehicles is conducted or rendered.
GARDEN APARTMENT — See the definition of "apartment, garden."
GARDENING — The cultivation of herbs, fruits, flowers or vegetables,
excluding the keeping of livestock.
GARDEN STRUCTURES — Any accessory structure located in any side or
rear yard not closer than three feet to any side or rear lot line; included in
this category of structures are arbors, aviaries, pergolas, trellises, barbecue
shelters and freestanding screens or baffles and similar structures.
Unscreened, unroofed, unwalled or unfenced patios, bird baths, ornamental
pools and swimming pools are not considered as garden structures.
GOLF COURSE — A tract of land for playing golf, improved with tees,
greens, fairways and hazards, and which may include clubhouses and
shelters.
GOVERNING BODY — The Board of Supervisors of West Hanover Township,
Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
GRADE, ESTABLISHED — The elevation of the center line of the streets, as
officially established by the municipal authorities.
GRADE, FINISHED — The completed surfaces of lawns, walks and roads
brought to grades as shown on official plans or designs relating thereto.
GRADE, NATURAL — The elevation of the ground in its natural state, before
man-made alterations.
GREENHOUSE — A building whose roof and sides are made largely of glass
or other transparent or translucent material and in which the temperature
and humidity can be regulated for the cultivation of delicate or out-ofseason
plants for subsequent sale or for personal enjoyment.
GROSS LEASABLE AREA — The total floor area designed for tenant
occupancy and exclusive use, including basements, mezzanines and upper
floors, if any, expressed in square feet and measured from the center line of
joint partitions and from outside wall faces.
GROUND COVER — A planting of low-growing plants or sod that in time
forms a dense mat covering the area, preventing soil from being blown or
washed away and the growth of unwanted plants.
GROUND FLOOR — The floor of a building nearest the mean grade of the
front of the building.
GROUP CARE FACILITY — A facility providing shelter, counseling and other
rehabilitative services in a family-like environment for more than nine but
fewer than 15 residents, plus such minimum supervisory personnel as may
be required to meet standards of the licensing agency. Residents may not
§ 195-10 PLUMBING § 195-10
144:533
be legally related to the facility operators or supervisors and, by reason of
mental or physical disability, chemical or alcohol dependency, or family or
school adjustment problems, require a minimal level of supervision but do
not require medical or nursing care or general supervision. A group care
facility must be licensed and/or approved by the Pennsylvania Department
of Public Welfare.
GROWER/PROCESSOR — A person, including a natural person,
corporation, partnership, association, trust or other entity, or any
combination thereof, which holds a permit from the DOH to grow and
process medical marijuana.[Added 3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-02]
HALFWAY HOUSE/TREATMENT CENTER — A facility providing housing
and supervision for unrelated persons who need treatment and counseling
for addictions to drugs, alcohol, gambling, etc., or a mental illness or other
behavior that could be a threat to the physical safety of others.[Added
2-17-2009 by Ord. No. 2008-18]
HAMLET — A small cluster of homes with a distinct identity in a rural area
usually located at a crossroads. Hamlets may or may not have a meeting
place, such as a park, green, tavern, restaurant, church or small retail store.
The meeting place has an intentional nature distinguishing the hamlet
from the standard "residence-only" suburban subdivision. A hamlet has a
compact nucleus with a layout and design that enables it to evolve into a
village.
HARVESTING PLAN — A written operations plan for timber harvesting
which addresses, among other things, environmental concerns on the
property and protection for Township roads leading to and from the
property.[Added 2-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2010-4]
HAZARDOUS WASTE —
Any garbage, refuse, sludge from an industrial or other wastewater
treatment plant, sludge from a water supply treatment plant or air
pollution control facility and other discarded material including solid,
liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material resulting from
municipal, commercial, industrial, institutional, mining or agricultural
operations, and from community activities, or any combination of these
factors, which, because of its quantity, concentration or physical,
chemical or infectious characteristics, may:
Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or
morbidity in either an individual or the total population; or
(1)
Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health
or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of or otherwise managed.
(2)
A.
The term "hazardous waste" shall not include coal refuse as defined
in the Coal Refuse Disposal Control Act (52 U.S.C. §§ 30.51 through
30.62). The term "hazardous waste" shall not include treatment sludges
from coal mine drainage treatment plants, disposal of which is being
B.
§ 195-10 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-10
144:534
HAZARDOUS WASTE CONSTITUENT — A chemical component of a waste
or chemical compound which qualifies a waste as hazardous under
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP) Hazardous
Waste Management Regulations (HWMR) 75.261 (relating to criteria,
identification and listing of hazardous waste), or which is listed as a
hazardous waste or hazardous compound in 75.261 (relating to criteria,
identification and listing of hazardous waste).
HAZARDOUS WASTE DISCHARGE — A discharge of hazardous waste.
HAZARDOUS WASTE IDENTIFICATION NUMBER — The number assigned
by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) or the number provided to
the PADEP by the EPA for assignment to each generator, transporter and
treatment, storage or disposal facility handling hazardous waste.
HAZARDOUS WASTE/INCOMPATIBLE WASTE — A hazardous waste which
is unsuitable for:
HAZARDOUS WASTE/INDIVIDUAL GENERATION SITE — The contiguous
site at or on which one or more hazardous wastes are generated. An
individual generation site, such as a large manufacturing plant, may have
one or more sources of hazardous waste but is considered a single or
individual generation site if the site or property is contiguous.
HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITY — A facility where storage,
treatment or disposal of hazardous waste occurs.
HAZARDOUS WASTE MANIFEST SYSTEM — The manifest, instructions
supplied with the manifest, and distribution system for copies of the
manifest which together identify the origin, routing, storage or disposal
under the following PADEP HWMR Subsections: 75.262(e), 75.263(d),
75.264(j) and 75.265(j) (relating to generators of hazardous waste,
transporters of hazardous waste, new and existing hazardous waste
management facilities applying for a permit and interim status standards
for hazardous waste management facilities and permit program for new and
existing hazardous waste management facilities).
carried on pursuant to and in compliance with a valid permit issued
under the Clean Streams Law (35 P.S. §§ 691.1 through 691.1001). The
term "hazardous waste" shall not include solid or dissolved material in
domestic sewage, or solid dissolved materials in irrigation return flows
or industrial discharges which are point sources subject to permits
under Section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1342), or source, special nuclear or by-product material as defined by
the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C. §§ 2011 through 2394).
Placement in a particular device or facility because it may cause
corrosion or decay of containment materials such as container inner
liners or tank walls; or
A.
Commingling with another waste or material under uncontrolled
conditions because the commingling might produce heat or pressure,
fire or explosion, violent reaction, toxic dusts, mists, fumes or gases, or
flammable fumes or gases.
B.
§ 195-10 PLUMBING § 195-10
144:535
HAZARDOUS WASTE NUMBER — The number assigned by the PADEP to
each hazardous waste listed and to each hazardous waste characteristic
identified in HWMR 75.261 (relating to criteria, identification and listing of
hazardous waste).
HAZARDOUS WASTE PERMIT — A written document issued by the PADEP
under the act which authorizes the recipient to undertake the treatment,
storage or disposal of hazardous waste under the act. The term "permit"
does not include interim status or a permit which has not yet been the
subject of final PADEP action, such as a draft permit or a proposed permit.
HEALTH CLUB — An establishment that provides facilities for aerobic
exercises, running and jogging, exercise equipment, game courts,
swimming facilities and saunas, showers, massage rooms and lockers.
HEALTH SERVICES — Establishments primarily engaged in furnishing
medical, surgical or other services to individuals, including the offices
of physicians, dentists and other health practitioners, medical and dental
laboratories, outpatient care facilities, blood banks and oxygen and
miscellaneous types of medical supplies and services.
HEIGHT — The vertical distance of a structure measured from the average
elevation of the finished grade. (See Illustration 2.162)
HELICOPTER — A mode of transportation utilizing a manned rotary wing
aircraft.[Added 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-7]
HELIPORT/HELIPAD — A nonpublic designated landing area for helicopter
operations and appurtenant areas, such as but not limited to fueling and
servicing.[Added 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-7]
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.[Added 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-18]
HISTORIC AREA — A district, place or site designated by local, state or
federal authority within which the buildings, structures, appurtenances and
places are of basic and vital importance because of their association with
history; or because of their unique architectural style and scale, including
color, proportion, form and architectural detail; or because of their being
a part of or related to a square, park or area the design or general
arrangement of which should be preserved and/or developed according to a
fixed plan based on cultural, historical or architectural motives or purposes.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:[Added 9-4-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-18]
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
162. Editor's Note: Illustration 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 195-10 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-10
144:536
HOME OCCUPATION — Any activity carried out for profit or gain by a
resident conducted as an accessory use in the resident's dwelling unit
or building accessory thereto situated within a residential, agriculture or
conservation district.
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION — A community association, other than
a condominium association, that is organized in a development in which
individual owners share common interests and responsibilities for costs and
upkeep of common open space or facilities.
HORTICULTURE — The cultivation of a garden or orchard.
HOSPITAL — An institution providing primary health services and medical
or surgical care to persons, inpatients and outpatients suffering from
illness, disease, injury, deformity and other abnormal physical or mental
conditions, including, as an integral part of the institution, related facilities
such as laboratories, outpatient facilities or training facilities.
HOTEL — A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the
general public and providing additional services such as restaurants,
meeting rooms and recreational facilities.
HUB HEIGHT — The distance measured from the surface of the tower
foundation to the height of the wind turbine hub, to which the blade is
attached.[Added 4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04]
HYDRIC SOILS — Soils that formed under conditions of saturation, flooding,
or ponding long enough during the growing season to develop anaerobic
conditions in the upper part (source: 59 Fed Rg 35680, 7/13/94).[Added
9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2005-8]
IDENTIFICATION CARD — A document issued by the DOH that permits
access to medical marijuana.[Added 3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-02]
IMPERVIOUS MATERIAL — Any substance placed on a lot which covers
the surface in such fashion as to prevent natural absorption of surface
water by the earth so covered. The following items shall be deemed to
be impervious material: buildings, concrete sidewalks, paved driveways
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 195-10 PLUMBING § 195-10
144:537
and parking areas, swimming pools and other nonporous structures or
materials.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that prevents the infiltration of water
into the ground. Impervious surface includes, but is not limited to, any
building, building roof, paved parking or driveway areas and any paved
streets and concrete sidewalks, concrete features and areas designed to
initially be gravel or crushed stone. (See Illustration 10.163)[Amended
4-4-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-2]
IMPROVEMENT CUTTING — Any cutting treatment used to alter species
composition and tree spacing to realize ownership objectives. Thinning is a
type of improvement cutting.[Added 2-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2010-4]
INCINERATOR — A facility or use that utilizes an approved device in which
combustible material, other than garbage, is burned to ashes.
INDUSTRIAL — Uses and structures related to fields of economic activity,
including forestry, fishing, hunting and trapping; mining; construction;
manufacturing; transportation, communication, electric, gas and sanitary
services; and wholesale trade.
INDUSTRIAL PARK — A planned, coordinated development of a tract of
land with two or more separate industrial buildings. Such development
is planned, designed, constructed and managed on an integrated and
coordinated basis with special attention given to on-site vehicular
circulation, parking, utility needs, building design and orientation and open
space. An industrial park is designed as a coordinated environment for
a variety of industrial and related activities. The project is developed or
controlled by one proprietary interest. It has an enforceable master plan
and/or covenants, conditions and restrictions. The development may be on
one parcel, may be subsidized, may have condominium ownerships or a
combination of these types.
INDUSTRY, HEAVY — A use engaged in the basic processing and
manufacturing of materials or products predominantly from extracted or
raw materials, or a use engaged in storage of or manufacturing processes
using flammable or explosive materials, or storage or manufacturing
processes that potentially involve hazardous or commonly recognized
offensive conditions.
INDUSTRY, LIGHT — A use engaged in the manufacture, predominantly
from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including
processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental storage,
sales and distribution of such products, but excluding basic industrial
processing.
INTERIOR PARKING LOT — The entire area within a parking lot which
includes parking spaces, access aisles and interior landscaped area, but
does not include the driveway entrance or perimeter landscaping.[Added
9-16-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-8]
163. Editor's Note: Illustration 10 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 195-10 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-10
144:538
ISOLATION DISTANCE — A horizontal unoccupied space surrounding a
landing area for aircraft.[Added 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-7]
JUNK — Any nonhazardous material left out in the open which has no more
useful life as the object was originally manufactured but may have value
as parts, scrap metals, or other recyclable materials.[Added 9-8-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-14]
JUNKYARD (see also "automobile wrecking yard") — A parcel of land on
which nonhazardous waste material or inoperable vehicles and other
machinery are collected, stored, salvaged or sold; an open area where
nonhazardous wastes or used or secondhand materials are bought, sold,
exchanged, stored, processed or handled. Materials may include, but are
not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires, and
bottles. An automobile wreaking yard is also considered a junkyard. This
definition shall not include dropoff recycle centers for household
recyclables.[Amended 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-14]
KNOLL — A small, round hill.
LAND CLEARING — The process of removing trees, stumps, brush, stones
and other obstacles from an area in anticipation of a subdivision or land
development.[Added 2-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2010-4]
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of, streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
The exclusion of certain land development from this definition of "land
development" is permitted only when such land development involves:
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or
single-family semidetached dwelling into not more that three
residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium.
(1)
The addition of an accessory building, including farm buildings, on
a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building not to
exceed 5,000 square feet of impervious coverage.
(2)
C.
§ 195-10 PLUMBING § 195-10
144:539
LANDING AREA — A designated place for setting a helicopter
down.[Added 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-7]
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee, if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other persons having a
proprietary interest in land.
LANDSCAPE PLAN — A component of a development plan, where required,
on which is shown proposed landscape species (such as number, spacing,
size at time of planting and planting details); proposals for protection
of existing vegetation during and after construction; proposed treatment
of hard and soft surfaces; proposed decorative features; grade changes;
buffers and screening devices; etc.
LAND USE — A description of how land is occupied or utilized.
LAND USE PLAN — An element of the West Hanover Township
Comprehensive Plan that outlines the existing and proposed location, extent
and intensity and design objectives of development of land to be used in the
future for varying types of residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural,
conservation, private and public purposes or combination of purposes.
LIGHTING —
LIVESTOCK — Animals raised, stabled, fed or maintained on an agricultural
operation with the purpose of generating income or providing work,
recreation or transportation.[Added 4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2008-07]
LOADING BERTH/SPACE — An off-street area on the same lot with a
building or contiguous to a group of buildings for the temporary parking of
a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit. (See Illustration 11.)164)[Amended 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
LOT AREA — The area contained within the property lines of a lot or
as shown on a subdivision plan, excluding space within any street, but
including the area of any easement. (See Illustration 11.)
DIFFUSED — That form of lighting wherein the light passes from the
source through a translucent cover or shade.
A.
DIRECT OR FLOOD — That form of lighting wherein the source is
visible and the light is distributed directly from it to the object to be
illuminated.
B.
INDIRECT — That form of lighting wherein the light source is entirely
hidden, the light being projected to a suitable reflector from which it is
reflected to the object to be illuminated.
C.
164. Editor's Note: Illustration 11 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 195-10 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-10
144:540
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the junction of and abutting on two or more
intersecting streets or at the point of abrupt change of a single street,
where the interior angle is less than 135º and the radius of the street line is
less than 100 feet. (See Illustration 12.165)
LOT COVERAGE — That portion of a lot covered by buildings and/or other
impervious improvements.
LOT, DEPTH OF — The average horizontal distance between the front and
rear lot lines.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE — A lot that fronts upon two parallel streets or
that fronts upon two streets that do not intersect at the boundaries of the
lot. (See Illustration 12.)
LOT, FLAG — A large lot not meeting minimum frontage requirements and
where access to the public road is by a narrow, private right-of-way or
driveway. (See Illustration 12.)
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot. (See Illustration 12.)
LOT LINES — The lines bounding a lot as defined herein. (See Illustration
12.)
LOT, MINIMUM WIDTH — The minimum required lot width measured at
the building setback line. The width of lots abutting a cul-de-sac shall be
measured as the chord distance length at the building setback line.
LOT OF RECORD — A lot which has been properly recorded in the office of
the Recorder of Deeds of Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot
measured at right angles to its depth along a straight line parallel to
the front lot line at the minimum required building setback line. (See
Illustration 12.166)
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.
MAIL ORDER — Establishments primarily engaged in the retail sale of
products by television, catalog and mail order. These establishments do
not maintain stock for sale on the premises. (Adopted for home occupation
ordinance.)
MALL —
A. A shaded walk or promenade
165. Editor's Note: Illustration 12 is included at the end of this chapter.
166. Editor's Note: Illustration 12 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 195-10 PLUMBING § 195-10
144:541
MANUFACTURED HOME —
MANUFACTURED HOME COMMUNITY — A parcel of land under single
ownership on which two or more manufactured homes are located.
MANUFACTURED HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a manufactured home
park/community, improved with the necessary utility connections and other
appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a single manufactured/
mobile home.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — A parcel, or contiguous parcels, of land
which has been so designated and improved that it contains two or more
manufactured home lots for the placement thereon of manufactured homes.
MANUFACTURING — The processing and/or converting of raw, unfinished
or finished materials or products into an article or substance of a different
character or for use for a different purpose; industries furnishing labor in
the case of manufacturing or the refinishing of manufactured articles.
MANURE — The fecal and urinary excrement of livestock and poultry, often
containing some spilled feed, bedding or litter.[Added 8-15-2005 by Ord.
No. 2004-12]
MANURE STORAGE FACILITIES — A detached structure or other
improvements built to store manure for future use or disposal. Types of
storage facility areas include underground storage, inground storage,
trench silo, earthen bank, stacking area and aboveground storage.[Added
8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
MEDICAL AND DENTAL CLINIC — Establishments containing the offices
of one or more physicians, dentists, physical therapists, pharmacists,
optometrists and other health care professionals, primarily engaged in
furnishing outpatient medical, surgical, rehabilitative or other health
services to individuals.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA — Marijuana for certified medical use as legally
permitted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania with Act 16.[Added
3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-02]
A shopping center where stores front both sides of a pedestrian way
which may be closed or open.
B.
A dwelling unit fabricated in an off-site manufacturing facility for
installation or assembly at the building site, bearing a label certifying
that it is built in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards (see 24 CFR 3280 for legal
definition).
A.
(Definition to be used as required by Article XV and FEMA regulations.)
A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent
foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term includes
park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and other similar vehicles
which are placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive days.
[Amended 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-18]
B.
§ 195-10 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-10
144:542
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DELIVERY VEHICLE OFFICE — Any facility used
to house delivery vehicles for supplying marijuana plants or seeds to one
or more marijuana growers/processors and/or dispensaries.[Added
3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-02]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA ORGANIZATION OR FACILITY — A dispensary or a
grower/processor of marijuana for medical purposes.[Added 3-19-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-02]
MEDIUM WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — An electricity-generating system that
is between five kilowatts and 25 kilowatts of power generation and is limited
in turbine height to 60 feet.[Added 5-3-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-03]
MEMBERSHIP ORGANIZATION — An organization operating on a
membership basis with preestablished formal membership requirements,
bylaws and with the objective of promoting the interests of its members.
MINERALS — Any aggregate or mass of mineral matter, whether or not
coherent. The term includes, but is not limited to, limestone and dolomite,
sand and gravel, rock and stone, earth, fill, slag, iron ore, zinc ore,
vermiculite and clay, anthracite and bituminous coal, coal refuse, peat and
crude oil and natural gas.[Amended 11-4-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-8A;
8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support or the removal
or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts
of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor repairs
include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent
or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting
public health or general safety.
MITIGATED WETLANDS — A replacement area of wetlands as designated
by the appropriate state agency, usually PADEP, in exchange for some
intrusion into a designated wetland area.[Added 9-5-2006 by Ord. No.
2005-8]
MIXED OCCUPANCY — Occupancy of a building or land for more than one
type of use.
MIXED USE — The development of a tract of land or building or structure
with two or more different uses, such as but not limited to residential, office,
manufacturing, retail, public or entertainment, in a compact urban form.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit, or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at the site complete and ready
for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent
foundation.[Amended 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
§ 195-10 PLUMBING § 195-10
144:543
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the erections thereon of a single mobile home.[Added 8-15-2005 by
Ord. No. 2004-12]
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has
been so designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home
lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.[Added 8-15-2005 by Ord.
No. 2004-12]
MODULAR HOME — Factory-built housing certified as meeting the BOCA
National Building Code standards as adopted by West Hanover Township.167
Modular homes shall be subject to the same standards as site-built homes.
MOTEL — A building or group of buildings, whether detached or in
connected units, used as individual sleeping or dwelling units, with separate
entrances and designed for year-round occupancy, primarily for transient
automobile travelers and providing for accessory off-street parking
facilities. The term "motel" includes buildings designated as tourist courts,
tourist cabins, motor lodges and similar terms.
NATURAL DRAINAGE FLOW — The pattern of surface and stormwater
drainage from a particular site before the construction or installation of
improvements or prior to any regrading.
NEW CONSTRUCTION (for Article XV and FEMA regulations only) —
Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after March
17, 1980, and includes any subsequent improvements thereto.[Added
9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-18]
NIGHTCLUB — An establishment dispensing liquor and meals and in which
music, dancing or entertainment is conducted.
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS — A business or commercial activity
administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly secondary
to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no customer, client or
patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal
functions to or from the premises in excess of those normally associated
with residential use.[Added 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area, dimensions or locations of which
was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter, but
which fails by reason of such adoption, revisions or amendment to conform
to the present requirements of the zoning district.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — Any sign lawfully existing on the effective
date of an ordinance, or an amendment thereto, which renders such sign
nonconforming because it does not conform to all the standards and
regulations of the adopted or amended ordinance.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE OR BUILDING — A structure or building,
the size, dimensions or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption,
revision or amendment to this chapter, but which fails by reason of such
167. Editor's Note: See Ch. 88, Uniform Construction Codes.
§ 195-10 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-10
144:544
adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the present requirements of
the zoning district.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity that was lawful prior to
the adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter, but that fails by
reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the present
requirements of the zoning district.
NUDITY or a STATE OF NUDITY — The showing of the human male or
female genitals, public area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less
that a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less
than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the
covered male genitals in a discernible turgid state.[Added 6-16-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-9]
NUDITY, SEMINUDE CONDITION — The state of dress in which clothing
partially or opaquely covers specified anatomical areas.[Added 6-16-2003
by Ord. No. 2003-9]
NURSERY — Any lot or parcel of land used to cultivate, propagate and grow
trees, shrubs, vines and other plants, including the buildings, structures and
equipment customarily incidental and accessory to the primary use.
NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOME — A building with sleeping rooms
where persons are housed or lodged and furnished with meals, and nursing
care for hire, and which is approved for nonprofit/profit corporations
licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare for such use.
OBSCENE MATERIALS — Any literature, book, magazine, pamphlet,
newspaper, story paper, paper, comic book, writing, drawing, photograph,
figure, image, motion picture, sound recording, article, instrument or any
other written or printed matter which:
OBSTRUCTION — Any wall, dam, wharf, embankment, levee, dike,
projection, excavation, channel, rectification, culvert, building, fence,
stockpile, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along, across or projecting into
any channel, watercourse or flood-prone area, which may impede, retard or
change the direction of the flow of water either in itself or by catching or
collecting debris carried by such water or is placed where the flow of the
water might carry the same downstream to the damage of life and property.
OCCUPANCY PERMIT — A permit issued by the proper Township official
allowing occupancy of a building or structure after it has been determined
that the building meets all the requirements of applicable ordinances.
Depicts or describes in a patently offensive manner sexual conduct,
sexual excitement or sadomasochistic abuse or (in the case of articles
or instruments) is designed for use in achieving artificial sexual
stimulation;
A.
B. Taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest; and
Taken as a whole, does not have serious literary, artistic, political or
scientific value.
C.
§ 195-10 PLUMBING § 195-10
144:545
OCCUPATION — Gainful employment in which an individual engages to
earn compensation.
OFFICE — A building or portion of a building wherein services are
performed involving predominantly administrative, professional or clerical
operations.
OFFICE PARK — A large tract of land that has been planned, developed and
operated as an integrated facility for a number of separate office buildings
and supporting ancillary uses with special attention given to circulation,
parking, utility needs, aesthetics and compatibility.
OFFICE, PROFESSIONAL — A room or rooms used for the carrying on of
a profession, including but not limited to physicians, physical therapists,
dentists, architects, engineers, accountants, attorneys, real estate brokers,
insurance agents entitled to practice under the laws of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania or similar type.
OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE — A temporary storage area for a motor
vehicle, trailer or vessel that is directly accessible to a driveway, and which
is not located on a dedicated street right-of-way.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that, on the average, is likely to
be equaled or exceeded, on the average, once every 100 years (i.e., that has
a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded, on the average, each
year, although the flood may occur in any year).
OPEN SPACE — An area that is intended to provide light and air, and is
designed for either environmental, scenic or recreational purposes. Open
space may include but is not limited to lawns, decorative planting,
walkways, active and passive recreation areas, playgrounds, fountains,
swimming pools, wooded areas and watercourses. Open space shall not be
deemed to include driveways, parking lots or other surfaces designed or
intended for vehicular travel. Land used for recreation, resource protection,
amenity and/or buffers. In no event shall any area of a lot constituting the
minimum lot area nor any part of an existing or future road or right-of-way
be counted as constituting open space.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water,
or a combination of land and water, within a development site and designed
and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a development, not
including streets, off-street parking areas and areas set aside for public
facilities.
OPEN SPACE DEVELOPMENT — A development design technique that
concentrates buildings in specific areas on a site to allow the remaining
land to be used for recreation, common open space and preservation of
environmentally sensitive areas.
OUTDOOR STORAGE — The keeping, in an unroofed area, of any goods,
material, merchandise or vehicles in the same place for more than 24 hours.
OVERLAY DISTRICTS — A zoning district that encompasses one or more
underlying zones and that imposes additional requirements above that
required by the underlying zone.
§ 195-10 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-10
144:546
OWNER — An individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership or
corporation having sufficient proprietary interest to seek development of
land.
PACKAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Small, self-contained sewage treatment
facilities built to serve developed areas beyond the service area of larger
regional plants.
PADDOCK/CORRAL — A contained area adjacent to a barn or stable
intended to give animals fresh air and sunshine, but not necessarily exercise
or feeding grounds.[Added 4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2008-07]
PARKING LOT — (See also "garage, public.") An area not within a building
where motor vehicles may be stored for the purposes of temporary, daily or
overnight off-street parking; a tract of land used for the temporary parking
of motor vehicles when such use is not accessory to any other use.
PARKING, SHARED — The development and use of parking areas on two or
more separate properties for joint use by the business on those properties.
PARKING SPACE — An area on a lot and/or within a building intended
for the use of temporary parking of a personal vehicle. This term is used
interchangeably with "parking stall." (See Illustration 23.168)
PARTY WALL — A common shared wall between two separate structures,
buildings or dwelling units.
PASTURE — Grounds outside of a paddock/corral, barn or stable where
natural grasses and other vegetation grows and maintains the stability of
the soil while providing feed and exercise for animals.[Added 4-6-2009 by
Ord. No. 2008-07]
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS — A set of criteria or limits relating to
nuisance elements which a particular land use or process may not exceed.
PERIMETER PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING — Landscape located around
the outside perimeter of a parking lot, except along the street frontage.
Perimeter landscaping includes the area provided in the setback required
between the parking spaces and the building.[Added 9-16-1996 by Ord.
No. 1996-8]
PERMIT — Written governmental permission issued by an authorized
official, empowering the holder thereof to do some act not forbidden by law,
but not allowed without such authorization.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, copartnership or a governmental unit, public utility or any
other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of
rights and duties.[Amended 4-4-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-2]
PERSONAL SERVICES — Establishments primarily engaged in providing
services involving the care of a person or his or her personal goods or
apparel.
168. Editor's Note: Illustration 23 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 195-10 PLUMBING § 195-10
144:547
PERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that generally permits the infiltration of
water into the ground. (See Illustration 10.169)
PICNIC AREA — A place equipped with tables, benches, grills and trash
receptacles for people to assemble, cook, eat and relax outdoors.
PLANNED BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT — A development that is granted
subdivision or land development for two or more development lots or one or
more office buildings.[Added 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — Land under unified control to be planned
and developed as a whole in a single development operation or a definitely
programmed series of development operations or phases. A planned
development includes principal and accessory structures and uses
substantially related to the character and purposes of the planned
development. A planned development is built according to general and
detailed plans that include not only streets, utilities, lots and building
location and the like, but also site plans for all buildings as are intended
to be located, constructed, used and related to each other, and plans for
other uses and improvements on the land as related to the buildings. A
planned development includes a program for the provisions, operations
and maintenance of such areas, facilities and improvements as will be for
common use by some or all of the occupants of the planned development
district, but which will not be provided, operated or maintained at general
public expense.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of land, controlled by
a landowner, to be developed as a single entity for a number of dwelling
units, or combination of residential and nonresidential uses, to develop
a plan for which does not correspond in lot size, bulk, type of dwelling
or use, density or intensity, lot coverage and required open space to the
regulations established in any one district created, from time to time, under
the provisions of a municipal zoning ordinance.
PLANNING CODE — The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act
247, as amended. 170
PLANNING COMMISSION — The West Hanover Township Planning
Commission, appointed by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.
PORCH — A roofed structure projecting from the front, side or rear wall of
a building.
POTABLE WATER — Water suitable for drinking or cooking purposes.
POULTRY — All domesticated fowl, including chickens, turkeys, ostriches,
emus, rheas, cassowaries, waterfowl, and game birds (except doves and
pigeons), or otherwise defined under Subpart A of the current version of
the National Poultry Improvement Plan (NPIP) and Auxiliary Provisions,
169. Editor's Note: Illustration 10 is included at the end of this chapter.
170. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 195-10 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-10
144:548
and shall be three weeks of age or older.[Added 4-6-2009 by Ord. No.
2008-07]
PRESERVATION TRUST — A locally formed nonprofit organization that
acquires and manages land for preservation and public use.
PRIME AGRICULTURAL LAND — Land used for agricultural purposes that
contains soils of the first, second or third class as defined by the United
States Department of Agriculture Natural Resource and Conservation
Services County Soil Survey.[Amended 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
PRIME AGRICULTURE SOILS — Soils classified as Class I or Class II
land under the United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation
Service Land Capability Classification System.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building in which the primary use of the lot on
which the building is located is conducted; a structure or, where the context
so indicates, a group of structures in or on which is conducted the principal
use of the lot on which such structure is located. (See Illustration 1.171)
PRINCIPAL USE — The main use of land or structures, as distinguished
from a secondary or accessory use; the primary use and chief purpose of a
lot or structure.
PRINT SHOP — A retail establishment that provides duplicating services
using photocopy, blueprint and offset.
PRIVATE — Not publicly owned, operated or controlled.
PROFESSIONAL OCCUPATION — The practice of a profession by any
professional, including but not limited to attorney, physician, surgeon,
osteopath, chiropractor, dentist, optician, optometrist, chiropodist,
engineer, surveyor, architect, landscape architect, planner or similar type,
entitled to practice under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
PROPERLY ENGINEERED FOUNDATION — A foundation that provides
adequate support of the home's vertical and horizontal loads and transfers
these and other imposed forces, without failure, from the home to the
undisturbed ground below the front line.
PRURIENT INTEREST — Is to be judged with reference to average adults
unless it appears from the nature of the material or the circumstances of
its dissemination, distribution or exhibition that it is designed for clearly
defined deviant sexual groups in which case the predominant appeal of the
matter shall be judged with reference to its intended recipient group.
PUBLIC — Owned, operated or controlled by a government agency (federal,
state or local, including a corporation and/or board created by law for the
performance of certain specialized governmental functions).
PUBLIC AREAS — Public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other
recreational areas and other public open spaces; scenic and historic sites;
schools and other public buildings and structures.
171. Editor's Note: Illustration 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 195-10 PLUMBING § 195-10
144:549
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Public grounds include the following:
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by
the governing body or planning agency, intended to inform and obtain
public comment, prior to taking action in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended. 172
PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE AREA — A designated growth area and all or
any portion of a future growth area described in a county or multimunicipal
comprehensive plan where public infrastructure services will be provided.
Public infrastructure services outside the "area" will not have to be publicly
financed.[Added 11-4-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-8A]
PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE SERVICES — Services provided to areas with
densities of one or more units to the acre, which may include, but need
not be limited to, sanitary facilities, including collection lines and treatment
plants, water lines and facilities, parks, streets, sidewalks, and public
transportation. The term excludes fire protection and emergency medical
services and any other services required to protect the health and safety of
residents.[Added 11-4-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-8A]
PUBLIC MEETING — A meeting held in compliance with the Open Meetings
Act (65 PA. C.S. Ch. 7).[Amended 11-4-2002 by Ord No. 2002-8A]
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of
the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be
more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven
days from the date of the hearing.
PUBLIC SEWER AND WATER SYSTEM — Any system other than an
individual septic tank, tile field or individual septic tank or well that is
operated by a municipality, governmental agency or a public utility for the
collection, treatment and disposal of wastes and the furnishing of potable
water.
PUBLIC UTILITY — A closely regulated private enterprise with an exclusive
franchise for providing a public service.
PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITIES — Telephone, electric and cable television
lines, poles, equipment and structures; water or gas pipes, mains, valves
or structures; sewer pipes; pumping stations; telephone exchanges and
repeater stations; and all other facilities, equipment and structures
necessary for conducting a service by a government or a public utility.
Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and other
public areas;
A.
Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly
owned or operated facilities; and
B.
C. Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
172. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 195-10 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-10
144:550
PUBLIC UTILITY, UNDERGROUND — A public utility facility whose
distribution system is primarily underground, but may be partially above
ground.
R-3 CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — A specific form of open space residential
development in the R-3 Cluster Overlay (R-3CO) that permits modifications
to certain use, design and dimensional requirements of the R-3 District and
open space residential and nonresidential development standards and other
standards of this chapter, and the movement (i.e., clustering) of residential
development rights (i.e., dwelling units) from an adjacent district in the
development area of the subject property, to be located on the R-3 District
portion of the development area of the subject property, so as to facilitate
the creation of larger areas of open space in exchange for land to be offered
for dedication to the Township for public parks and recreation land.[Added
4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-03]
RECREATION, ACTIVE — Leisure time activities, usually of a formal nature
and often performed with others, requiring equipment and taking place at
prescribed places, sites, pools, courts, tracks, playgrounds or fields.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicular unit which is designed as a
temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation use, and which is
either self-propelled, mounted on, or pulled by another vehicle (i.e., travel
trailer, camping trailer, truck camper, motor home, fifth-wheel trailer, van,
etc.). [Added 9-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-13]
RECREATION AREAS — A place designed and equipped for the conduct of
sports, leisure time activities and other customary and usual recreational
activities. Public recreation areas are those owned and operated by a unit
of local government. Private recreation areas are those owned and operated
by a nonprofit organization, and open only to bona fide members and their
guests. Commercial recreation areas are those operated as a business and
open to the public for a fee.
RECREATION, PASSIVE — Activities that involve relatively inactive or less
energetic activities such as walking, sitting, picnicking, card games, chess,
checkers and similar table games.
REGISTRY — The registry established by the DOH for all medical marijuana
organizations and practitioners.[Added 3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-02]
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Earth disturbance
activity one acre or more with a point source discharge to surface waters
or the Township’s storm sewer system, or five acres or more regardless of
the planned runoff. This includes earth disturbance on any portion of, part
or during any stage of a larger common plan of development. This only
includes road maintenance activities involving 25 acres or more of earth
disturbance.[Added 4-4-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-2]
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) plus
a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.[Added 9-4-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-18]
§ 195-10 PLUMBING § 195-10
144:551
REPAIR SERVICES — Any building, premises and land in which or upon
which a business or industry involving the maintenance, servicing or repair
to products is conducted or rendered; establishments primarily engaged in
providing assistance, as opposed to products.
RETAIL SALES — Establishments engaged in selling goods or merchandise
to the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering
services incidental to the sale of such goods.
RETAIL WAREHOUSE OUTLET — Retail sales from a warehouse as an
accessory use to the principle warehouse use.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT — Any establishment which carries on
investigation in the natural, physical, technical or social sciences or
engineering and development as an extension of such investigation with the
objective of creating end products.
RESEARCH LABORATORY — A building or group of buildings in which
are located facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing or
experimentation, but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of products,
except as incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory.
RESIDENTIAL — Pertains to uses and structures of or related to residence
or residences; used as a residence or by residents.
RESTAURANT —
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD —
An establishment that serves food and beverages primarily to persons
seated within the building. This includes cafes, tea rooms and outdoor
cafes.
A.
A business establishment whose principal business is the selling of
unpackaged food to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, in
individual servings or in nondisposable containers, and where the
customer consumes these foods while seated at tables or counters
located within the building.
B.
An establishment that offers quick food service, which is accomplished
through a limited menu of items already prepared and held for service,
or prepared, fried or grilled quickly, or heated in a device such as
a microwave oven. Orders are not generally taken at the customer's
table, and food is generally served in disposable wrapping or
containers.
A.
Any establishment whose principal business is the sale of foods, frozen
desserts or beverages in ready-to-consume individual servings, for
consumption either within the restaurant building or for carry-out, and
where either: foods, frozen desserts or beverages are usually served
in paper, plastic or other disposable containers, and where customers
are not served their food, frozen desserts or beverages by a restaurant
employee at the same table or counter where the items are consumed;
B.
§ 195-10 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-10
144:552
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced
dedication, prescription or condemnation and intended to be occupied or
occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil
or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary storm sewer and other similar uses;
generally, the right of one to pass over the property of another. (See
Illustration 11.173)
RIGHT-OF-WAY, STREET — A public or private thoroughfare for vehicular
traffic and/or pedestrian traffic, whether designated as a street, highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, alley or however
designated.
ROCK OUTCROPPINGS — The part of a rock formation that appears at the
surface of the ground.
RURAL RESOURCE AREA — An area described in a municipal or
multimunicipal plan within which uses including, but not limited to,
agriculture, timbering, mineral extraction, forest and game lands, and
recreation are encouraged and enhanced. Development that is compatible
with or supportive of such uses is permitted. Public infrastructure services
are not provided except in villages.[Added 11-4-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-8A]
SCENIC VIEW — An area visible from a highway, waterway, railway or
hiking, biking or equestrian trail where the natural or man-made features of
which are visually significant or geologically or botanically unique.
SCHOOL — Any place offering instruction in any branch of knowledge
under the supervision of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or a lawfully
constituted ecclesiastical governing body, person, partnership or
corporation meeting the requirements of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
SCREENING —
SELF-SERVICE STATION — An establishment where liquids used as motor
fuels are stored and dispersed into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles by
or the establishment includes a drive-up or drive-through service
facility or offers curb service.
The method by which a view of one site from another adjacent site
is shielded, concealed or hidden. Screening techniques include fences,
walls, hedges, berms or other features.
A.
A device or materials used to conceal one element of a development
from other elements or from adjacent or contiguous development.
B.
Screening may include one or a combination of the following materials
of sufficient mass to be opaque or that shall become opaque after 12
months and which shall be maintained in an opaque condition: walls,
berms or plantings.
C.
173. Editor's Note: Illustration 11 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 195-10 PLUMBING § 195-10
144:553
persons other than the service station attendant and may include facilities
available for the sale of other retail products.
SERVICE STATION (See also "garage, repair") —
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business or commercial enterprise
that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration:[Added 6-16-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-9]
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — An adult arcade, adult bookstore,
adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motion-picture
theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual
encounter center.[Added 6-16-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-9]
SHADOW FLICKER — The alternating changes in light intensity caused
by the moving wind rotor blade casting shadows on the ground and/or
stationary objects.[Added 4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04]
SHOPPING CENTER — A grouping of retail business and service uses on
a single site with common parking facilities; a group of stores planned and
designed to function as a unit for the lot on which it is located with off-street
parking provided as an integral part of the unit. For the purposes of this
chapter, a shopping center is defined as a group of three or more stores on
a single parcel of ground.
SIDEWALK — A paved surface or leveled area, paralleling and usually
separated from the street, used as a pedestrian walkway.
SIGHT TRIANGLE — A triangular-shaped portion of land at a street
intersection or private exitway in which nothing is erected, placed, planted
or allowed to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight
distance of motorists entering or leaving the intersection.[Added
9-16-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-9]
SIGNS —
Any premises where gasoline and other petroleum products are sold
and/or light maintenance activities such as engine tuneups, lubrication,
minor repairs and carburetor cleaning are conducted. Service stations
shall not include premises where heavy automobile maintenance
activities such as engine overhauls, automobile painting and body
fender work are conducted.
A.
Buildings and premises where the primary use is the supply and
dispensing at retail of motor fuels, lubricants, batteries, tires and motor
vehicle accessories.
B.
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons
of the opposite sex; or
A.
Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the
same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or
seminudity.
B.
A. General definitions.
§ 195-10 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-10
144:554
SIGN — Any object, device, display or structure, or part thereof,
visible from a public way, which is used to advertise, identify,
display, direct or attract attention to a person, organization,
institution, business, product, service, event or location. A sign
includes writing, representation or any other figure of similar
character within a building when located in a window.
(1)
SIGN AREA — The entire face of a sign, including the advertising
surface and any framing, trim or molding, but not including the
supporting structure.
(2)
(3) SIGN FACE — The area or display surface used for the message.
ANIMATED SIGN — Any sign or part of a sign which changes
physical position by any movement or rotation or which gives the
visual impression of such movement or rotation.
(4)
Signs defined according to location on premises and/or method of
attachment.
AWNING, CANOPY OR MARQUEE SIGN — A sign that is mounted
or painted on, or attached to an awning, canopy or marquee that is
otherwise permitted by ordinance. (See Illustration 24.174)
(1)
BANNER SIGN — A temporary sign of lightweight fabric or similar
material that is temporarily mounted to a pole or a building.
(2)
FLAG SIGN — Any fabric, banner or bunting containing distinctive
colors, patterns or symbols used as a form of advertisement.
(3)
FREESTANDING SIGN — Any nonmovable sign not affixed to a
building.
(4)
GROUND SIGN — Any sign, other than a pole sign, permanently
placed upon or supported by the ground independent of any other
structure. (See Illustration 24.)
(5)
INTEGRAL ROOF SIGN — Any sign erected or constructed as
an integral or essentially integral part of a normal roof structure
of any design, such that no part of the sign extends vertically
above any portion of the roof and such that no part of the sign is
separated from the rest of the roof by a space of more than six
inches; or which is painted on the roof.
(6)
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — A sign which directs attention to a
business or profession conducted, or to a commodity or service
sold, offered or manufactured, or to an entertainment offered off
the premises where the sign is located.
(7)
B.
174. Editor's Note: Illustration 24 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 195-10 PLUMBING § 195-10
144:555
ON-PREMISES SIGN — A sign located on the same premises on
which the use is located and clearly incidental and associated with
the operation of that use.
(8)
PAINTED WALL SIGN — A permanent mural or message painted
directly onto a building surface.
(9)
PENNANTS — A temporary sign made of lightweight plastic, fabric
or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind,
suspended from a rope, wire or string, usually in series, designed
to move in the wind.
(10)
POLE SIGN — A sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole or
other support so that the bottom edge of the sign face is nine feet
or more above grade. (See Illustration 24.175)
(11)
PORTABLE SIGN — A sign that is not permanently affixed to a
building, structure or the ground. (See Illustration 24.)
(12)
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign that is erected on the outside wall of
a building that projects out at an angle. (See Illustration 24.)
(13)
ROOF SIGN — A sign which is erected, constructed and maintained
on or above the roof line of any building or structure.
(14)
TEMPORARY SIGN — Any sign which is movable, not permanently
attached to the ground, a structure or other sign, designed or
constructed in such a manner that it can be moved or relocated
without involving any structural or support changes, intended for a
limited period of display or constructed out of cloth, canvas, plastic
sheet, cardboard or other like materials.
(15)
TRAILER SIGN — A sign which is attached to, supported by or part
of a structure which is designed to be moved on trailer wheels,
skids or other similar device; or transported by a motor vehicle. It
is designed to be moved and is not permanent, nor is it intended to
be permanently attached to a building, structure or the ground.
(16)
WALL SIGN — A sign fastened to or painted on the wall of a
building or structure in such a manner that the wall becomes the
supporting structure for or forms the background surface of the
sign and which does not project more than 12 inches from such
building or structure.
(17)
WINDOW SIGN — A sign that is applied or attached to the exterior
or interior of a window within a building so that it is visible from the
exterior of the structure through a window. (See Illustration 24.176)
(18)
C. Signs defined according to type of message conveyed.
175. Editor's Note: Illustration 24 is included at the end of this chapter.
176. Editor's Note: Illustration 24 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 195-10 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-10
144:556
ADDRESS SIGN — A sign or nameplate, located on the premises,
giving the name or address, or both, of the owners or occupants of
a building or premises.
(1)
BILLBOARD — A sign which directs attention to a business or
profession conducted, or to a commodity or service sold, offered or
manufactured, or to an entertainment offered off the premises.
(2)
BULLETIN BOARD — A permanent sign with movable letters,
words or materials, indicating the names of persons associated
with, products and/or services offered on the premises, etc.
(3)
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN — A sign designed to allow frequent
message changes, either electronically or manually, such as time
and temperature or a theater marquee sign.
(4)
CONSTRUCTION SIGN — A sign identifying an architect,
contractor, subcontractor, owners, financial supporters, material
supplier and similar individuals or firms having a role in
construction on the property on which the sign is located.
(5)
DEVELOPMENT SIGN — A sign which, by symbol or name,
identifies a development, including a subdivision, neighborhood,
residential development, shopping center or commercial, industrial
or office complex.
(6)
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — A sign limited to providing entrance and
exit information necessary to direct traffic flow which does not
include any commercial message, but can include business name or
logo.
(7)
HOME OCCUPATION SIGN — A sign containing only the name and
occupation of a permitted home occupation.
(8)
IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign indicating the name, owner,
manager, logo, trademark or other identifying symbol, and address
of a building, business, development or establishment on the
premises where it is located. "Name" may include the type of goods
or services rendered, but not brand names.
(9)
JOINT IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A group of signs clustered
together in a single structure or compositional unit used to
advertise several occupants of the same building or building
complex.
(10)
MEMORIAL SIGN — A sign, tablet or plaque memorializing a
person, event, structure or site.
(11)
INFORMATION SIGN — A sign commonly associated with
information necessary or convenient for visitors coming on the
property, including signs marking parking areas, circulation
direction, bathroom facilities, pickup and delivery areas or
telephone which does not include commercial messages or name.
(12)
§ 195-10 PLUMBING § 195-10
144:557
SILVICULTURE — The development and/or maintenance of forests.
SITE-BUILT HOUSING — A home that is constructed on the building site.
POLITICAL SIGNS — A temporary sign announcing or supporting
political candidates or issues in connection with any national, state
or local election.
(13)
PRIVATE SALE OR EVENT SIGN — A temporary sign advertising
private sales of personal property such as house sales, garage
sales and the like or private not-for-profit events such as picnics,
carnivals, bazaars, game nights, art fairs and craft shows.
(14)
PRODUCT SIGN — A sign or portion of a sign that depicts a specific
name-brand product that is sold on the premises.
(15)
REAL ESTATE SIGN — A sign which directs attention to the
promotion, development, rental, sale or lease of the property on
which the sign is located.
(16)
SECURITY SIGN — A small sign indicating the premises are under
some monitored security system. [Added 6-4-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-5177; 3-3-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-02]
(17)
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign intended to be used for a period of
no more than 30 days. Exceptions for pennants and similar devices
intended for civic purposes may be granted by special permit.
(18)
Signs defined according to degree of illumination.
FLASHING SIGN — Any directly or indirectly illuminated sign
which contains an intermittent or flashing light source by means of
animation or an extremely intermittent light source.
(1)
ILLUMINATED SIGN — Any sign lit by electrical bulbs, fluorescent
lights, neon bulbs or exposed to artificial lighting either by lights
on or in the sign or directed towards the sign. Neon tubes used as
abstract, graphic, decorative or architectural elements shall also
be considered to constitute an illuminated sign.
(2)
DIRECT EXTERNAL LIGHTING — Lighting that is external but
integral to the sign, such as flood or spotlights; lights directed
towards the sign.
(3)
ELECTRONIC SIGN — A sign with a fixed or changing display or
message composed of a series of light bulbs or light-emitting diodes
(LEDs), liquid crystal displays, plasma screens, fiber optic or other
nonconventional illumination methods, such that the message may
be changed through electronic means. [Added 6-4-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-5; amended 4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-03]
(4)
D.
177. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection
C(17), the definition for "temporary sign," to Subsection C(18).
§ 195-10 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-10
144:558
SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A scaled graphical depiction of the proposed
development of a lot, parcel or tract of land describing all covenants
assigned, lot dimensions, as well as accurately depicting the use, location
and bulk of all buildings and structures, intensity of use or density of
development, streets, driveways, rights-of-ways, easements, parking
facilities, open space, public facilities and utilities, setbacks, height of
buildings and structures and other such data necessary for municipal
officials to determine compliance with this chapter and appropriate
provisions of other such ordinances, as they may apply.
SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — An electricity-generating system that is
limited to five kilowatts of power generation and is limited in turbine height
to 35 feet.[Added 4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04 amended 5-3-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-03]
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS — Devices used to collect radiant energy from
the sun and convert that energy into useful electrical or heat energy,
storage units for that energy, and the components for the distribution of that
transformed energy.[Added 5-4-2009 by Ord. No. 5-4-2009]
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It
is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99 and/or AH.[Added
9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-18]
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Human genitals, pubic region, anus,
buttocks, female breast(s) below a point immediately above the top of
the areola, or human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if
completely covered.[Amended 6-16-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-9]
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Any of the following:[Amended
6-16-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-9]
SPECIFIED SEXUALLY CRIMINAL ACTIVITY — Any of the following
offenses:[Added 6-16-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-9]
The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus or female breasts;
A.
Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; or
B.
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities
set forth in Subsections A and B above.
C.
Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity;
sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual
performance by a child; possession or distribution of child
pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure, indecency with a
child; engaging in organized activity; sexual assault, molestation of a
child, gambling or distribution of a controlled substance, or any similar
offenses to those described above under the criminal or penal code of
other states or countries, for which:
A.
§ 195-10 PLUMBING § 195-10
144:559
SPORTSMAN CLUB — A place privately owned and operated by a nonprofit
organization and open to members and their guests, designed and equipped
with a clubhouse, meeting rooms and other accessory uses for the conduct
of social gatherings and active outdoor recreation activities such as archery
target ranges, archery field courses, archery hunters course, firearm target
shooting, shooting ranges, trap and skeet shooting, fishing and
hunting.[Added 4-16-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-2]
SPOT ZONING — Rezoning of a lot or parcel of land to benefit an owner for
a use incompatible with surrounding uses and that is inconsistent and does
not further the West Hanover Township Comprehensive Plan.
STACKING SPACE — A temporary improved waiting area where customers
receive services or obtain goods while waiting in a motor vehicle. A stacking
space for automobiles shall be 20 feet. A stacking space for a tractor trailer
truck shall be 80 feet.[Added 11-6-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-10]
START OF CONSTRUCTION (pertaining to floodplain language only) — The
commencement of any earth disturbance or construction of any structure or
utility or infrastructure, once pertinent permits have been obtained.[Added
9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-18]
STEEP SLOPE — Land with a twenty-five-foot or greater change in
elevation, 100 feet or less in horizontal distance or, in other terms, 25% or
greater on the average. The following formula is the acceptable method of
determining average slope:[Amended 3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-01]
S = 0.0023 I x L
______________
A
S = Average percent slope of site
I = Contour interval in feet
Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor
offense;
(1)
Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement for conviction, whichever is
the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or
(2)
Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of
two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor
offenses occurring within any twenty-four-month period.
(3)
The fact that conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the
disqualification of the applicant or a person residing with the applicant.
B.
§ 195-10 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-10
144:560
L = Sum of the length of contours in feet
A = Land area in areas of parcel being considered
STORAGE, SELF-SERVICE —
STORY — That portion of any building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the next floor above it, or, if there is no floor above
it, then the space between such floor and the ceiling next above it.
STORY, HALF — A story under a gabled, hipped or gambreled roof, the wall
plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not over three
feet above the finished floor of such story. (See Illustration 13.178)
STREAM — A watercourse with definite bed and banks which confine and
convey continuously or intermittently flowing water.
STREAM, INTERMITTENT — A natural stream carrying water during the
wet seasons and having at least one critical area feature.
STREAM, PERENNIAL — A stream that is present at all seasons of the year.
STREET — A public or private right-of-way constructed to municipal
standards which affords primary vehicular traffic or pedestrian access to
abutting properties, which includes an avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
freeway, parkway and viaduct, but shall not include an alley for the purpose
of this chapter. (See Illustration 15.179)
STREET, COLLECTOR — A major street or highway which carries traffic
from minor streets to arterial streets, including the principal entrance
streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within such
a development. (See Illustration 14.180)
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC — A street intersecting another street at one end and
terminating at the other in a vehicular turnaround. (See Illustration 14.)
STREET GRADE — The officially established grade of the street upon which
a lot fronts or in its absence the established grade of the other streets upon
which the lot abuts, at the midpoint of the frontage of the lot thereon. If
there is no officially established grade, the existing grade of the street at
such midpoint shall be taken as the street grade.
A building or group of buildings consisting of individual, small, selfcontained
units that are leased or owned for the storage of business and
household goods or contractors' supplies.
A.
A building or group of buildings in a controlled access and fenced
compound that contains varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized
and controlled access stalls or lockers for the storage of a customer's
goods or wares.
B.
178. Editor's Note: Illustration 13 is included at the end of this chapter.
179. Editor's Note: Illustration 15 is included at the end of this chapter.
180. Editor's Note: Illustration 14 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 195-10 PLUMBING § 195-10
144:561
STREET LINE — The dividing line between the street and the lot, also
known as the "right-of-way line." (See Illustration 14.)
STREET, MINOR — A street used primarily for access to abutting
properties. (See Illustration 14.)
STREET WIDTH — The distance between street right-of-way lines measured
at right angles to the center line of the street.
STRUCTURE —
STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY — A structure without any foundation or
footings and which is to be removed when the designated time period,
activity or use for which the temporary structure was erected has ceased.
STUDIO — A building or portion of a building used as a place of work by an
artist, photographer or artisan, or used for radio or television broadcasting.
STUDIO, DANCING OR MUSIC — The use of a premises by a teacher of
music or dancing where students are taught these arts for a fee. This term
is synonymous with "dancing school" and "music school," and other similar
expressions.
SUBDIVISION — (See "land development.") The division or redivision of
a lot, tract or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts,
parcels or other divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for
the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court
for distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot
development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of land for
agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any
new street or easement of access or residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBJECT PROPERTY — The combined total area of the tract of land or
contiguous tracts of land under single ownership on the effective date of
this chapter designed and developed under a unified development plan at
the time of submission of the preliminary plan.[Added 4-3-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-03]
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.[Added 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-18]
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on or
in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
A.
(Definition to be used as required by Article XV and FEMA regulations.)
A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank
that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
[Amended 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-18]
B.
§ 195-10 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-10
144:562
have incurred substantial damage regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not include either:[Amended 9-4-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-18]
SURFACE MINING — The extraction of minerals from the earth, from waste
or stock piles or from pits or banks as activities conducted upon the surface
of the land which require the removal of overburden, strata or material
overlying, above or between the minerals, or by otherwise exposing and
retrieving the minerals from the surface. These activities include but are not
limited to strip, drift, auger and open pit mining, quarrying, leaching, box
cutting and activities related thereto. Mining activities carried out beneath
the surface by means of shafts, tunnels or other underground mine openings
are not included in this definition.
SWIMMING POOL — A water-filled enclosure, permanently constructed or
portable, having a depth of more than 18 inches below the level of the
surrounding land, or an above-surface pool, having a depth of more than 18
inches, designed, used and maintained for swimming and bathing.
TELEPHONE ANSWERING SERVICE — A commercial service that answers
telephone calls for its clients.
THEATER — A building or part of a building devoted to the showing of
moving pictures or theatrical productions on a paid admission basis.
TIMBER HARVESTING — The actual cutting and removal of trees from
their growing site, and the attendant cutting and skidding operation, in
conjunction with Forest Management, over an area greater than two acres,
and which requires a Township permit. [Also reference § 195-97B, Erosion
and sedimentation control, Subsection B, which requires a Township permit
with 2,000 square feet of earth disturbance (from skid roads and staging
areas).][Amended 2-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2010-4]
TIMBER HARVESTING OPERATOR — Any person or company involved in
timber harvesting activities.[Added 2-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2010-4]
TOWER, CELLULAR — A communications tower using low power
transmitters (approximately 100 watts) to transmit signals in a cell or
cellular radio-telephone services (cellular), personal communications
services (PCS), enhanced specialized mobile radios (ESMR), truck mobile
cellular radios, paging services and similar cellular-based communications
to the general public. Cellular communications are considered a public
utility.[Added 8-4-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-12]
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specification which have
been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historical
structure.
B.
§ 195-10 PLUMBING § 195-10
144:563
TOWER, COMMUNICATIONS — A vertical structure that is designed
primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas.[Added
8-4-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-12]
TOWER, FREESTANDING — A tower constructed to be self supporting for
its' height, weight, intended antennas, and dynamic loads of wind, snow or
ice.[Added 8-4-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-12]
TOWER, GUY WIRE — A tower requiring support from guy wires radiating
out from the tower at various levels and various angles.[Added 8-4-2003
by Ord. No. 2003-12]
TOWER, PRIVATE ANTENNA — A tower using low power (approximately
100 watts) to transmit and receive signals by private individuals or
clubs.[Added 8-4-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-12]
TOWER, RADIO — A tower used for the transmission of AM or FM band
radio frequencies to the general public.[Added 8-4-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-12]
TOWER, TELEVISION — A tower used for the transmission of very high
frequency (VHF) and ultra high frequency (UHF) band television
frequencies to the general public.[Added 8-4-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-12]
TRAILER — A structure standing on wheels, towed or hauled by another
vehicle.[Added 9-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-13]
TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS — The removal of the right to
develop or build, expressed in dwelling units per acre, from one zoning
district to land in another district where such transfer is permitted.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF AN ADULT
ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS — Includes any of the following:[Added
6-16-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-9]
TRUCKSTOP — Any building, premises or land in which or upon which
a business, servicing or industry involving the maintenance, servicing,
storage or repair of commercial vehicles in conducted or rendered,
including the dispensing of motor fuel or other petroleum products directly
into motor vehicles and the sale of accessories or equipment for trucks
and similar commercial vehicles. A truckstop also may include overnight
accommodations, chapels, arcades and restaurant facilities primarily for the
use of truck crews.
A. The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the
business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or
B.
The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which
transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer
by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person
possessing the ownership or control.
C.
§ 195-10 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-10
144:564
TRUCK TERMINAL —
TURBINE HEIGHT — The distance measured from the surface of the tower
foundation or structure to the highest point of the turbine rotor
plane.[Added 4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04; amended 5-3-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-03]
TURNOUT SHED — A three-sided and roofed accessory structure designed
to shelter animals from harsh weather.[Added 4-6-2009 by Ord. No.
2008-07]
UNDEVELOPED LAND — Any lot which has not been graded or in any other
manner prepared for the construction of a building.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999, as amended,
applicable to new construction in all municipalities whether administered
by the municipality, a third party, or the Department of Labor and Industry.
Applicable to residential and commercial buildings, the Code adopted the
International Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code
(IBC), by reference and as amended, as the construction standards
applicable with the state floodplain construction.[Added 9-4-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-18]
UPLAND BUFFER — Areas elevated around a stream, waterway or
woodland existing in a natural state physically separating, visually shielding
and protecting sensitive hydrological features from land uses.
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is designated,
arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
USE, PERMITTED — Any use allowed in a zoning district and subject to the
regulations applicable to that zoning district.
USE, TEMPORARY — A use established for a fixed period of time with the
intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the time period.
VARIANCE — Relief granted by the Zoning Hearing Board from technical
requirements of this chapter which if strictly adhered to would inflict
unnecessary hardship upon the applicant. Procedures and criteria for
granting such relief shall comply with the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247, as amended. 181
Land and buildings used as a relay station for the transfer of a load from
one vehicle to another or one party to another. The terminal cannot be
used for permanent or long-term accessory storage for principal land
uses at other locations. The terminal facility may include storage areas
for trucks and buildings or areas for the repair of trucks associated with
the terminal.
A.
A building or area in which freight brought by truck is assembled and/
or stored for routing or reshipment, or in which semitrailers, including
tractor and/or trailer units and other trucks, are parked or stored.
B.
181. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 195-10 PLUMBING § 195-10
144:565
VEGETATIVE COVER — Such cover shall consist of trees, shrubs, flowers,
grass or similar natural cover.
VEHICLE, MOTOR — A self-propelled device used for transportation of
people or goods over land surfaces and licensed as a motor vehicle.
VETERINARY SERVICES — Veterinary facilities, as well as establishments
providing support to the veterinary profession and animal care, such as
veterinary laboratories and miscellaneous types of veterinary supplies and
services.
VILLAGE — An unincorporated settlement that is part of the Township
where residential and mixed-use densities of one unit to the acre or more
exist or are permitted and commercial, industrial or institutional uses exist
or are permitted.[Amended 11-4-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-8A; 8-15-2005
by Ord. No. 2004-12]
VIOLATION (for Article XV and FEMA regulations only) — The failure of a
structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's
floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development
without elevation certificate, other certifications, engineering surveys, flood
map amendments, flood map revisions, or other evidence of compliance
required in 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5)
is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is
provided.[Added 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-18]
WAREHOUSE — A building used primarily for the storage of goods and
materials.
WAREHOUSING AND DISTRIBUTION — A use engaged in storage,
wholesale and distribution of manufactured products, supplies and
equipment, but excluding bulk storage of materials that are inflammable
or explosive or that create hazardous or commonly recognized offensive
conditions.
WATERCOURSE (WATERWAY) — A channel or conveyance of surface water,
such as a stream or creek, having defined bed and banks, whether natural
or artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow (Ref. MS4
document).[Added 4-4-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-2; amended 9-5-2006 by
Ord. No. 2005-8]
WATERSHED — A region or area bounded peripherally by a contour
elevation devising line where surface water drains into a particular
waterway or stream. A watershed is the total area drained by a stream or
tributary.
WETLANDS — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface
or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs and similar areas. (The term includes but is not limited
to wetland areas listed in the State Water Plan, the United States Forest
Service Wetlands Inventory of Pennsylvania, the Pennsylvania Coastal Zone
Management Plan and a wetland area designated by a river basin
§ 195-10 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-10
144:566
commission. This definition is used by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency and the United States Army Corps of Engineers.)
WHOLESALE BUSINESS — Establishments or places of business primarily
engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial,
institutional or professional business users; to other wholesalers; or acting
as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling merchandise to,
such individuals or companies.
WILDLIFE — All animals not fitting any livestock, poultry or domestic pet
definitions and/or which would require either state or federal permits to
own.[Added 4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2008-07]
WILDLIFE HABITAT — Land set aside for animal habitation.
WILDLIFE PRESERVE — An area restricted for the protection and
preservation of natural resources and wildlife.
WILDLIFE PROPAGATION — Raising of nondomestic wildlife.
WIND ENERGY FACILITY — An electricity-generating facility, consisting
of one or more wind turbines and associated accessory structures and
buildings, including substations, meteorological towers, electrical
infrastructure, transmission lines and other appurtenant structures and
facilities, which generates more than 25 kilowatts of power.[Added
4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04; amended 5-3-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-03]
WIND TURBINE — A wind energy conversion system that converts wind
energy into electricity through the use of a wind turbine generator and
includes the nacelle, rotor, tower, pad, transformer, and other accessories, if
any.[Added 4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04; amended 5-3-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-03]
WINERY — An agricultural processing plant used for the commercial
purpose of processing grapes, other fruit products, or vegetables to produce
wine or similar spirits. Processing includes wholesale sales, crushing,
fermenting, blending, aging, storage, bottling, administrative office
functions for the winery and warehousing. Retail sales and tasting facilities
of wine may be permitted as part of the winery operations. Sale of food is
prohibited; however, incidental provision of food without compensation is
allowed.[Added 9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2005-8]
WOODLAND, MATURE — Woodlands consisting of 30% or more canopy
trees having a twelve-inch or greater caliper, or any small concentration
of trees without regard to size consisting of eight or more trees having a
sixteen-inch or greater caliper.
WOODLANDS — Areas covered with stands of trees, the majority of which
are greater than twelve-inch caliper, covering an area greater than 1/4 acre;
or a small concentration of mature trees without regard to minimum area
consisting of substantial numbers of individual specimens.
WOODLAND, YOUNG — Woodlands consisting of 70% or more canopy trees
having a two-and-one-half-inch caliper or greater.
§ 195-10 PLUMBING § 195-10
144:567
WORK RELEASE FACILITY — A facility providing housing and supervision
for nonviolent criminals who are within six months of completion of their
term or release and who have the opportunity to work, go to school, or take
job training.[Added 2-17-2009 by Ord. No. 2008-18]
YARD — An unoccupied space, outside the building setback lines, other than
a court, open to the sky, on the same lot with a building or structure.
YARD, BUFFER — A strip of required yard space adjacent to the boundary
of a property or district, not less than the width designated in this chapter,
and on which is placed (planted) year-round shrubbery, hedges, evergreens
or other suitable plantings of sufficient height and density to constitute an
effective screen and give maximum protection and immediate screening to
an abutting property or district, and may include a wall, as provided for in
this chapter.
YARD, EXTERIOR — An open, unoccupied space between a building and the
property boundary or street line..
YARD, FRONT — An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a building,
extending the full width of the lot and situated between the street line and
the building line projected to the side lines of the lot. The depth of the front
yard shall be measured between the front building line and the street line.
(See Illustration 15.182)
YARD, INTERIOR — An open, unoccupied space between building
structures, all of which are located on the same lot.
YARD, REAR — A yard located between a primary or accessory building and
the rear lot line upon which the building is located, as prescribed by the
provisions of this chapter. (See Illustration 15.)
YARD, SIDE — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building
and situated between the building and the side line of the lot and extending
from the front yard to the rear yard. Any lot line not a rear line or a front
line shall be deemed a side line. (See Illustration 15.)
ZONING DISTRICT — The part, zone or geographic area as depicted on
the West Hanover Township Zoning Map183 within which certain zoning and
development regulations apply.
ZONING HEARING BOARD — The West Hanover Zoning Hearing Board
appointed by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended. 184
ZONING MAP — The official zoning map setting forth the boundaries of the
zoning districts of the Township which shall be part of this chapter. 185
ZONING OFFICER — The duly constituted Township official designated to
administer and enforce this chapter.
182. Editor's Note: Illustration 15 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
183. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Township offices.
184. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
185. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 195-10 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-10
144:568
ZONING PERMIT — A permit signed by the Zoning Officer, as required in
this chapter, as a condition precedent to the commencement of a use or the
erection, construction, reconstruction, restoration, alteration, conversion or
installation of a structure or building, which acknowledges that such use,
structure or building complies with the provisions of the municipal zoning
or authorized variance therefrom.
§ 195-10 PLUMBING § 195-10
144:569

ARTICLE III
Designation of Districts
§ 195-11. Enumeration of zoning districts. [Amended 8-15-2005 by
Ord. No. 2004-12]
For the purpose of this chapter, West Hanover Township is hereby divided
into the following districts:
§ 195-12. Establishment of Zoning Map.
A. Conservation (C).
B. Flexible Rural Agriculture (FRA).
C. Rural Residential (RR).
D. Low Density Residential (R1).
E. Medium Density Residential (R2).
F. Suburban Residential (R3).
G. Neighborhood Commercial (NC).
H. Business Enterprise (BE).
I. Commercial Highway (CH).
J. Interchange (I).
K. Industrial Enterprise (IE).
L. Floodplain Overlay (FO).
M. Environmental Protection Overlay (EPO).
N. R-3 Cluster Overlay (R-3CO). [Added 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-03]
A. The boundaries of the C, FRA, RR, R-1, R-2, R-3, NC, BE, CH, I and IE
Districts shall be shown on the Zoning Map which is on file in the
Township office. This map shall be known as the "Zoning Map of West
Hanover Township" (hereinafter "Zoning Map") and is hereby made a
part of this chapter. A copy of the Zoning Map accompanies this
chapter.186 [Amended 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
B. The boundaries of the FO Districts shall serve as overlays to the
underlying districts as specifically described in Article XV, the
Floodway Data Table and the one-hundred-year-flood delineation in the
Flood Insurance Study prepared for the Township by the Flood
Insurance Administration dated March 18, 1980, and as determined.
Said study and accompanying maps and all notations, references and
186. Editor's Note: The current Zoning Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 195-11 PLUMBING § 195-12
144:571
§ 195-13. Boundaries between districts. [Amended 8-15-2005 by
Ord. No. 2004-12]
other data shown thereon are hereby incorporated by reference into
this chapter as if all were fully described herein.
C. The boundaries of the EPO District shall serve as overlays to the
underlying districts as specifically delineated in accordance with the
standards of Article XVI.
A. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such center
lines.
B. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall
be construed as following such lot lines.
C. Boundaries indicated as approximately following municipality limits
shall be construed as following such municipality limits.
D. Boundaries indicated as approximately following center lines of
streams, rivers or other bodies of water shall be construed as following
such center lines.
E. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or an extension of features indicated
in Subsections A through D above shall be so construed.
F. The RR boundary on the west side of Fairville Avenue (T526) between
the southwest corner of parcel 68-019-056 to the northwest corner of
parcel 68-019-042.
G. The I boundary between the intersection of Harper Drive (T557) and
Jonestown Road (T601) in the south heading northwest for
approximately 480 feet until the intersection with the easternmost line
of parcel 68-020-015, approximately 100 feet west of the edge of the
stream.
H. The IE boundary between tax parcel #68-019-041 and tax parcel
68-019-019 on Linglestown Road shall be 650 feet parallel with
Linglestown Road (SR0039).
I. The RR boundary between tax parcel 68-014-084 and tax parcel
68-014-045 on the east side of Piketown Road (T560) shall be 650 feet
parallel with Piketown Road (T560).
J. The RR boundary between tax parcel 68-021-001 and tax parcel
68-021-006 on the east side of Fairville Avenue (T526) and the north
side of Kiwanis Road (T515) shall be 200 feet parallel with Fairville
Avenue (T526) and Kiwanis Road (T515).
K. The NC boundary between the southeast corner of parcel 68-030-030 to
the northwest corner of parcel 68-039-078.
§ 195-12 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-13
144:572
§ 195-14. Interpretation of boundaries.
L. The NC boundary from a midpoint of the easternmost parcel line of
parcel 68-030-183 eastward to the northwest corner of parcel
68-030-138.
M. The NC boundary between tax parcel 68-025-039 and the northeast
corner of tax parcel 68-035-064 shall be measured 175 feet parallel
with Hershey Road (Route 39).
N. The RR boundary between tax parcel 68-019-040 and the southeast
corner of tax parcel 68-019-073 to the northeast of Mocking Bird Lane
(T624).
O. The RR boundary approximately 130 feet south of the southwest corner
of parcel 68-022-002 follows an intermittent stream channel westward
to Beaver Creek.
P. The R-1 boundary from the northwest corner of tax parcel 68-002-001
to the midpoint of the eastern parcel line of parcel 68-001-032.
Q. The NC eastern boundary for tax parcel 68-039-080 shall be measured
200 feet parallel to Douglas Road (T516).187 [Added 2-6-2006 by Ord.
No. 2006-1]
R. The CH (Commercial Highway) western boundary parallel to Hershey
Road (Route 39), approximately 270.46 feet east of Hershey Road
extending from the southern edge of tax parcel 68-024-113 up to the
northern edge of tax parcel 68-024-103. [Added 8-18-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-12]
A. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at
variance with those shown on the Zoning Map or in circumstances not
covered by Subsections A through B herein, the Zoning Hearing Board
shall interpret the district boundaries.
B. When a district boundary line divides a lot held in single and separate
ownership at the effective date of this chapter, the regulations of each
zoning district shall apply.
187. Editor's Note: Former Subsection R, pertaining to the NC southern boundary for tax
parcels 68-039-098 and 68-039-043, added 2-6-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-1, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 10-1-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-17.
§ 195-13 PLUMBING § 195-14
144:573

ARTICLE IV
Conservation District
§ 195-15. Purpose.
The Conservation (C) District is established to protect West Hanover's most
sensitive environmental areas. The application of this district is to lands
identified in the Township's Comprehensive Plan and Natural Resources
Inventory as having severe limitations based on their physiographic,
geologic, hydrologic, soil, slope and vegetative characteristics. The district
is intended to support policies established in the Comprehensive Plan for
lands to be preserved for conservation by discouraging urban land uses and
development in these areas and maintaining open areas and low-intensity
land uses. This district identifies these sensitive lands and distinguishes
them from other areas in the Township which are identified in the
Comprehensive Plan as appropriate for urban land uses.
§ 195-16. Principal permitted uses, buildings and structures.
[Amended 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12; 9-5-2006 by Ord. No.
2005-8]
Principal permitted uses, buildings and structures are as follows:
A. Christmas tree growing.
B. Forestry activities; commercial timber harvesting in accordance with §
195-103Q.
C. Game farms, such as pheasant, deer and other small game.
D. Hiking trails, horseback riding trails and bicycle trails.
E. Hunting and trapping.
F. Passive recreation areas, such as but not limited to day camps, picnic
areas and archery ranges in accordance with § 195-103K.
G. Public utilities and facilities in accordance with § 195-103J.
H. Tree farms.
I. Tree nurseries.
J. Wildlife propagation and management.
K. Wildlife sanctuaries.
L. Wind energy facility. [Added 4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04188]
M. Any use determined by the Zoning Officer to be of the same general
character of the above-listed permitted uses.
188. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection L
as Subsection M.
§ 195-15 PLUMBING § 195-17
144:575
§ 195-17. Principal conditional uses, buildings and structures.
[Amended 6-19-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-7; 8-4-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-12]
Principal conditional uses, buildings and structures, when authorized by the
Board of Supervisors in accordance with Article XXV, are as follows:
§ 195-18. Accessory permitted uses, buildings and structures.
[Amended 8-4-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-12; 8-15-2005 by Ord. No.
2004-12; 9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2005-8]
Accessory permitted uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental
to the principal permitted uses are as follows, including but not limited to:
A. Single-family detached dwellings on existing lots of record in existence
prior to January 3, 1995, the effective date of this chapter.
B. Radio and television towers in accordance with § 195-180.
C. Heliports/helipads in accordance with § 195-182.1. [Added 11-6-2006
by Ord. No. 2006-7]
A. Accessory apartments in accordance with § 195-94. [Added 5-7-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-6189]
B. Bus shelters in accordance with § 195-114. [Added 5-4-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-07190]
C. Fences in accordance with § 195-95D.
D. No impact home-based business in accordance with § 195-103O.
E. Off-street parking in accordance with Article XXII.
F. Signs in accordance with Article XXIII.
G. Aggregate of all accessory buildings shall be limited to 1000 square
feet, except for barns which shall be limited to 5,000 square feet in
accordance with § 195-95A.
H. Private antenna tower in accordance with § 195-95G.
I. The keeping of livestock in accordance with the following
requirements: [Added 4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-01]
(1) The minimum lot area shall be five acres.
(2) One livestock animal is permitted for the initial three acres. A
companion animal is required if the livestock animal is equine.
189. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections A
through F as Subsections B through G, respectively.
190. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection B
through I as Subsections C through J, respectively.
§ 195-17 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-18
144:576
§ 195-19. Development requirements.
(3) One livestock animal per acre will be permitted for each additional
acre over three acres.
(4) Barns and manure piles must be at least 100 feet from the property
line.
(5) Fences shall be no closer than five feet to property lines.
(6) Equine liability signs shall be required if equines are present.
(7) On-site manure disposal shall be in accordance with any and all
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP)
guidelines and requirements.
(8) Paddocks/corrals shall have stormwater and erosion controls
installed, after approval by the Township.
(9) Manure piles shall have stormwater and erosion controls installed.
(10) Equine ownership or stabling shall require a turnout shed in the
pasture lands.
J. Small and medium wind energy systems in accordance with § 195-95H.
[Amended 5-3-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-03]
K. Solar energy systems in accordance with § 195-112. [Added 5-4-2009
by Ord. No. 2009-09]
L. ECHO (Elder Cottage Housing Opportunity) in accordance with
§ 195-100. [Added 12-19-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
A. Height regulations. The height of a principal building shall not be
greater than 35 feet. Accessory building and structure heights shall be
as specified in § 195-96A.
B. Lot area regulations. The minimum lot area shall be five acres.
[Amended 9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2005-8]
C. Width regulations. At the required minimum front building setback line,
the lot width shall be a minimum of 200 feet.
D. Yard regulations. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards of not
less than the depth and width indicated below:
(1) Front yard depth: 50 feet.
(2) Side yards for an interior lot shall be a minimum of 40 feet for each
side. On a corner lot, the side yard abutting the street shall be not
less than 50 feet in width.
(3) Rear yard depth: 50 feet.
§ 195-18 PLUMBING § 195-19
144:577
E. Coverage regulations. The building(s), structure(s) and impervious
surface coverage shall not be more than 10%.
F. Floodplain Overlay District. Development located in affected floodplain
areas shall be in accordance with the requirements of the Floodplain
Overlay District of Article XV.
G. Environmental Protection Overlay District. Development shall meet the
requirements of the Environmental Protection Overlay District in
accordance with Article XVI.
H. Development standards. Development shall meet the development
improvement requirements in accordance with Article XIX.
I. Performance standards. Development shall meet the requirements of
the performance standards in accordance with Article XX.
J. Motor vehicle access. When motor vehicle access is provided from a
public or private street on to the lot, the motor vehicle access
requirements of Article XXI shall apply.
K. Off-street parking requirements. Off-street parking shall be provided in
accordance with the provisions of Article XXII.
§ 195-19 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-19
144:578
ARTICLE V
Flexible Rural Agriculture District
§ 195-20. Purpose. [Amended 9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2005-8;
4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2008-07]
The Flexible Rural Agriculture (FRA) District is to protect and preserve land
with productive soils which are suitable for fanning and for the conservation
of natural open space resources which are considered highly desirable in
West Hanover Township. The keeping of livestock, poultry and domestic
pets is consistent with the rural aspect of the district, as long as the needs
and welfare of the animals is maintained. The application of this district
shall be for undeveloped lands and existing agricultural properties within
West Hanover, with the intent of protecting the environment, agricultural
viability, small farm preservation, and the deteriorating effects to the
Township's rural character from sprawling rural development and urban
encroachment.
§ 195-21. Principal permitted uses, buildings and structures.
Principal permitted uses, buildings and structures are as follows:
A. Agriculture operations.
B. Animal kennels, including but not limited to animal shelters, boarding
horses and boarding kennels.
C. Animal services, including but not limited to dog grooming, pet
training, horse training, pedigree record services and breeding
services.
D. Community residential homes.
E. Forestry activities in accordance with § 195-103Q. [Added 8-15-2005
by Ord. No. 2004-12191]
F. Golf courses in accordance with § 195-103D. [Amended 3-5-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-1; 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
G. Cemeteries and memorial gardens.
H. Crop preparation services, including but not limited to corn shelling,
grain cleaning, packaging fresh and farm dried fruits, and seed
cleaning.
I. Government buildings and uses.
J. Public recreation areas, such as but not limited to parks, playgrounds,
greenways, pedestrian/bicycle trails and open space.
191. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections E
through O as Subsections F through P, respectively.
§ 195-20 PLUMBING § 195-21
144:579
§ 195-22. Principal conditional uses, buildings and structures.
[Amended 4-16-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-2; 11-19-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-5; 8-4-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-12]
Principal conditional uses, buildings and structures, when authorized by the
Board of Supervisors in accordance with Article XXV, are as follows:
K. Public utilities and facilities in accordance with § 195-103J. [Amended
8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
L. Retail nurseries and garden stores limited to 3,000 square feet of floor
area.
M. Single-family detached dwellings. [Amended 12-19-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-04]
N. Transient business stands for the sale of agricultural products
produced on the property where offered for sale.
O. Veterinary services.
P. Wind energy facility. [Added 4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04192]
Q. Any use determined by the Zoning Officer to be of the same general
character as the above-listed permitted uses.
A. Churches.
B. Concentrated animal operation (CAO)/concentrated animal feeding
operation (CAFO) in accordance with § 195-181. [Added 8-15-2005 by
Ord. No. 2004-12193]
C. Sportsman clubs.
D. Elementary and secondary schools and institutions of higher education.
E. Radio and television towers in accordance with § 195-180.
F. Heliports/helipads in accordance with § 195-182.1. [Added 11-6-2006
by Ord. No. 2006-7]
G. Airports in accordance with § 195-182.2. [Added 5-7-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-1]
192. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection P
as Subsection Q.
193. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections B
through D as Subsections C through E, respectively.
§ 195-21 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-23
144:580
§ 195-23. Accessory permitted uses, buildings and structures.
[Amended 8-4-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-12; 8-15-2005 by Ord. No.
2004-12; 9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2005-8]
Accessory permitted uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental
to the principal permitted uses are as follows, including but not limited to:
A. Accessory apartments in accordance with § 195-94. [Added 5-7-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-6194]
B. Barns in accordance with § 195-95A.
C. Bus shelters in accordance with § 195-114. [Added 5-4-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-07195]
D. Fences in accordance with § 195-95D.
E. Manure storage facilities in accordance with § 195-103P.
F. No-impact home-based business in accordance with § 195-103O.
G. Signs in accordance with Article XXIII.
H. Storage buildings in accordance with § 195-95A.
I. Swimming pools in accordance with § 195-95F.
J. The keeping of livestock in accordance with the following
requirements: [Amended 4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2008-07]
(1) The minimum lot area shall be three acres.
(2) One livestock animal is permitted for the initial three acres. A
companion animal is required if the livestock animal is equine.
(3) One livestock animal per acre will be permitted for each additional
acre over three acres.
(4) A buffer will be required abutting a residential use or district
wherein the minimum setback for a fence shall be five feet.
(5) Equine liability signs shall be required if equines are present.
(6) Where abutting an occupied residential property, was manure piles
must be at least 100 feet from the property line.
(7) On-site manure disposal shall be in accordance with PADEP
guidelines and requirements.
(8) Paddocks/corrals shall have stormwater and erosion controls
installed, after approval by the Township.
194. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections A
through I as Subsections B through J, respectively.
195. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections C
through K as Subsections D through L, respectively.
§ 195-23 PLUMBING § 195-23
144:581
§ 195-24. Development requirements. [Amended 9-5-2006 by Ord.
No. 2005-8]
(9) Manure piles shall have stormwater and erosion controls installed.
(10) Equine ownership or stabling shall require a turnout shed in the
pasture lands.
K. Private antenna tower in accordance with § 195-95G.
L. Small and medium wind energy systems in accordance with § 195-95H.
[Added 4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04; amended 5-3-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-03]
M. Solar energy systems in accordance with § 195-112. [Added 5-4-2009
by Ord. No. 2009-09]
N. ECHO (Elder Cottage Housing Opportunity) in accordance with
§ 195-100. [Added 12-19-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
A. Height regulations. The height of a principal building shall not be
greater than 35 feet. Accessory buildings, structures and barn heights
are specified in § 195-96A.
B. Lot area regulations. The minimum lot area shall be two acres except as
modified by Article XVII, § 195-86A, open space residential and
nonresidential development.
C. Width regulations. At the required minimum front building setback line,
the lot width shall be a minimum of 200 feet except as modified by
Article XVII, Open Space Residential and Nonresidential Development.
D. Yard regulations. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards of not
less than the depth and width indicated below, except as modified by
Article XVII, Open Space Residential and Nonresidential Development.
(1) Front yard depth: 35 feet.
(2) Side yards for an interior lot shall be a minimum of 20 feet for each
side. On a corner lot, the side yard abutting the street shall be not
less than 35 feet in width.
(3) Rear yard depth: 50 feet.
(4) Interior yards:
(a) Front: 35 feet.
(b) Side: 20 feet.
(c) Rear: 50 feet.
§ 195-23 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-24
144:582
E. Coverage regulations. The building(s), structures(s) and impervious
surface coverage shall not exceed 20% except as modified by Article
XVII, Open Space Residential and Nonresidential Development.
F. Floodplain Overlay District. Development located in affected floodplain
areas shall be in accordance with the requirements of the Floodplain
Overlay District of Article XV.
G. Environmental Protection Overlay District. Development shall meet the
requirements of the Environmental Protection Overlay District in
accordance with Article XVI.
H. Open space residential and nonresidential development. Open space
residential and nonresidential development shall be in accordance with
Article XVII.
I. Development standards. Development shall meet the development
standards in accordance with Article XIX.
J. Performance standards. Development shall meet the requirements of
the performance standards in accordance with Article XX.
K. Motor vehicle access. When motor vehicle access is provided from a
public or private street onto the lot, the motor vehicle access
requirements of Article XXI shall apply.
L. Off-street parking requirements. Off-street parking shall be provided in
accordance with the provisions of Article XXII.
§ 195-24 PLUMBING § 195-24
144:583

ARTICLE VI
Rural Residential District
§ 195-25. Purpose.
The Rural Residential (RR) District is established to provide areas for rural
residential development that do not impact agricultural lands or create
further sprawling patterns of development. The district is located adjacent
to areas of existing residential development as identified in the
Comprehensive Plan. Further residential development is encouraged for
these areas. Single lot or minor subdivisions of low density are anticipated
in these areas due to the limited availability of community facilities. The RR
District area is adjacent to the agricultural district; however, agricultural
uses are not encouraged because this district is comprised primarily of
small lots. The regulations for this district are designed to protect and
stabilize these essential development characteristics and promote and
encourage quality rural development.
§ 195-26. Principal permitted uses, buildings and structures.
Principal permitted uses, buildings and structures are as follows:
§ 195-27. Principal conditional uses, buildings and structures.
[Amended 8-4-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-12]
Principal conditional uses, buildings and structures, when authorized by the
Board of Supervisors in accordance with Article XXV, are as follows:
A. Community residential facilities.
B. Forest activites in accordance with § 195-103Q. [Added 8-15-2005 by
Ord. No. 2004-12196]
C. Government buildings and uses.
D. Public recreation areas.
E. Public utilities and facilities in accordance with § 195-103J. [Amended
8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
F. Single-family detached dwellings.
G. Any use determined by the Zoning Officer to be of the same general
character of the above-listed permitted uses.
A. Churches.
B. Community activity buildings.
C. Elementary and secondary schools and institutions of higher education.
196. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections B
through F as Subsections C through G, respectively.
§ 195-25 PLUMBING § 195-27
144:585
§ 195-28. Accessory permitted uses, buildings and structures.
[Amended 8-4-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-12; 8-15-2005 by Ord. No.
2004-12; 9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2005-8]
Accessory permitted uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental
to the principal permitted uses are as follows, including but not limited to:
D. Private recreation areas.
E. Public libraries.
F. Radio and television towers in accordance with § 195-180.
G. Heliports/helipads in accordance with § 195-182.1. [Added 11-6-2006
by Ord. No. 2006-7]
H. Airports in accordance with § 195-182.2. [Added 5-7-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-1]
A. Accessory apartments in accordance with § 195-94. [Added 5-7-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-6197]
B. Bus shelters in accordance with § 195-114. [Added 5-4-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-07198]
C. Fences in accordance with § 195-95D.
D. Home occupations in accordance with § 195-99.
E. Manure storage facilities in accordance with § 195-103P.
F. No-impact home-based business in accordance with § 195-103O.
G. Off-street parking in accordance with Article XXII.
H. Private garages, garden houses or greenhouses not used for
commercial purposes in accordance with § 195-95A.
I. Signs in accordance with Article XXIII.
J. Storage buildings in accordance with § 195-95A.
K. Swimming pools in accordance with § 195-95F.
L. The keeping of livestock in accordance with the following
requirements: [Amended 4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2008-07]
(1) The minimum lot area shall be three acres.
(2) One livestock animal is permitted for the initial three acres. A
companion animal is required if the livestock animal is equine.
197. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections A
through K as Subsections B through L, respectively.
198. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections B
through M as Subsections C through N, respectively.
§ 195-27 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-28
144:586
§ 195-29. Development requirements.
(3) One livestock animal per acre will be permitted for each additional
acre over three acres.
(4) A buffer will be required abutting a residential use or district
wherein the minimum setback for a fence shall be five feet.
(5) Equine liability signs shall be required if equines are present.
(6) Where abutting an occupied residential property, manure piles
must be at least 100 feet from the property line.
(7) On-site manure disposal shall be in accordance with PADEP
guidelines and requirements.
(8) Paddocks/corrals shall have stormwater and erosion controls
installed, after approval by the Township.
(9) Manure piles shall have stormwater and erosion controls installed.
(10) Only hen poultry shall be allowed.
M. Private antenna tower in accordance with § 195-95G.
N. Small and medium wind energy systems in accordance with § 195-95H.
[Added 4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04; amended 5-3-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-03]
O. Solar energy systems in accordance with § 195-112. [Added 5-4-2009
by Ord. No. 2009-09]
P. ECHO (Elder Cottage Housing Opportunity) in accordance with
§ 195-100. [Added 12-19-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
A. Height regulations. The height of a principal building shall not be
greater than 35 feet. Accessory building and structure heights are as
specified in § 195-96A.
B. Lot area regulations. The minimum lot area shall be one acre except as
modified by Article XVII, Open Space Residential and Nonresidential
Development.
C. Width regulations. At the required minimum front building setback line,
the lot width shall be a minimum of 100 feet.
D. Yard regulations. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards of not
less than the depth and width indicated below: [Amended 9-5-2006
by Ord. No. 2005-8]
(1) Front yard depth: 35 feet.
§ 195-28 PLUMBING § 195-29
144:587
(2) Side yards for an interior lot shall be a minimum of 15 feet for each
side. On a corner lot, the side yard abutting the street shall be not
less than 35 feet in width.
(3) Rear yard depth: 50 feet.
(4) Interior yards:
(a) Front 35: feet.
(b) Side 20: feet.
(c) Rear 50: feet.
E. Coverage regulations. The building(s), structure(s) and impervious
surface coverage shall not be more than 20%.
F. Floodplain Overlay District. Development located in affected floodplain
areas shall be in accordance with the requirements of the Floodplain
Overlay District of Article XV.
G. Environmental Protection Overlay District. Development shall meet the
requirements of the Environmental Protection Overlay District in
accordance with Article XVI.
H. Open space residential and nonresidential development. Open space
residential and nonresidential development shall be in accordance with
Article XVII.
I. Development standards. Development shall meet the development
standards in accordance with Article XIX.
J. Performance standards. Development shall meet the requirements of
the performance standards in accordance with Article XX.
K. Motor vehicle access. When motor vehicle access is provided from a
public or private street onto the lot, the motor vehicle access
requirements of Article XXI shall apply.
L. Off-street parking requirements. Off-street parking shall be provided in
accordance with the provisions of Article XXII.
§ 195-29 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-29
144:588
ARTICLE VII
Low-Density Residential District
§ 195-30. Purpose.
The Low-Density Residential (R-1) District provides areas for low-density
residential development. The district is located within growth areas as
defined in the Township's Comprehensive Plan, and areas planned for public
sewage as identified in West Hanover Township's Sewage Facilities Plan
(hereinafter "Sewage Plan"). Single lot developments or subdivisions of
low density are anticipated in these areas due to the future availability
of community facilities. The regulations for this district are designed to
protect and maintain these essential development characteristics and
promote and encourage quality residential development in keeping with the
Township's design standards.
§ 195-31. Principal permitted uses, buildings and structures.
Principal permitted uses, buildings and structures are as follows:
§ 195-32. Principal conditional uses, buildings and structures.
Principal conditional uses, buildings and structures, when authorized by the
Board of Supervisors in accordance with Article XXV, are as follows:
A. Community residential homes.
B. Duplex dwellings.
C. Elementary and secondary schools and institutions of higher education.
D. Forestry activites in accordance with § 195-103Q. [Added 8-15-2005
by Ord. No. 2004-12199]
E. Government buildings and uses.
F. Public parks, playgrounds and open space.
G. Public utilities and facilities in accordance with § 195-103J. [Amended
8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
H. Single-family detached dwellings.
I. Single-family semidetached dwellings.
J. Any use determined by the Zoning Officer to be of the same general
character as the above-listed permitted uses.
A. Churches.
B. Community activity buildings.
199. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections D
through I as Subsections E through J, respectively.
§ 195-30 PLUMBING § 195-32
144:589
§ 195-33. Accessory permitted uses, buildings and structures.
[Amended 8-4-2003 by 2003-12; 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12;
9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2005-8]
Accessory permitted uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental
to the principal permitted uses are as follows, including but not limited to:
C. Convenience stores.
D. Private recreation areas.
E. Public libraries.
A. Accessory apartments in accordance with § 195-94.
B. Bus shelters in accordance with § 195-114. [Added 5-4-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-07200]
C. Fences in accordance with § 195-95D.
D. Home occupations in accordance with § 195-99.
E. Manure storage facilities in accordance with § 195-103P.
F. No-impact home-based business in accordance with § 195-103O.
G. Off-street parking in accordance with Article XXII.
H. Private garages, garden houses or greenhouses not used for
commercial purposes in accordance with § 195-95A.
I. Signs in accordance with Article XXIII.
J. Storage buildings in accordance with § 195-95A.
K. Swimming pools in accordance with § 195-95F.
L. (Reserved)201
M. Private antenna tower in accordance with § 195-95G.
N. Small and medium wind energy systems in accordance with § 195-95H.
[Added 4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04; amended 5-3-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-03]
O. Solar energy systems in accordance with § 195-112. [Added 5-4-2009
by Ord. No. 2009-09]
P. ECHO (Elder Cottage Housing Opportunity) in accordance with
§ 195-100. [Added 12-19-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
200. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of Subsections B
through K as Subsections C through L, respectively.
201. Editor's Note: Former Subsection L, concerning the keeping of farm animals, was
superseded 4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2008-07. See now § 195-33.1A.
§ 195-32 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-33.1
144:590
§ 195-33.1. R-1 conditional accessory permitted uses, buildings and
structures. [Added 4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2008-07]
§ 195-34. Development requirements.
A. The keeping of livestock, when authorized by the Board of Supervisors,
in accordance with § 195-188, and the following requirements:
(1) The minimum lot area is three acres.
(2) One livestock animal is permitted for the initial required acreage. A
companion animal is required if only one equine is present.
(3) One livestock animal per acre will be permitted for each additional
acre over the required acreage.
(4) A buffer will be required abutting a residential use or district
wherein the minimum setback for a fence shall be five feet.
(5) Equine liability signs shall be required if necessary.
(6) Where abutting a residential property or district, barns, stables
and manure piles must be at least 100 feet from the property line.
(7) Manure shall be removed from the premises on a weekly basis.
(8) Stormwater and erosion controls shall be installed around the
manure piles.
(9) Paddocks/corrals shall have stormwater and erosion controls
installed, after approval by the Township.
(10) Only hen poultry shall be allowed.
A. Height regulations. The height of a principal building shall not be
greater than 35 feet. Accessory buildings and structures are as
specified in § 195-96A.
B. Lot area regulations. The minimum lot area shall be 1/2 acre where
public sewer is available, except as modified by Article XVII, Open
Space Residential and Nonresidential Development. The minimum lot
area shall be one acre where public sewer is not available.
C. Width regulations. At the required minimum front building setback line,
the lot width shall be a minimum of 100 feet.
D. Yard regulations. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards of not
less than the depth and width indicated below: [Amended 9-5-2006
by Ord. No. 2005-8]
(1) Front yard depth: 30 feet.
(2) Minimum one side yard shall be not less than 10 feet. The total
width of the two required side yards shall be not less than 30 feet.
§ 195-33.1 PLUMBING § 195-34
144:591
On a corner lot, the side yard abutting the street shall be not less
than 30 feet in width.
(3) Rear yard depth: 50 feet.
(4) Interior yards:
(a) Front: 30 feet.
(b) Side: 10 feet.
(c) Rear: 50 feet.
E. Coverage regulations. The building(s), structure(s) and impervious
surface coverage shall not be more than 35%.
F. Floodplain Overlay District. Development located in affected floodplain
areas shall be in accordance with the requirements of the Floodplain
Overlay District of Article XV.
G. Environmental Protection Overlay District. Development shall meet the
requirements of the Environmental Protection Overlay District in
accordance with Article XVI.
H. Open space residential and nonresidential development. Open space
residential and nonresidential development shall be in accordance with
Article XVII.
I. Development standards. Development shall meet the development
standards in accordance with Article XIX.
J. Performance standards. Development shall meet the requirements of
the performance standards in accordance with Article XX.
K. Motor vehicle access. When motor vehicle access is provided from a
public or private street onto the lot, the motor vehicle access
requirements of Article XXI shall apply.
L. Off-street parking requirements. Off-street parking shall be provided in
accordance with the provisions of Article XXII.
§ 195-34 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-34
144:592
ARTICLE VIII
Medium-Density Residential District
§ 195-35. Purpose.
The Medium-Density Residential (R-2) District provides areas for mediumdensity
residential development. The district is located within growth areas
as defined in the Township's Comprehensive Plan and areas planned for
public sewage as identified in the Township's Sewage Plan. Due to existing
development conditions, character and the availability of community
facilities in the R-2 District, uniform residential development types similar
to the existing development are anticipated and encouraged. The
regulations for this district are designed to protect and maintain present
single-family detached development characteristics and ensure high-quality
future residential development in keeping with the Township's design
standards.
§ 195-36. Principal permitted uses, buildings and structures.
Principal permitted uses, buildings and structures are as follows:
§ 195-37. Principal conditional uses, buildings and structures.
Principal conditional uses, buildings and structures, when authorized by the
Board of Supervisors in accordance with Article XXV, are as follows:
A. Community residential homes.
B. Forestry activites in accordance with § 195-103Q. [Added 8-15-2005
by Ord. No. 2004-12202]
C. Government buildings and uses.
D. Patio homes.
E. Public recreation areas.
F. Public utilities and facilities in accordance with § 195-103J. [Amended
8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
G. Single-family detached dwellings.
H. Any use determined by the Zoning Officer to be of the same general
character as the above-listed permitted uses.
A. Churches.
B. Elementary and secondary schools and institutions of higher education.
C. Community activity buildings.
202. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections B
through G as Subsections C through H, respectively.
§ 195-35 PLUMBING § 195-38
144:593
§ 195-38. Accessory permitted uses, buildings and structures.
[Amended 8-4-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-12; 8-15-2005 by Ord. No.
2004-12; 9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2005-8]
Accessory permitted uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental
to the principal permitted uses are as follows, including but not limited to:
§ 195-39. Development requirements.
A. Accessory apartments in accordance with § 195-94. [Added 5-7-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-6203]
B. Bus shelters in accordance with § 195-114. [Added 5-4-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-07204]
C. Fences in accordance with § 195-95D.
D. Home occupations in accordance with § 195-99.
E. No-impact home-based business in accordance with § 195-103O.
F. Off-street parking in accordance with Article XXII.
G. Private garages, garden structures or greenhouses not used for
commercial purposes in accordance with § 195-95A.
H. Signs in accordance with Article XXIII.
I. Storage buildings in accordance with § 195-95A.
J. Swimming pools in accordance with § 195-95F.
K. Private antenna tower in accordance with § 195-95G.
L. Small and medium wind energy systems in accordance with § 195-95H.
[Added 4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04; amended 5-3-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-03]
M. Solar energy systems in accordance with § 195-112. [Added 5-4-2009
by Ord. No. 2009-09]
N. ECHO (Elder Cottage Housing Opportunity) in accordance with
§ 195-100. [Added 12-19-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
A. Height regulations. The height of a principal building shall not be
greater than 35 feet or three stories. Accessory buildings, structures
and heights are as specified in § 195-96A.
B. Lot area regulations. The minimum lot area shall be 15,000 square feet
for single-family dwellings.
203. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections A
through I as Subsections B through J, respectively.
204. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections B
through K as Subsections C through L, respectively.
§ 195-38 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-39
144:594
C. Width regulations. At the required minimum front building setback line,
the lot width shall be a minimum of 100 feet.
D. Yard regulations. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards of not
less than the depth and width indicated below: [Amended 9-5-2006
by Ord. No. 2005-8]
(1) Front yard depth: 35 feet.
(2) Minimum side yards: 15 feet.
(3) Rear yard depth: 35 feet.
(4) Interior yards:
(a) Front: 35 feet.
(b) Side: 15 feet.
(c) Rear: 35 feet.
E. Coverage regulations. The building(s), structure(s) and impervious
surface coverage shall not be more than 35%.
F. Floodplain Overlay District. Development located in affected floodplain
areas shall be in accordance with the requirements of the Floodplain
Overlay District of Article XV.
G. Environmental Protection Overlay District. Development shall meet the
requirements of the Environmental Protection Overlay District in
accordance with Article XVI.
H. Development standards. Development shall meet the development
standards in accordance with Article XIX.
I. Performance standards. Development shall meet the requirements of
the performance standards in accordance with Article XX.
J. Motor vehicle access. When motor vehicle access is provided from a
public or private street onto the lot, the motor vehicle access
requirements of Article XXI shall apply.
K. Off-street parking requirements. Off-street parking shall be provided in
accordance with the provisions of Article XXII.
L. Open space residential and nonresidential development. Open space
residential and nonresidential development shall be in accordance with
Article XVII. [Added 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
§ 195-39 PLUMBING § 195-39
144:595

ARTICLE IX
Suburban Residential District
§ 195-40. Purpose.
The Suburban Residential (R-3) District provides areas for medium- and
high-density residential development. The district is located within growth
areas as defined in the Township's Comprehensive Plan and areas planned
for public sewage as identified in the Township's Sewage Plan. Due to
the availability of community facilities in the R-3 District, housing variety,
quality design and sound construction are anticipated and encouraged. It
is anticipated that development projects in the R-3 District will be based
on performance standards that preserve existing natural features and
vegetation and promote excellence in site planning and landscape design.
The regulations for this district are designed to protect and maintain
present suburban characteristics and ensure high-quality future residential
development in keeping with the Township's design standards.
§ 195-41. Principal permitted uses, buildings and structures.
Principal permitted uses, buildings and structures are as follows:
A. Apartments.
B. Bed-and-breakfast homes. [Amended 12-19-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-08]
C. Child/adult care centers in accordance with § 195-104.
D. Community residential homes.
E. Condominiums.
F. Congregate care residences.
G. Churches.
H. Duplexes.
I. Elementary and secondary schools and institutions of higher education.
J. Forestry activities in accordance with § 195-103Q. [Added 8-15-2005
by Ord. No. 2004-12205]
K. Garden apartments.
L. Government buildings and uses.
M. Multifamily dwellings.
N. Patio homes.
205. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections J
through X as Subsections K through Y, respectively.
§ 195-40 PLUMBING § 195-41
144:597
§ 195-42. Principal conditional uses, buildings and structures.
Principal conditional uses, buildings and structures, when authorized by the
Board of Supervisors in accordance with Article XXV, are as follows:
§ 195-43. Accessory permitted uses, buildings and structures.
[Amended 8-4-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-12; 8-15-2005 by Ord. No.
2004-12; 9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2005-8]
Accessory permitted uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental
to the principal permitted uses are as follows, including but not limited to:
O. Public libraries.
P. Public recreation areas.
Q. Public utilities and facilities in accordance with § 195-103J. [Amended
8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
R. Quadruplex dwellings.
S. Single-family attached dwellings.
T. Single-family detached dwellings.
U. Single-family semidetached dwellings.
V. Townhouses.
W. Triplex dwellings.
X. Two-family dwellings.
Y. R-3 cluster developments in the R-3CO in accordance with § 195-44A.
[Added 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-03206]
Z. Any use determined by the Zoning Officer to be of the same general
character as the above-listed permitted uses.
A. Boardinghouses.
B. Community activity buildings.
C. Health clubs.
D. Manufactured home parks.
E. Nursing or convalescent homes.
F. Private recreation areas.
A. Accessory apartments in accordance with § 195-94.
206. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection Y as Subsection Z.
§ 195-41 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-43
144:598
§ 195-44. Development requirements.
B. Bus shelters in accordance with § 195-114. [Added 5-4-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-07207]
C. Fences in accordance with § 195-95D.
D. Home occupations in accordance with § 195-99.
E. No-impact home-based business in accordance with § 195-103O.
F. Off-street parking in accordance with Article XXII.
G. Private garages, garden structures or greenhouses not used for
commercial purposes in accordance with § 195-95A.
H. Signs in accordance with Article XXIII.
I. Storage buildings in accordance with § 195-95A.
J. Swimming pools in accordance with § 195-95F.
K. Private antenna tower in accordance with § 195-95G.
L. Solar energy systems in accordance with § 195-112. [Added 5-4-2009
by Ord. No. 2009-09]
M. ECHO (Elder Cottage Housing Opportunity) in accordance with
§ 195-100. [Added 12-19-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
A. Height regulations. The height of a principal building shall not be
greater than 35 feet or three stories. Accessory buildings, structures
and barn heights are as specified in § 195-96A.
B. Lot area regulations. [Amended 10-7-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-12;
amended 7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-7; 9-5-2006 by Ord. No.
2005-8]
(1) The minimum lot area shall be 10,000 square feet for single-family
dwellings, except as modified by Article XVII, Open Space
Residential and Nonresidential Development.
(2) The minimum lot area shall be 8,000 square feet for manufactured
home park lots, except as modified by Article XVII, Open Space
Residential and Nonresidential Development. In no case shall a
manufactured home park lot be less than 10,000 square feet in
area.
(3) The minimum lot area for two-family dwellings or duplexes shall be
8,000 square feet per unit, except as modified by Article XVII.
207. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections B
through J as Subsections C through K, respectively.
§ 195-43 PLUMBING § 195-44
144:599
(4) The minimum lot area for multifamily dwelling units shall be
10,000 square feet per unit, except as modified by Article XVII.
(5) The minimum lot area for nonresidential uses shall be 10,000
square feet.
C. Density regulations. Maximum density shall be 4.5 dwelling units per
acre. [Amended 9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2005-08]
D. Width regulations. [Amended 10-7-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-12]
(1) Single-family detached. At the required minimum front building
setback line, the lot width shall be a minimum of 60 feet for singlefamily
detached dwellings.
(2) Other single-family residential. Lot widths for other single-family
residential types shall conform to the following:
Use
Minimum Lot Width
Requirements
(feet)
Manufactured home parks 50
Patio homes 75
Quadruplex dwellings 75
Single-family attached
dwellings
20
Single-family semidetached
dwellings
40
Triplex dwellings 75
Two-family dwellings 100
Multifamily residential 50
Nonresidential 50
E. Yard regulations. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards of not
less than the depth and width indicated below: [Amended 10-7-1996
by Ord. No. 1996-12; 9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2005-8]
(1) Front yard depth: 25 feet.
(2) Side yards:
(a) Single-family detached dwellings or two-family dwellings.
Minimum width of one side yard shall be not less than eight
feet. The total width of the two required side yards shall be not
less than 20 feet.
(b) On a corner lot, the side yard abutting the street shall be not
less than 20 feet in width.
§ 195-44 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-44
144:600
(c) Single-family attached dwelling units: zero feet.
(d) Patio homes. One side yard may be zero feet. The total width of
the two required side yards shall be not less than 20 feet.
(3) Rear yard depth: 35 feet.
(4) Interior yards :
(a) Front: 25 feet.
(b) Side: 10 feet.
(c) Rear: 35 feet.
F. Coverage regulations. The building(s), structure(s) and impervious
surface coverage shall not be more than 35%.
G. Floodplain Overlay District. Development located in affected floodplain
areas shall be in accordance with the requirements of the Floodplain
Overlay District of Article XV.
H. Environmental Protection Overlay District. Development shall meet the
requirements of the Environmental Protection Overlay District in
accordance with Article XVI.
I. Open space residential and nonresidential development. Open space
residential and nonresidential development shall be in accordance with
Article XVII.
J. Development standards. Development shall meet the development
standards in accordance with Article XIX.
K. Performance standards. Development shall meet the requirements of
the performance standards in accordance with Article XX.
L. Motor vehicle access. When motor vehicle access is provided from a
public or private street onto the lot, the motor vehicle access
requirements of Article XXI shall apply.
M. Off-street parking requirements. Off-street parking shall be provided in
accordance with the provisions of Article XXII.
§ 195-44 PLUMBING § 195-44
144:601

ARTICLE IXA
R-3 Cluster Overlay (R-3CO)
[Added 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-03]
§ 195-44.1. Purpose.
The Comprehensive Plan recognizes that maintaining open spaces and
providing public parks and recreation land is important and desirable in
enhancing the Township's rural character and quality of life. The intent
of this article is to provide for modifications to certain use, design and
dimensional requirements of the R-3 District and open space residential and
nonresidential development standards and other standards of this chapter
and the movement (i.e., clustering) of residential development rights (i.e.,
dwelling units) from an adjacent district in the development area of the
subject property, to be located on the R-3 District portion of the
development area of the subject property, so as to facilitate the creation of
larger areas of open space in exchange for land to be offered for dedication
to the Township for public parks and recreation land, which will improve
living, working and natural environments; promote more efficient
subdivision and land development design; encourage a variety of residential
dwelling types; promote ingenuity and originality in total subdivision and
site design; preserve open space; and promote public parks and recreation
land.
§ 195-44.2. Relationship to other requirements.
The provisions, regulations, limitations and restrictions of this article shall
supersede all provisions, regulations, limitations and restrictions of this
chapter and Chapter 173, Subdivision and Land Development, that are in
conflict with the provisions, regulations, limitations and restrictions set
forth in this article. To the extent that a provision, regulation, limitation
or restriction is not specifically referenced in or regulated by this article,
then the applicable provisions, regulations, limitations and restrictions of
this chapter and of Chapter 173, as applicable, shall govern.
§ 195-44.3. Optional overlay.
While the R-3CO confers additional development options to be used at the
discretion of the applicant, any subject property located within the R-3CO
may be developed in accordance with either the regulations of the R-3CO or
the regulations of the underlying zoning district. Although the R-3CO does
not in any manner remove or alter the rights permitted by the underlying
zoning district, the use of one or more of the R-3CO development provisions
requires compliance with all applicable R-3CO requirements.
§ 195-44.4. Applicability.
A. Except as modified by this article, the open space standards of Article
XVII shall apply to subdivisions or land developments. Pursuant to
submission of a unified development plan submitted as part of the
§ 195-44.1 PLUMBING § 195-44.4
144:603
§ 195-44.5. General requirements.
preliminary plan, an R-3 cluster development is permitted by right in
the R-3CO, provided that the R-3 cluster development must be:
(1) Located on a subject property containing at least 100 contiguous
acres of undeveloped land (NOTE: For purposes of the R-3CO,
"undeveloped land" shall specifically include land with not more
than three single-family detached buildings and accessory
buildings.) on the effective date of this article;
(2) Located on a subject property, within at least two zoning districts,
within West Hanover Township, and one of which must be the R-3
District, on the effective date of this article;
(3) Located on a subject property with the R-3 District portion located
within a designated growth area or expansion area as depicted on a
Comprehensive Plan on the effective date of this article;
(4) Located on a subject property with frontage along and having at
least one point of access onto a state road on the effective date of
this article; and
(5) Connected or to be connected to public water and public sewer.
B. The requirements of this article do not apply to the areas of the subject
property that are not located in the development area. Therefore, the
applicable zoning district use and development requirements shall
govern these areas.
A. Required public park and recreation land.
(1) The minimum amount of land required to be offered for dedication
to the Township as public park and recreational land as part of the
R-3 cluster development shall:
(a) Be 40% of the gross acreage of the development area;
(b) Be open to the public; and
(c) Satisfy the total amount of any parkland, recreation or open
space land required by Chapter 173, Subdivision and Land
Development, or this chapter, notwithstanding any other
Township provision.
(2) Public park and recreation land shall be permitted to be located on
any portion of the development area. While a minimum of 65% of
the dedicated parkland must be located in the Township, the
remaining portion of the dedicated parkland may include land in a
contiguous municipality, provided such land is contiguous with land
being dedicated to West Hanover Township and is deed-restricted,
appropriately recorded at the County Recorder of Deeds Office, to
§ 195-44.4 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-44.5
144:604
permanently maintain such land as parkland, recreation space or
open space land, and is open to the public.
(3) The required public park and recreation land must be offered for
dedication to the Township. By affirmatively selecting the optional
R-3CO option, the applicant waives its right to pay a fee in lieu of
dedication. The required public park and recreation land shall be
included in the initial phase of any phased project and offered for
dedication contemporaneously with the recording of the Phase 1
final plan.
B. Residential dwelling units and related residential density.
(1) Prohibition of dwelling units from being developed on the portions
of the development area not located in the R-3 District. Although
maximum residential dwelling units and densities shall be
permitted to be calculated in accordance with § 195-86C, on the
portions of the development area not located in the R-3 District, no
residential dwelling units shall be permitted to be located,
developed or constructed on the portions of the development area
not located in the R-3 District. All of the residential dwelling units
shall be restricted from being located, developed or constructed on
the portions of the development area not located in the R-3 District
via a deed restriction appropriately recorded at the County
Recorder of Deeds Office. Additionally, all future residential
development rights on the portions of the development area not
located in the R-3 District shall be restricted as part of the deed
restriction appropriately recorded at the County Recorder of Deeds
Office.
(2) Clustering of dwelling units (i.e., development rights) in the R-3
District. All of the residential dwelling units permitted to be
calculated on the portions of the development area not located in
the R-3 District, and that are restricted from being located,
developed or constructed on the portions of the development area
not located in the R-3 District, shall be permitted to be located,
developed and constructed on the R-3 District portions of the
development area. This article specifically authorizes the
clustering (i.e., movement) of residential development rights from
an adjacent district in the development area to be located on the
R-3 District portion of the development area. The residential
development rights (i.e., dwelling units) shall not be permitted to
be located on any of the portions of the development area not
located in the R-3 District. In other words, the residential density
(i.e., development rights) of the development area can only be
clustered, located, developed and constructed on the R-3 District
portions of the development area.
(3) Notwithstanding any other Township provision, if residential
development rights (i.e., dwelling units) are moved from, and
prohibited on, the portions of the development area not located in
§ 195-44.5 PLUMBING § 195-44.5
144:605
§ 195-44.6. Specific district requirements.
the R-3 District as set forth in this article, nonresidential uses,
buildings and structures shall be permitted to be located on these
non-R-3 District portions of the development area in accordance
with this article.
(4) Density or development rights cannot be transferred into the
Township from any land part of the development area that is
located outside of the Township.
C. Slopes greater than 25%. Notwithstanding any other Township
provision, up to 40% of the land within the development area with
slopes greater than 25% shall be permitted by right to be removed or
altered. The slopes greater than 25% that are removed or altered shall
not be included in the calculation of the area of the Environmental
Overlay Districts as set forth in § 195-86C(2). To demonstrate
compliance with this section, as part of the unified development plan
submitted as part of the preliminary plan, the applicant shall prepare
an exhibit depicting the areas of the development area with slopes
greater than 25% that are to be removed or altered.
D. Stream and wetland crossings.
(1) Notwithstanding any other Township provision, streams and
drainageways shall be permitted by right to be crossed by utilities
and infrastructure, including transmission lines, pipelines, bridges,
culverts, roadways, roadway rights-of-way and roadway
approaches, and subject to the unified development plan. Such
crossings should be as perpendicular as practicable to the natural
stream alignment.
(2) Notwithstanding any other Township provision, all stream or
wetland crossings require federal or state encroachment permits
or waivers of such permits by the responsible federal or state
entities, as applicable.
A. R-3CO requirements. Except as modified by this article, development
shall meet the use and development requirements of the R-3 District in
accordance with Article IX.
(1) Additional permitted uses. Additional permitted uses, buildings and
structures in the R-3CO are as follows:
(a) Principal permitted uses, buildings and structures. Principal
permitted uses, buildings and structures are as follows:
[1] Community center, clubhouse or similar facility (i.e.,
meeting, recreation and office) consisting of an
auditorium, activity rooms, library, physical fitness and
therapy center, lounge or similar facilities that primarily
serve residents of the development and their guests, and
§ 195-44.5 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-44.6
144:606
which may include a temporary sales office while the
development is under construction, and permanent rental/
leasing or management offices for the development.
[2] Parking lots directly associated with residential
development of the R-3 District portion of the development
area.
[3] Public or private recreation areas, such as but not limited
to parks, playgrounds, "bark parks," picnic facilities, grills,
gazebos, greenways, pedestrian/bicycle trails and open
space.
[4] Stacked flat dwellings.
[5] Stormwater facilities, including by way of example and not
limitation a stormwater basin(s), may be located on the R-3
District portion of the development area to manage and
handle stormwater related to or generated by the
development area.
(b) Additional accessory permitted uses, buildings and structures.
Additional accessory permitted uses, buildings and structures
are as follows:
[1] Maintenance or storage building, barn or shed in
accordance with § 195-95A.
[2] Parking lots (public and private).
[3] Any accessory use, building or structure determined by
the Zoning Officer to be of the same general character as
the above-listed accessory permitted uses, buildings and
structures.
(2) Development requirements.
(a) Lot area regulations.
[1] The minimum lot area for single-family attached dwelling
units, multifamily dwelling units and stacked flat dwellings
shall be 2,200 square feet per unit.
[2] The minimum lot area for all other uses shall be 10,000
square feet.
(b) Calculating permitted density. For purposes of calculating the
maximum permitted density (i.e., units per acre) in the R-3CO
in accordance with § 195-86C, for single-family attached
dwelling units, townhouse dwellings, multifamily dwellings and
stacked flat dwellings within the development area, the
calculation shall use 8,000 square feet as the minimum lot area
to determine the maximum total number of dwelling units.
§ 195-44.6 PLUMBING § 195-44.6
144:607
(c) Width regulations. Lot widths for the following uses shall
conform to the following:
Use
Minimum Lot Width
Requirements
(feet)
Townhouse dwellings and
Stacked Flat Dwellings
20
(d) Yard regulations.
[1] Side yards for single-family attached dwellings, townhouse
dwellings, multifamily dwellings and stacked flats
dwellings: zero feet.
(e) Coverage regulations.
[1] Single-family attached dwelling lots, townhouse dwelling
lots, multifamily dwelling lots, stacked flat dwelling lots
and community center, clubhouse or similar facility lots.
The building(s), structure(s) and impervious surface
coverage shall not be more than 75% for single-family
attached dwelling lots, townhouse dwelling lots,
multifamily dwelling lots, stacked flat dwelling lots or
community center, clubhouse of similar facility lots in the
development area.
B. Neighborhood Commercial (NC) District requirements. Except as
modified by this article, development shall meet the use and
development requirements of the NC District in accordance with Article
X. To the extent that non-R-3 District portions of the development area
are depicted on the unified development plan and residential uses are
moved from, and prohibited from locating on, such non-R-3 District
portions of the development area in accordance with this article, then
following shall apply:
(1) Additional permitted uses. Additional permitted uses, buildings and
structures in the NC District are as follows:
(a) Principal permitted uses, buildings and structures. Principal
permitted uses, buildings and structures are as follows:
[1] Parking lots (public and private).
[2] Public or private recreation areas, such as but not limited
to parks, playgrounds, "bark parks," picnic facilities, grills,
gazebos, greenways, pedestrian/bicycle trails and open
space.
[3] Stormwater facilities, including by way of example and not
limitation a stormwater basin(s), may be located on an
adjacent district (i.e., non-R-3 District) portion of the
§ 195-44.6 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-44.6
144:608
development area to manage and handle stormwater
related to or generated by the development area.
(b) Accessory permitted uses, buildings and structures. Accessory
permitted uses, buildings and structures are as follows:
[1] Any accessory use, building or structure determined by
the Zoning Officer to be of the same general character as
the above-listed accessory permitted uses, buildings and
structures.
(c) Prohibited uses. Residential dwellings and uses shall be
prohibited.
(2) Development requirements. Notwithstanding any other Township
provision, if residential development rights (i.e., dwelling units) are
moved from the NC District to the R-3 District, not more than 50%
of the total area within NC District can be developed with
building(s), structure(s) and impervious surface coverage for
commercial purposes. Stormwater facilities are expressly excluded
from this limitation.
C. Flexible Rural Agriculture (FRA) District requirements. Except as
modified by this article, development shall meet the use and
development requirements of the FRA District in accordance with
Article V. To the extent that non-R-3 District portions of the
development area are depicted on the unified development plan and
residential uses are moved from, and prohibited from locating on, such
non-R-3 District portions of the development area in accordance with
this article, then following shall apply:
(1) Additional permitted uses. Additional permitted uses, buildings and
structures in the FRA District are as follows:
(a) Principal permitted uses, buildings and structures. Principal
permitted uses, buildings and structures are as follows:
[1] A maintenance or storage building, barn or shed, directly
associated with residential development of the R-3 District
portion of the development area, may be located on an
adjacent district (i.e., non-R-3 District) portion of the
development area.
[2] Parking lots (public and private) directly associated with
residential development of the R-3 District portion of the
development area may be located on an adjacent district
(i.e., non-R-3 District) portion of the development area.
[3] Public or private recreation areas, such as but not limited
to parks, playgrounds, "bark parks," picnic facilities, grills,
gazebos, greenways, pedestrian/bicycle trails and open
space.
§ 195-44.6 PLUMBING § 195-44.6
144:609
[4] Stormwater facilities, including by way of example and not
limitation a stormwater basin(s), may be located on an
adjacent district (i.e., non-R-3 District) portion of the
development area to manage and handle stormwater
related to or generated by the development area.
(b) Accessory permitted uses, buildings and structures. Accessory
permitted uses, buildings and structures are as follows:
[1] Maintenance or storage building, barn or shed, in
accordance with § 195-95A.
[2] Parking lots (public and private).
(c) Prohibited uses. Residential dwellings and uses shall be
prohibited.
(2) Development requirements. Notwithstanding any other Township
provision, if residential development rights (i.e., dwelling units) are
moved from the FRA District to the R-3 District, not more than one
acre of the total area within the FRA District can be developed with
building(s), structure(s) and impervious surface coverage up to
75% for uses directly related to the residential uses in the R-3
District depicted on the unified development plan. Open space
conservation areas and uses, public recreation areas and
stormwater facilities are expressly excluded from this limitation.
§ 195-44.6 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-44.6
144:610
ARTICLE X
Neighborhood Commercial (NC) District
[Added 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12208]
§ 195-45. Purpose.
The Neighborhood Commercial (NC) District provides the ability to
maintain the existing physical character of the village centers or hamlets of
the Township and the ability to create mixed-use centers for commercial and
public activities with compact residential development. The Neighborhood
Commercial (NC) District provides an area developed with a compatible
mixture of residential units for various income levels and nonresidential
commercial and workplace uses, including some structures that provide for
a mix of uses within the same building. The district is located within the
designated growth area as identified by the Township's Comprehensive Plan
and areas planned for public sewage as identified by the Township's Sewage
Plan. The characteristics of this district include residences, shops, offices,
workplaces, public buildings and parks interwoven within the neighborhood
so that all are within relatively close proximity to each other. The
development is relatively compact, limited in size and oriented toward
pedestrian-friendly activity. There should be an identifiable center and
discernable edges to the neighborhood. The regulations of this district are
designed to promote and maintain a mixed-use village with appropriate
densities and standards for pedestrian activity.
§ 195-46. Principal permitted uses, buildings and structures.
Principal permitted uses, buildings and structures are as follows:
A. Residential.
(1) Community residential homes.
(2) Congregate care residences.
(3) Duplexes.
(4) Garden apartments and apartments.
(5) Patio homes.
(6) Single-family detached dwellings.
(7) Single-family attached dwellings.
(8) Single-family semidetached dwellings.
(9) Townhouses.
(10) Two-family dwellings.
208. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. X, Hanoverdale Hamlet District, as
amended.
§ 195-45 PLUMBING § 195-46
144:611
(11) Multifamily dwellings.
(12) Quadruplex dwellings.
(13) Triplex dwellings.
(14) Conversion apartments with commercial.
(15) Any use determined by the Zoning Officer to be of the same general
character as the above-listed permitted uses.
B. Nonresidential.
(1) Administrative offices.
(2) Animal kennels, veterinary services and animal services in
accordance with § 195-103N.
(3) Art galleries.
(4) Amusement arcades.
(5) Bars in accordance with § 195-103R.
(6) Bed-and-breakfast homes: a privately owned detached dwelling
having a maximum of eight rooms, all without cooking facilities,
rented to guests on a daily basis with the service of providing
breakfast to the guests by the proprietor facility. [Amended
12-19-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-09]
(7) Business services.
(8) Child/adult care centers in accordance with § 195-103B.
(9) Community activity buildings.
(10) Convenience stores.
(11) Churches or place of worship.
(12) Elementary and secondary schools and institutions of higher
education.
(13) Financial institutions.
(14) Forestry activities in accordance with § 195-103Q.
(15) Funeral homes (without crematorium).
(16) Health clubs.
(17) Laundromats.
(18) Membership organizations.
(19) Medical and dental clinics.
§ 195-46 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-46
144:612
§ 195-47. Principal conditional uses, buildings and structures.
Principal conditional uses, buildings, and structures, when authorized by
the Board of Supervisors in accordance with Article XXV, are as follows:
§ 195-48. Accessory permitted uses, buildings and structures.
[Amended 9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2005-8]
Accessory permitted uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental
to the principal permitted uses are as follows, including but not limited to:
(20) Museums.
(21) Personal services.
(22) Pharmacies.
(23) Professional offices.
(24) Public libraries.
(25) Public open space.
(26) Public recreation areas.
(27) Public utilities and facilities in accordance with § 195-103J.
(28) Rental services.
(29) Restaurants.
(30) Restaurants, fast-food.
(31) Retail sales.
(32) Studios.
(33) Studios, dance and music.
(34) Theaters.
(35) Uses determined by the Zoning Officer to be of the same general
character of the permitted uses listed above.
A. Public parking lots.
B. Nursing or convalescent homes in accordance with § 195-169.
A. Accessory apartments in accordance with § 195-94. [Added 5-7-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-6209]
B. Bus shelters in accordance with § 195-114. [Amended 5-4-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-07]
209. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections A
through J as Subsections B through K, respectively.
§ 195-46 PLUMBING § 195-48
144:613
§ 195-49. Development requirements.
C. Fences in accordance with § 195-95D.
D. Home occupations in accordance with § 195-99.
E. No-impact home-based business in accordance with § 195-103O.
F. Off-street parking in accordance with Article XXII.
G. Parking lots (public and private).
H. Private garages, garden structures or greenhouses not used for
commercial purposes in accordance with § 195-95A. A commercial
greenhouse is not considered an accessory use in accordance with
§ 195-10.
I. Signs in accordance with Article XXIII.
J. Solar energy systems in accordance with § 195-112. [Added 5-4-2009
by Ord. No. 2009-09210]
K. Storage buildings in accordance with § 195-95A.
L. Swimming pools in accordance with § 195-95F.
A. Height regulations. The height of a principal building shall not be
greater than three stories or 35 feet. Accessory building and structure
heights are as specified in § 195-96A.
B. Lot area regulations.
(1) Residential.
(a) Minimum lot area (single-family detached dwellings, except as
modified by Article XVII): 8,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot area for duplexes: 3,000 square feet. [Amended
9-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-10]
(c) Minimum lot area for multifamily dwellings, townhouses: 2,000
square feet. [Added 9-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-10]
(2) Nonresidential: no minimum lot area.
C. Density regulations.
(1) Residential and mixed uses. [Amended 9-5-2006 by Ord. No.
2005-8; 9-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-10211]
210. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections J
and K as Subsections K and L, respectively.
211. Editor's Note: This ordinance also deleted former Subsection C(2) and (3), pertaining to
nonresidential uses.
§ 195-48 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-49
144:614
(a) Maximum density per acre shall be 5.5 dwelling units per acre
for lots less than three acres.
(b) Development of at least three acres and less than 15 acres
requires mixed-use ratio of:
[1] Minimum 25% of lot area nonresidential use up to a
maximum of 50%.
[2] Maximum residential density per acre shall be eight
dwelling units per acre.
(c) Development of at least 15 acres requires mixed-use ratio of:
[1] Minimum 20% of lot area nonresidential use up to a
maximum of 50%.
[2] Maximum residential density per acre shall be eight
dwelling units per acre.
D. Nonresidential structure regulations. [Added 9-4-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-10212]
(1) (Reserved)213
(2) (Reserved)
(3) (Reserved)
(4) Maximum nonresidential development shall be not greater than
50% of lot area for lots of at least three acres.
(5) Building structures, as defined by Subsection D(2) and (3), may be
connected under a single roof only if common public space is
between each building structure.
(6) The common public space shall be a minimum of fifteen-feet-wide,
and may extend from the ground level floor up to a roof structure,
as in an atrium.
(7) In cases where the building structures are less than 75% of the
maximum allowable building coverage and/or gross floor area, the
common public space may be reduced by 25% through the
allowance of a second- or third-story room.
(8) The only allowable uses in the common public space shall be stairs,
elevators, escalators, walkways, pedestrian seating and planters,
and other noncommercial ancillary uses.
212. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also relettered former Subsections D through L as E
through M, respectively.
213. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D(1), (2) and (3), regarding maximum building coverage
and maximum gross floor area, was repealed 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-07.
§ 195-49 PLUMBING § 195-49
144:615
(9) The end walls of the connected building structures shall meet the
applicable fire-rated assemblies, per the current International
Building Code.
(10) The common public area must have an architecturally diversified
facia from the rest of the building structure facias.
(11) One tenant shall not occupy more than the maximum gross floor
area of one building structure.
E. Width regulations. Residential: at the front building setback line, the
minimum lot width shall be 20 feet. [Amended 9-4-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-10]
F. Yard regulations. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards of not
less than the depth and width indicated below: [Amended 9-5-2006
by Ord. No. 2005-8]
(1) Front yard depth: 10 feet.
(2) Side yard depth: none for single-family attached dwellings; 10 feet
for single-family detached dwellings, multifamily dwellings and
duplexes.
(3) Rear yard depth: 30 feet.
(4) Interior yards:
(a) Front: 10 feet.
(b) Side: 10 feet.
(c) Rear: 30 feet.
(5) Nonresidential side yard depth: 10 feet.
G. Coverage regulations. The building(s), structure(s) and impervious
surface coverage shall not be more than 75%.
H. Floodplain Overlay District. Development located in affected floodplain
areas shall be in accordance with the requirements of the Floodplain
Overlay District of Article XV.
I. Environmental Protection Overlay District. Development shall meet the
requirements of the Environmental Protection Overlay District in
accordance with Article XVI.
J. Development standards. Development shall meet the development
standards in accordance with Article XIX.
K. Performance standards. Development shall meet the requirements of
the performance standards in accordance with Article XX.
§ 195-49 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-49
144:616
§ 195-49.1. Design standards.
L. Motor vehicle access. When motor vehicle access is provided from a
public or private street onto the lot, the motor vehicle access
requirement of Article XXI shall apply.
M. Off-street parking requirements. Off-street parking shall be provided in
accordance with the provisions of Article XXII.
A. Public areas.
(1) Streets and alleys shall be a continuation and extension of existing
streets and alleys and shall have the name of existing streets and
alleys. Streets shall be sized or improved to allow for on-street
parking, on either one side or both sides of the street. Two-way
streets shall be 40 feet in width, with two eleven foot driving lanes
and two nine-foot parking areas. Alleys shall be at least 14 feet
wide. The right-of-way for an alley shall be four feet wider than the
driving lane. All streets shall have curbs, and curbs shall not be
required for alleys.
(2) Streetlights shall be provided and shall not exceed 18 feet in height
and at no more than seventy-five-foot intervals on both sides of the
street. The Township streetlight specification for this district shall
be met.
(3) Sidewalks with a minimum width of four feet shall be provided
along both sides of the street.
(4) Garages and parking. Detached private garages shall be built to be
accessible from an alley or secondary street. However, in the case
where space limitations do not allow for the alley to physically fit
into an existing neighborhood, detached private garages may be
accessible from a private driveway accessible from the street,
provided that the garage is located in the rear of the lot a minimum
of 10 feet beyond the line of the rear of the dwelling unit/building.
(5) The overall design for traditional neighborhood development shall
be focused on preserving the existing village/neighborhood
character of the Township. The overall design of infill development
within or at the end of any existing block shall be consistent with
existing dwellings and nonresidential structures from the
standpoint of setbacks and vehicular access.
B. Location of uses. The greatest density of housing and preponderance of
office and commercial uses should be located in the center of the
traditional neighborhood development with frontage along state routes
and major transportation corridors with uses extending along the
corridor to the edges of the district. Commercial uses located at the
edge of the traditional neighborhood development may be located
adjacent to similar commercial uses in order to form a greater
commercial corridor. Residential development should fill in behind or
§ 195-49 PLUMBING § 195-49.1
144:617
mixed with those commercial uses fronting along the major
thoroughfare.
§ 195-49.1 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-49.1
144:618
ARTICLE XI
Business Enterprise (BE) District
[Added 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12214]
§ 195-50. Purpose.
The Business Enterprise (BE) District is a nonresidential, multiuse area
that incorporates well planned medium- to large-scaled campus-style
development into the existing and planned development areas while
providing adequate buffering to adjacent uses and preserving open space.
The district will include planned business developments with standards
that are primarily intended to avoid the eventual placement of a large
number of driveways that would enter onto arterial and connector streets
and to provide for unified and coordinated development. The district is
located within the designated growth area as identified by the Township's
Comprehensive Plan and areas planned for public sewage as identified by
the Township's Sewage Plan. The district is characteristic of development
in the form of employment centers, including business parks and office
complexes with supportive services and public open space. The regulations
of this district are designed to promote and maintain mixed-use employment
centers with adequate access to the transportation network.
§ 195-51. Principal permitted uses, buildings and structures.
Principal permitted uses, buildings and structures are as follows:
A. Administrative offices.
B. Business/office parks.
C. Child/adult care centers in accordance with § 195-103B.
D. Corporate headquarters.
E. Forestry activities in accordance with § 195-103Q.
F. Government buildings and uses.
G. Institutions of higher education and training centers.
H. Medical and dental clinics.
I. Planned business development in accordance with § 195-110.
J. Professional offices.
K. Any use determined by the Zoning Officer to be of the same general
character as the above-listed permitted uses.
214. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. XI, Village District, as amended.
§ 195-50 PLUMBING § 195-52
144:619
§ 195-52. Principal conditional uses, buildings and structures.
Principal conditional uses, buildings and structures, when authorized by the
Board of Supervisors in accordance with Article XXV, are as follows:
§ 195-53. Accessory permitted uses, buildings and structures.
[Amended 9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2005-8]
Accessory permitted uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental
to the principal permitted uses are as follows, including but not limited to:
§ 195-54. Development requirements.
Standards for approval of a planned business development have been
specified to assure that the intent and requirements of this district are
complied with; review and approval of planned business development shall
be in accordance with Section 195-110. The following criteria must be met:
A. Public parking garage or parking lot.
B. Hospitals in accordance with § 195-165.
C. Heliports/helipads in accordance with § 195-182.1. [Added 11-6-2006
by Ord. No. 2006-7]
A. Bus shelters.
B. Business services.
C. Fences in accordance with § 195-95D.
D. Off-street parking in accordance with Article XXII.
E. Personal services.
F. Public or private parking garages in accordance with § 195-95B.
G. Restaurants.
H. Retail sales.
I. Signs in accordance with Article XXIII.
J. Storage buildings in accordance with § 195-95A.
K. Small and medium wind energy systems in accordance with § 195-95H.
[Added 4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04; amended 5-3-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-03]
L. Solar energy systems in accordance with § 195-112. [Added 5-4-2009
by Ord. No. 2009-09]
A. Height regulations: 35 feet or three stories, or 45 feet or four stories, if
fully sprinkled incompliance with the IBC.
§ 195-52 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-54
144:620
B. Lot area regulations: minimum of two acres for lots individually
developed, a minimum of 10 acres for planned business developments.
C. Width regulations. At the required minimum front building setback line,
the lot width shall be a minimum of 200 feet.
D. Yard regulations. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards of not
less than the depth and width indicated below:
(1) Front yard depth: 50 feet from the existing or future street right-ofway.
(2) Side yard depth: 20 feet minimum for each of two side yards.
(3) Rear yard depth: 30 feet.
(4) Interior yards:
(a) Front: 50 feet.
(b) Side: 20 feet.
(c) Rear: 30 feet.
E. Floodplain Overly District. Development located in affected floodplain
areas shall be in accordance with the requirements of the Floodplain
Overlay District of Article XV.
F. Environmental Protection Overlay District. Development shall meet the
requirements of the Environmental Protection Overlay District of
Article XVI.
G. Development standards. Development shall meet the development
standards in accordance with Article XIX, with exception to those
standards herein modified.
H. Performance standards. Development shall meet the requirements of
the performance standards in accordance with Article XX.
I. Signs. Development shall meet the requirements for signs in
accordance with Article XXIII.
J. Off-street parking. Development shall meet the requirements for offstreet
parking in accordance with Article XXII.
K. Coverage regulations: The building(s), structure(s), and impervious
coverage shall not be more than 75%. [Added 9-5-2006 by Ord. No.
2005-8]
§ 195-54 PLUMBING § 195-54
144:621

ARTICLE XII
Commercial Highway District
§ 195-55. Purpose.
The Commercial Highway (CH) District provides suitable development
opportunities for highway-oriented commercial activities. The district is
located within growth areas as defined in the Township's Comprehensive
Plan and areas planned for public sewage as identified in West Hanover
Township's Sewage Plan. Due to the availability of community facilities in
the CH District, a variety of commercial development types are anticipated
and encouraged to service local residents and the transient public. As
recommended in the Township's Comprehensive Plan, highway commercial
development with environmentally sensitive site and highway access design
is anticipated and encouraged. The regulations for this district are intended
to promote high-quality development projects in keeping with the Township
design standards.
§ 195-56. Principal permitted uses, buildings and structures.
Principal permitted uses, buildings and structures are as follows:
A. Administrative offices.
B. Animal kennels, veterinary services and animal services in accordance
with § 195-103L. [Amended 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
C. Auto body shops in accordance with § 195-103M. [Amended
8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
D. Automobile garage in accordance with § 195-103M. [Amended
8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
E. Automobile service and self-service stations in accordance with
§ 195-103M. [Amended 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
F. Automobile washing.
G. Bars.
H. Big box stores in accordance with § 195-103C. [Added 4-6-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-02215]
I. Commercial recreation in accordance with § 195-111. [Added
9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-13216]
J. Business services.
K. Convenience stores.
215. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections H
through NN as Subsections I through OO.
216. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections I
through OO as Subsection J through PP.
§ 195-55 PLUMBING § 195-56
144:623
L. Data centers, stand-alone. [Added 12-15-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-20217]
M. Equipment retail sales.
N. Financial institutions.
O. Flea markets in accordance with § 195-103F. [Amended 8-15-2005 by
Ord. No. 2004-12]
P. Forestry activities in accordance with § 195-103Q. [Added 8-15-2005
by Ord. No. 2004-12218]
Q. Government buildings and uses.
R. Health clubs.
S. Health services.
T. Laundromats.
U. Membership organizations.
V. Medical and dental clinics.
W. Motels or hotels.
X. Motor vehicle retail sales, new and used, in accordance with
§ 195-103I. [Amended 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
Y. Nightclubs.
Z. Public or private parking garages.
AA. Personal services.
BB. Pharmacies.
CC. Professional offices.
DD. Public libraries.
EE. Public utilities and facilities in accordance with § 195-103J. [Amended
8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
FF. Recreation, public or private.
GG. Rental services.
HH. Repair services.
II. Restaurants.
217. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections J through II as K
through JJ, respectively.
218. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections N
through JJ as Subsections O through KK, respectively.
§ 195-56 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-56
144:624
§ 195-57. Principal conditional uses, buildings and structures.
Principal conditional uses, buildings and structures, when authorized by the
Board of Supervisors in accordance with Article XXV, are as follows:
JJ. Restaurants, fast-food.
KK. Retail sales.
LL. Theaters.
MM.Any use determined by the Zoning Officer to be of the same general
character as the above-listed permitted uses.
NN.Work release facility in accordance with § 195-103T. [Added
2-17-2009 by Ord. No. 2008-18]
OO. Halfway house/treatment center in accordance with § 195-103U.
[Added 2-17-2009 by Ord. No. 2008-18]
PP. Detention centers in accordance with § 195-103V. [Added 2-17-2009
by Ord. No. 2008-18]
QQ. Academic clinical research centers in accordance with § 195-104.
[Added 3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-02]
RR. Medical marijuana grower/processors in accordance with § 195-104.
[Added 3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-02]
SS. Medical marijuana transport vehicle offices in accordance with
§ 195-104. [Added 3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-02]
TT. Medical marijuana dispensaries in accordance with § 195-104. [Added
3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-02]
A. Storage self-service facilities.
B. Light industrial uses as defined herein which are of low to moderate
hazard in accordance with the UCC (Uniform Construction Code of
Pennsylvania, Act 45, as amended). [Added 3-17-1997 by Ord. No.
1997-3; amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-09]
C. Heavy industrial uses as defined herein which are of low to moderate
hazard in accordance with the UCC (Uniform Construction Code of
Pennsylvania, Act 45, as amended). [Added 3-17-1997 by Ord. No.
1997-3; amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-09]
D. Hospitals in accordance with § 195-165. [Added 8-15-2005 by Ord.
No. 2004-12]
E. Heliports/helipads in accordance with § 195-182.1. [Added 11-6-2006
by Ord. No. 2006-7]
§ 195-56 PLUMBING § 195-57
144:625
§ 195-58. Accessory permitted uses, buildings and structures.
[Amended 8-4-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-12; 9-5-2006 by Ord. No.
2005-8]
Accessory permitted uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental
to the principal permitted uses are as follows, including but not limited to:
§ 195-59. Development requirements.
F. Airports in accordance with § 195-182.2. [Added 5-7-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-1]
A. Bus shelters in accordance with § 195-114. [Added 5-4-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-07219]
B. Fences in accordance with § 195-95D.
C. Parking in accordance with Article XXII.
D. Public or private parking garages in accordance with § 195-95B.
E. Signs in accordance with Article XXIII.
F. Storage buildings in accordance with § 195-95A.
G. Swimming pools in accordance with § 195-95F.
H. Private antenna tower in accordance with § 195-95G.
I. Small wind energy system in accordance with § 195-95H. [Added
4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04]
J. Solar energy systems in accordance with § 195-112. [Added 5-4-2009
by Ord. No. 2009-09]
A. Height regulations. The height of a principal building shall not be
greater than three stories or 35 feet. Accessory building and structure
heights are as specified in § 195-96A.
B. Lot area regulations: none.
C. Width regulations. At the required minimum front building setback line,
the lot width shall be a minimum of 50 feet.
D. Yard regulations. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards of not
less than the depth and width indicated below:
(1) Front yard depth.
(a) Front yard depth when parking is located in the side or rear
yard: 20 feet.
219. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections A
through H as Subsections B through I, respectively.
§ 195-57 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-59
144:626
(b) Front yard depth when parking is located in the front yard: 50
feet.
(2) Side yard depth: 10 foot minimum on each side. On a corner lot, the
side yard abutting the street shall be considered a front yard. The
side yard on a corner lot shall be not less than 25 feet.
(3) Rear yard depth: 15 feet.
(4) Interior yards:
(a) Front: 20 feet with no parking in front; 50 feet with parking in
front.
(b) Side: 10 feet.
(c) Rear: 15 feet.
E. Coverage regulations. The building(s), structure(s) and impervious
surface coverage shall not be more than 75%.
F. Floodplain overlay. Development located in affected floodplain areas
shall be in accordance with the requirements of the Floodplain Overlay
District of Article XV.
G. Open space nonresidential development. Open space nonresidential
development shall be in accordance with Article XVII.
H. Development standards. Development shall meet the development
standards in accordance with Article XIX.
I. Performance standards. Development shall meet the requirements of
the performance standards in accordance with Article XX.
J. Environmental Protection Overlay District. Development shall meet the
requirements of the Environmental Protection Overlay District in
accordance with Article XVI.
K. Motor vehicle access. When motor vehicle access is provided from a
public or private street onto the lot, the motor vehicle access
requirements of Article XXI shall apply.
L. Off-street parking requirements. Off-street parking shall be provided in
accordance with the provisions of Article XXII.
§ 195-59 PLUMBING § 195-59
144:627

ARTICLE XIII
Interchange District
§ 195-60. Purpose.
The Interchange District provides suitable development opportunities for
activities which service the needs of interstate highway automobile and
truck traffic at the interchange area. The district is located within growth
areas as defined in the Township's Comprehensive Plan and areas planned
for public sewage as identified in Township's Sewage Plan. Due to the
availability of community facilities in the I District, a limited variety of highintensity
commercial developments are anticipated to service the transient
public. Interchange commercial development with environmentally
sensitive site and highway access design is anticipated and encouraged.
The regulations for this district are designed to promote high-quality
development projects in keeping with the Township's design standards.
§ 195-61. Principal permitted uses, buildings and structures.
Principal permitted uses, buildings and structures are as follows:
A. Beer and/or wine retail or wholesale.220
B. Convenience stores.
C. Forestry activities in accordance with § 195103Q. [Added 8-15-2005
by Ord. No. 2004-12221]
D. Laundromat.
E. Motels or hotels.
F. Motor vehicle body shops in accordance with § 195-103M. [Amended
8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
G. Motor vehicle garages in accordance with § 195-103M. [Amended
8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
H. Motor vehicle service and self-service stations.222
I. Personal services.
J. Pharmacies.
K. Public utilities and facilities in accordance with § 195-103J. [Amended
8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
220. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, regarding adult entertainment uses, was repealed
11-6-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-10.
221. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections C
through O as Subsections D through P, respectively.
222. Editor's Note: Former Subsection I, Motor vehicle washing, which immediately followed
this subsection, was repealed 11-6-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-10.
§ 195-60 PLUMBING § 195-61
144:629
§ 195-62. Principal conditional uses, buildings and structures.
[Amended 11-6-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-10; 8-4-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-12]
Principal conditional uses, buildings and structures, when authorized by the
Board of Supervisors in accordance with Article XXV, are as follows:
§ 195-63. Accessory permitted uses, buildings and structures.
[Amended 8-4-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-12; 9-5-2006 by Ord. No.
2005-8]
Accessory permitted uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental
to the principal permitted uses are as follows, including but not limited to:
L. Rental services.
M. Repair services.
N. Restaurants.
O. Restaurants, fast-food.223
P. Any use determined by the Zoning Officer to be of the same general
character as the above-listed permitted uses.
A. Adult entertainment uses in accordance with § 195-174.
B. Motor vehicles washing.
C. Truckstops.
D. Radio and television towers in accordance with § 195-180.
E. Heliports/helipads in accordance with § 195-182.1. [Added 11-6-2006
by Ord. No. 2006-7]
A. Bus shelters in accordance with § 195-114. [Added 5-4-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-07224]
B. Fences in accordance with § 195-95D.
C. Off-street parking in accordance with Article XXII.
D. Public or private parking garages in accordance with § 195-95B.
E. Signs in accordance with Article XXIII.
F. Storage buildings in accordance with § 195-95A.
G. Swimming pools in accordance with § 195-95F.
223. Editor's Note: Former Subsection Q, Truckstops, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 11-6-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-10.
224. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections A
through H as Subsections B through I, respectively.
§ 195-61 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-63
144:630
§ 195-64. Development requirements.
H. Private antenna tower in accordance with § 195-95G.
I. Small and medium wind energy systems in accordance with § 195-95H.
[Added 4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04; amended 5-3-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-03]
J. Solar energy systems in accordance with § 195-112. [Added 5-4-2009
by Ord. No. 2009-09]
A. Height regulations. The height of a principal building shall not be
greater than three stories or 35 feet. Accessory building and structure
heights are as specified in § 195-96A.
B. Lot area regulations: none.
C. Width regulations. At the required minimum front building setback line,
the lot width shall be a minimum of 100 feet.
D. Yard regulations. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards of not
less than the depth and width indicated below:
(1) Front yard depth: 50 feet.
(2) Side yard depth: 10 feet each side. On a corner lot, the side yard
abutting the street shall be considered a front yard. The side yard
on a corner lot shall be not less than 50 feet. A side yard that abuts
residential districts or uses shall be 50 feet.
(3) Rear yard depth: 15 feet. Rear yards abutting residential districts
or uses shall be 50 feet.
E. Coverage regulations. The building(s), structure(s) and impervious
surface coverage shall not be more than 75%.
F. Floodplain Overlay District. Development located in affected floodplain
areas shall be in accordance with the requirements of the Floodplain
Overlay District of Article XV.
G. Environmental Protection Overlay District. Development shall meet the
requirements of the Environmental Protection Overlay District of
Article XVI.
H. Open space residential and nonresidential development. Open space
residential and nonresidential development shall be in accordance with
Article XVII.
I. Development standards. Development shall meet the development
standards in accordance with Article XIX.
J. Performance standards. Development shall meet the requirements of
the performance standards in accordance with Article XX.
§ 195-63 PLUMBING § 195-64
144:631
K. Motor vehicle access. When motor vehicle access is provided from a
public or private street onto the lot, the motor vehicle access
requirements of Article XXI shall apply.
L. Off-street parking requirements. Off-street parking shall be provided in
accordance with the provisions of Article XXII.
§ 195-64 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-64
144:632
ARTICLE XIV
Industrial Enterprise District
§ 195-65. Purpose.
The Industrial Enterprise (IE) District provides suitable development
opportunities for assembling, fabrication, processing, production,
distribution, manufacturing and warehousing activities. It is intended to
maximize industrial potential while ensuring compatibility with surrounding
zoning districts. The IE District is located within growth areas as defined
in the Township's Comprehensive Plan and areas planned for public sewage
as identified in Township's Sewage Plan. Due to the future availability of
community facilities in the IE District, a limited variety of high-intensity
industrial development types are anticipated. Industrial-related
development with environmentally sensitive site and highway access design
is anticipated and encouraged. The regulations for this district are intended
to promote high-quality development projects in keeping with the
Township's design and performance standards.
§ 195-66. Principal permitted uses, buildings and structures.
Principal permitted uses, buildings and structures are as follows:
A. Breweries.
B. Commercial recreation in accordance with § 195-111. [Added
9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-13225]
C. Contractors.
D. Distribution centers.
E. Factory and industrial, low hazard, as defined by the ICC (International
Code Council) in accordance with the UCC (Uniform Construction
Code) of Pennsylvania, Act 45. [Amended 8-15-2005 by Ord. No.
2004-12]
F. Factory and industrial, moderate hazard, as define by ICC
(International Code Council) in accordance with the UCC (Uniform
Construction Code) of Pennsylvania, Act 45. [Amended 8-15-2005 by
Ord. No. 2004-12]
G. Food precessing.
H. Forestry activites in accordance with § 195-103Q. [Added 8-15-2005
by Ord. No. 2004-12226]
I. Freight handling facilities or terminals.
225. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections B
through P as Subsections C through Q.
226. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections G
through O as Subsections H through P, respectively.
§ 195-65 PLUMBING § 195-66
144:633
§ 195-67. Principal conditional uses, buildings and structures.
Principal conditional uses, buildings and structures, when authorized by the
Board of Supervisors in accordance with Article XXV, are as follows:
§ 195-68. Accessory permitted uses, buildings and structures.
[Amended 8-4-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-12; 9-5-2006 by Ord. No.
2005-8]
Accessory permitted uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental
to the principal permitted uses are as follows, including but not limited to:
J. Industrial parks.
K. Industry, light.
L. Public utilities and facilities in accordance with § 195-103J. [Amended
8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
M. Research laboratories.
N. Storage self-service facilities.
O. Truck terminals.
P. Warehousing.
Q. Any use determined by the Zoning Officer to be of the same general
character as the above-listed permitted uses.
R. Academic clinical research centers in accordance with § 195-104.
[Added 3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-02]
S. Medical marijuana grower/processors in accordance with § 195-104.
[Added 3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-02]
T. Medical marijuana transport vehicle offices in accordance with
§ 195-104. [Added 3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-02]
U. Medical marijuana dispensaries in accordance with § 195-104. [Added
3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-02]
A. Hazardous waste management facilities.
B. Incinerators.
C. Junkyards.
D. Heliports/helipads in accordance with § 195-182.1. [Added 11-6-2006
by Ord. No. 2006-7]
A. Bus shelters in accordance with § 195-114. [Added 5-4-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-07227]
B. Fences in accordance with § 195-95D.
§ 195-66 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-68
144:634
§ 195-69. Development requirements.
C. Off-street parking in accordance with Article XXII.
D. Signs in accordance with Article XXIII.
E. Storage buildings in accordance with § 195-95A.
F. Private antenna tower in accordance with § 195-95G.
G. Small wind energy system in accordance with § 195-95H. [Added
4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04]
H. Solar energy systems in accordance with § 195-112. [Added 5-4-2009
by Ord. No. 2009-09]
A. Height regulations. The height of a principal building shall not be
greater than three stories or 35 feet. Accessory building and structure
heights are as specified in § 195-96A.
B. Lot area regulations: none.
C. Width regulations. At the required minimum front building setback line,
the lot width shall be a minimum of 100 feet.
D. Yard regulations. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards of not
less than the depth and width indicated below:
(1) Front yard depth: 50 feet.
(2) Side yard depth: 15 feet each side. On a corner lot, the side yard
abutting the street shall be considered a front yard. The side yard
on a corner lot shall be not less than 50 feet. A side yard that abuts
residential or agricultural districts or uses shall be 50 feet.
(3) Rear yard depth: 15 feet. Rear yards abutting residential or
agricultural districts or uses shall be 50 feet.
E. Coverage regulations. The building(s), structure(s) and impervious
surface coverage shall not be more than 75%.
F. Floodplain Overlay District. Development located in affected floodplain
areas shall be in accordance with the requirements of the Floodplain
Overlay District of Article XV.
G. Environmental Protection Overlay District. Development shall meet the
requirements of the Environmental Protection Overlay District in
accordance with Article XVI.
H. Open space residential and nonresidential development. Open space
nonresidential development shall be in accordance with Article XVII.
227. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections A
through F as Subsections B through G, respectively.
§ 195-68 PLUMBING § 195-69
144:635
I. Development standards. Development shall meet the development
standards in accordance with Article XIX.
J. Performance standards. Development shall meet the requirements of
the performance standards in accordance with Article XX.
K. Motor vehicle access. When motor vehicle access is provided from a
public or private street onto the lot, the motor vehicle access
requirements of Article XXI shall apply.
L. Off-street parking requirements. Off-street parking shall be provided in
accordance with the provisions of Article XXII.
§ 195-69 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-69
144:636
ARTICLE XV
Floodplain Overlay District
§ 195-70. General provisions. [Amended 7-17-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-7; 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-18
A. Statutory authorization. The Legislature of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania has, by the passage of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain
Management Act of 1978,228 delegated the responsibility to local
governmental units to adopt floodplain management regulations to
promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its citizenry.
Therefore, the Board of Supervisors of West Hanover Township does
hereby order as follows.
B. Purpose. The purpose of this article is to prevent the loss of life and
property, the creation of health and safety hazards, the disruption of
commerce and governmental services, the extraordinary and
unnecessary expenditure of public funds for flood protection and relief
and the impairment of the tax base by:
(1) Regulating uses, activities and development which, acting alone or
in combination with other existing or future use, activities and
development, will cause unacceptable increases in flood heights,
velocities and frequencies.
(2) Restricting or prohibiting certain uses, activities and development
from locating within areas subject to flooding.
(3) Minimizing danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
(4) Requiring all those uses, activities and developments that do occur
in flood-prone areas to be protected and/or floodproofed against
flooding and flood damage.
(5) Protecting individuals from buying lands and structures which are
unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazards.
(6) Complying with federal and state floodplain management
requirements.
C. Applicability. Those provisions shall apply to all lands within the
jurisdiction of West Hanover Township and shown as being located
within the boundaries of any identified floodplain district which are
considered as part of the Official Zoning Map.
D. Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no
structure shall be located, relocated, constructed, reconstructed,
enlarged or structurally altered except in full compliance with the
terms and provisions of this chapter and any other applicable
228. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 195-70 PLUMBING § 195-70
144:637
§ 195-71. Establishment of floodplain districts. [Amended 9-4-2012
by Ord. No. 2012-18]
ordinances and regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction
of this chapter.
E. Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection
sought by the provision of this article is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on acceptable engineering methods of
study. Larger floods may occur. Flood heights may be increased by manmade
or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted
by debris. This article does not imply that areas outside any identified
floodplain area or that land uses permitted within such areas will be
free from flooding or flood damages.
F. This article shall not create liability on the part of West Hanover
Township or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
G. This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be
in effect in identified floodplain areas, unless conflicting provisions are
more restrictive, in which case the more restrictive shall prevail.
H. Identification.
(1) The identified floodplain area shall be any areas of West Hanover
Township classified as special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) in the
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood
Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated August 2, 2012, and issued by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or the most
recent revision thereof, including all digital data developed as part
of the Flood Insurance Study.
(2) The above referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent
revisions and amendments, are hereby adopted by West Hanover
Township and declared to be part of the chapter.
I. Severability. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or
phrase of this section shall be declared invalid for any reason
whatsoever, such a decision shall not affect the remaining portions of
the ordinance, which shall remain in full force and effect, and for this
purpose the provisions of this section are hereby declared to be
severable.
A. Floodway Area: the area identified as floodway in the FIS and FIRM
(Flood Insurance Rate Map dated August 2, 2012) which represents the
channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation by more than one foot at any
point. This term shall also include floodway areas which have been
identified in other available studies or sources of information for those
§ 195-70 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-71
144:638
special floodplain areas where no floodway has been identified in the
FIS. Any encroachment that would cause any increase in flood heights
shall be prohibited. No new construction or development shall be
allowed, unless a permit is first obtained from the Department of
Environmental Protection Regional Office, prior to any Township
approvals or permits.
B. Special Floodplain Area: the area identified as Zones AE and A1-30 in
the FIS which is subject to inundation by the one-percent-annualchance
flood event determined by detailed methods and has base flood
elevations (BFEs) shown. No new construction or development shall be
located within a minimum distance measured 50 feet landward from the
top-of-bank of any watercourse. In Special Floodplain Areas without a
designated floodway, no new development shall be permitted unless it
can be demonstrated that the cumulative effect of all past and projected
development will not increase the BFE by more than one foot.
C. Approximate Floodplain Area: the areas identified as Zone A in the FIS
which are subject to inundation by the one-percent-annual-chance flood
event determined using approximate methodologies. Because detailed
hydraulic analyses have not been performed, no BFEs or flood depths
are shown.
(1) No new construction or development shall be located within a
minimum distance measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank
of any watercourse. When available, information from other
federal, state, and other acceptable sources shall be used to
determine the BFE, as well as a floodway area, if possible. When no
other information is available, the BFE shall be determined by
using a point on the boundary of the identified floodplain area
which is nearest the construction site in question.
(2) In lieu of floodplain areas as identified on the current FIS maps, the
municipality may require the applicant to determine the elevation
with hydrology and hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic
and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by professional
engineers or others of demonstrated qualification, who shall certify
that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.,
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by West Hanover Township.
D. Shallow Flooding Area: the areas identified as Zones AO and AH in the
FIS. These areas are subject to inundation by one-percent-annualchance
shallow flooding where average depths are between one foot
and three feet. Drainage paths shall be established to guide floodwaters
around and away from structures on slopes.
E. Overlay concept.
(1) The floodplain areas described above shall be overlay districts to
the existing underlying districts as shown on the Zoning Map, and
§ 195-71 PLUMBING § 195-71
144:639
§ 195-72. District provisions.
as such, the provisions for the floodplain districts shall serve as a
supplement to the underlying district provisions.
(2) Where there happens to be any conflict between the provisions or
requirements of any of the floodplain districts and those of any
underlying district, the more restrictive provisions shall apply.
F. Zoning Map. The boundaries of the floodplain districts are established
as incorporated into the West Hanover Township Zoning Map. Refer to
Article III, Designation of Districts, §§ 195-11 and 195-12B.
G. District boundary changes. The delineation of any of the floodplain
districts may be revised by the Board of Supervisors where natural or
man-made changes have occurred and/or more detailed studies
conducted or undertaken by the United States Army Corps of
Engineers, a river basin commission or other qualified agency or
individual documents the need or possibility for such changes.
However, prior to any such changes, approval must be obtained from
FEMA. Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six
months after the date such information becomes available, the
applicant providing such data shall notify FEMA of the changes by
submitting technical or scientific data (LOMR submission).
H. Boundary disputes. Should a dispute concerning any identified
floodplain boundary arise, an initial determination shall be made by the
Floodplain Administrator, and any party aggrieved by this decision or
determination may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. The burden of
proof shall be on the appellant.
A. General provisions.
(1) All uses, activities and development occurring within any floodplain
district shall be undertaken only in strict compliance with the
provisions of this article, Chapter 108, Floodplain Management,
and with all other applicable codes and ordinances, such as
Chapter 14, Section 1403.6, Flood resistance, Chapter 16, Section
1612, Flood Loads, Appendix G, Flood-Resistant Construction,
International Building Code 2003, or such successor code which
may be duly adopted by the Township, and Chapter 173,
Subdivision and Land Development. [Amended 9-5-2006 by Ord.
No. 2005-8; 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-18]
(2) Under no circumstances shall any uses, activity and/or
development adversely affect the capacity of the channels or
floodway of any watercourse, drainage ditch or any other drainage
facility or system.
(3) Prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of any stream,
watercourse, etc., within the municipality, permits shall first be
obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
§ 195-71 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-72
144:640
Regional Office, and the United States Army Corps of Engineers,
if necessary. Further, notification of the proposal shall be given
to all affected adjacent municipalities. Copies of such notification
shall be forwarded to both FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department
of Community and Economic Development prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse. No encroachment, alteration,
or improvement of any kind shall be made to any watercourse
unless it can be shown that the activity will not reduce or impede
the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse in any way and a
conditional use hearing is held before the Board of Supervisors.
[Amended 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-18]
(4) The applicant shall be required to submit technical or scientific
data to FEMA for a letter of map revision (LOMR) within six months
of the completion of any new construction, development, or other
activity resulting in changes in the BFE. [Added 9-4-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-18]
B. Specific district provisions.
(1) Floodway (FW) Area, Special Floodplain (SF) Area, Approximate
Floodplain (AF) Area, and Shallow Flooding Area.. [Amended
9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2005-8; 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-18]
(a) In the Floodway (FW) Area, Special Floodplain (SF) Area,
Approximate Floodplain (AF) Area, and Shallow Flooding Area,
any new construction and/or development that would cause
any increase in flood heights shall be prohibited.
(b) Permitted uses in the Floodway (FW) Area, Special Floodplain
(SF) Area, Approximate Floodplain (AF) Area, and Shallow
Flooding Area. The following uses and activities are permitted,
provided that they are in compliance with the provisions of the
underlying district and are not prohibited by any other
ordinance and provided that they do not require structures, fill
or storage of materials and equipment:
[1] Agricultural uses, such as general farming, pasture
grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, truck
farming, forestry, sod farming, contour plowing, no-till
planting, terracing and strip-cropping and wild crop
harvesting.
[2] Public and private recreational uses and activities, such as
parks, day camps, picnic grounds, golf courses, boat
launching and swimming areas, hiking and horseback
riding trails, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms,
fish hatcheries, trap and skeet game ranges and hunting
and fishing areas.
§ 195-72 PLUMBING § 195-72
144:641
[3] Recreational vehicles in Zones A1-30, AH, and AE shall not
be on site more than 180 consecutive days and shall be
fully licensed and ready for highway use.
[4] Accessory residential uses, such as yard areas, gardens,
play areas and pervious parking areas.
[5] Accessory industrial and commercial uses, such as yard
areas, pervious parking and loading areas, airport landing
strips, etc.
[6] Utilities, and public facilities and improvements, such as
railroads, streets, bridges, transmission lines, pipelines,
water and sewage treatment plants, and other similar or
related uses once all state and/or federal permits have
been obtained.
(2) Uses permitted by special exception. The following uses and
activities may be permitted by special exception, provided that they
are in compliance with the provisions of the underlying district and
are not prohibited by any other ordinance: [Amended 9-5-2006
by Ord. No. 2005-8]
(a) Structures, except for mobile homes, accessory to the uses and
activities in Subsection B(1) above.
(b) Water-related uses and activities, such as marinas, docks,
wharves, piers, etc.
(c) Extraction of sand, gravel and other materials.
(d) Temporary uses, such as circuses, carnivals and similar
activities.
(e) Storage of materials and equipment, provided that they are not
buoyant, flammable or explosive, and are not subject to major
damage by flooding, or provided that such material and
equipment is firmly anchored to prevent flotation or
movement, and/or can be readily removed from the area within
the time available after flood warning.
(f) Other similar uses and activities, provided that they cause no
increase in flood heights and/or velocities. All uses, activities
and structural development shall be undertaken in strict
compliance with the floodproofing provisions contained in
§ 195-74B and all other applicable codes and ordinances.
(3) Uses specifically prohibited. See § 195-73 for the kinds of
development which are specifically prohibited.
(4) Setback requirements from floodway and floodplain. No new
construction or development shall be located within the area
measured 50 feet of a floodplain district.
§ 195-72 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-72
144:642
(5) Recreational vehicles in flood areas A, AH, and AE must comply
with the following: [Added 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-18]
(a) On site less than 180 consecutive days; and
(b) Fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(c) Meet permit requirements for manufactured homes per §
108-14.
C. Enforcement. [Added 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-18]
(1) Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator determines that
there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a
violation of any provision of this chapter or of any regulation
adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain Administrator shall give
notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter provided. Such
notices shall:
(a) Be in writing.
(b) Include the specific violation with a description of the
requirements which have not been met, citing in each instance
the applicable provisions of the chapter.
(c) Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for
the performance of any act it requires.
(d) Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case
may require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall
be deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or
agent when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by
any method authorized or required by the laws of this
commonwealth.
(e) Contain an outline of remedial action, which, if taken, will
effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(f) Include the name of the owner of record and any other person
against whom the municipality intends to take action.
(g) Include the location of the violation.
(h) Include the date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(i) Include that the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal
to the West Hanover Township Board of Supervisors within a
prescribed period of time in accordance with procedures set
forth in the chapter and the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.229
229. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 195-72 PLUMBING § 195-72
144:643
§ 195-73. Prohibited uses. [Amended 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-18]
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the
(j) Include that the failure to comply with the notice within the
time specified constitutes a violation with sanctions clearly
defined.
(2) Penalties.
(a) Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or
refuses to comply with any notice, order or direction of the
Floodplain Administrator shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
upon conviction shall pay a fine to West Hanover Township of
not more than $500 plus costs of prosecution.
(b) In addition to the above penalties, all other actions are hereby
reserved, including an action in equity for the proper
enforcement of the chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty
for any violation of, or noncompliance with, this chapter shall
not excuse the violation or noncompliance, or permit it to
continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or
remedy such violation and noncompliance within a reasonable
time. Any development initiated or any structure or building
constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered, or relocated in
noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by the Board
of Supervisors to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
(3) Appeals.
(a) Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the
Floodplain Administrator concerning the administration of the
provisions of this chapter may appeal to the West Hanover
Township Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal must be filed in
writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or
action of the Floodplain Administrator.
(b) Upon receipt of such appeal with the appropriate application
and paid fee, the West Hanover Township shall set a time and
place, within no less than 10 and not more than 30 days for the
purpose of considering the appeal. Notice of the time and place
at which the appeal will be considered shall be given to all
parties.
(c) Any person aggrieved by any decision of West Hanover
Township Zoning Hearing Board may seek relief by appeal to
court, as provided by the laws of the commonwealth, including
the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.230
230. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 195-72 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-73
144:644
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,231 the following activities shall
be prohibited within any identified floodplain area. Prohibited uses are as
follows:
§ 195-74. Existing structures in identified floodplain areas.
[Amended 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-18]
(See Chapter 108 for additional requirements.)
A. Hospitals, public or private.
B. Nursing homes, public or private.
C. Jails, prisons, work release centers, halfway houses.
D. New mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions and/or
substantial improvements to existing mobile home parks.
E. Manufactured homes.
F. Development which may endanger human life.
G. On-lot sanitary facilities.
A. A structure or use of a structure or premises which lawfully existed
before the enactment of these provisions, but which is not in conformity
with these provisions, may be continued subject to the following
conditions:
(1) No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be
allowed within any Floodway Area that would cause any increase in
the elevation of the one-percent-annual-chance flood event BFE.
(2) No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be
allowed within any Special Floodplain Area that would, together
with all other existing and anticipated development, increase the
BFE more than one foot at any point.
(3) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or
more of its market value, shall constitute a substantial
improvement and shall be undertaken only in full compliance with
the provisions of this article.
(4) The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 Pa.
Code, as amended, and the 2009 International Building Code and
the 2009 International Residential Code.
(5) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than
50% of its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed in
strict compliance with the floodproofing and related provisions
231. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 195-73 PLUMBING § 195-74
144:645
§ 195-75. Administration. [Amended 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-18]
§ 195-76. Variances.
contained in Subsection B and all other applicable codes and
ordinances to the greatest extent possible.
B. Elevation and floodproofing requirements. For flood-opening
requirements, see § 108-101(5) and (6).
(1) Residential structures. Within any identified floodplain area, the
lowest floor (including basement) of any substantial improvement
to an existing residential structure shall be at least 1 1/2 feet above
the one-percent-annual-chance flood event BFE. Fully enclosed
spaces below the lowest floor shall be prohibited.
(2) Nonresidential structures. Within any identified floodplain area,
the lowest floor (including basement) of any substantial
improvement to an existing nonresidential structure shall be at
least 1 1/2 feet above the one-percent-annual-chance flood event
BFE or be designed and constructed so that the space enclosed by
such structure shall remain either completely or essentially dry
during any flood up to that height. Fully enclosed spaces below the
lowest floor shall be prohibited.
A. Zoning permit required. Zoning permits shall be required for all
construction and development, which includes, but is not limited to,
buildings or other structures, paving, filling, grading, excavation,
mining, dredging or drilling operations in any floodway or floodplain
area. Permits shall be issued only after compliance with this and related
ordinances has been met.
B. Review by County Conservation District and others. A copy of all
applications and plans for any proposed construction or development in
any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval shall be
submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to the County Conservation
District and/or other appropriate agencies or individuals for review and
comment prior to the issuance of a building permit. The
recommendations of the Conservation District shall be considered by
the Floodplain Administrator for possible incorporation into the
proposed plan.
C. All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least
50 lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in flood hazard
areas where base flood elevation data are not available, shall be
supported by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that
determine base flood elevations and floodway information. The analyses
shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer in a format
required by FEMA for a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or
letter of map revision (LOMR). Submittal requirements and processing
fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
§ 195-74 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-76
144:646
A. General. If compliance with any of the requirements of this article
would result in an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder,
developer or landowner, the Zoning Hearing Board may, upon request,
grant relief from the strict application of the requirements.
B. Variance procedures and requirements. Requests for variances shall be
considered by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the
procedures contained in § 195-199 and the following:
(1) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use or activity within any floodway area that would cause any
increase in the one-percent-annual-chance flood event BFE in
excess of the Pennsylvania allowable surcharge of one foot.
[Amended 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-18]
(2) Except for a possible modification of the one-and-one-half-foot
freeboard requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for
any of the prohibited uses listed in § 195-73.
(3) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(4) In granting any variance, the Zoning Hearing Board shall attach
whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers
necessary in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare,
and to achieve the objectives of this article.
(5) Whenever a variance is granted, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
notify the applicant, in writing, that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(6) In reviewing any request for a variance, the Zoning Hearing Board
shall consider, at a minimum, the following:
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(c) That the granting of the variance will neither result in an
unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood heights,
additional threats to public safety or extraordinary public
expense, nor create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimize the
public or conflict with any other applicable state or local
ordinances and regulations.
(7) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by the Zoning Hearing Board. In addition, a report of
all variances granted during the year shall be included in the
§ 195-76 PLUMBING § 195-76
144:647
§ 195-77. Special exceptions in floodplain districts; additional
factors to be considered.
annual report to FEMA. [Amended 9-4-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-18]
(8) Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting
the one-percent-annual-chance flood event. [Amended 9-4-2012
by Ord. No. 2012-18]
A. Review factors. In passing upon applications for special exceptions, the
Zoning Hearing Board shall consider all relevant factors and
procedures specific in other sections of this chapter and:
(1) The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or
velocities caused by encroachments.
(2) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or
downstream to the injury of others.
(3) The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability
of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary
conditions.
(4) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owners.
(5) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community.
(6) The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location.
(7) The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for
the proposed use.
(8) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development
and development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
(9) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan
and floodplain management program for the area.
(10) The safety of access to the property, in times of flood, of ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
(11) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the floodwaters expected at the site.
(12) Recreational vehicles in Zones A1-30, AH, and AE shall not be on
site more than 180 consecutive days and shall be fully licensed and
ready for highway use. [Added 9-4-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-18232]
§ 195-76 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-77
144:648
(13) Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this
article.
B. Supplemental technical review. The Zoning Hearing Board may refer
any application and accompanying documentation pertaining to any
request for a special exception to the Township Engineer for technical
assistance in evaluating the proposed project in relation to flood
heights and velocities, and the adequacy of the plans for protection and
other related matters.
C. Conditions for approving special exceptions.
(1) Special exceptions shall only be issued after the Zoning Hearing
Board has determined that the granting of such will not result in
unacceptable or prohibited increases in flood heights; additional
threats to public safety; extraordinary public expense; the creation
of nuisances; any fraud or victimization of the public; or any
conflict with local laws or ordinances.
(2) No special exception shall be granted for any proposed use,
development or activity within any Floodway (FW) District that will
cause any increase in flood heights.
232. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection
A(12) as Subsection A(13).
§ 195-77 PLUMBING § 195-77
144:649

ARTICLE XVI
Environmental Protection Overlay District
§ 195-78. Purpose. [Amended 9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2005-8]
The Comprehensive Plan has provided an inventory of important natural
and cultural features that include wetlands, floodplains, watersheds,
streams, soils, historic sites and buildings. The Township recognizes the
interrelationship between its natural resources and the health, safety and
general welfare of the community. The Township also recognizes that these
resources have a major role in the quality of life in the community and must
be protected, maintained and preserved for future generations. Recognizing
that the Comprehensive Plan promotes the preservation and protection of
these important features, this article provides appropriate standards and
regulations for the following purposes:
§ 195-79. Stream Protection Overlay District (SPOD). [Added
7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-7; 9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2005-8]
The Comprehensive Plan identifies and recognizes streams and the natural
areas around them as important hydrological and environmental assets. It
is the intent of this section to provide appropriate standards for delineating
and preserving natural and man-made waterways. These regulations are
provided to protect wildlife; reduce exposure to high water and flood
hazards; preserve existing vegetation along waterways; minimize the
negative effects on waterways from agriculture and development related
erosion; minimize scenic degradation; and protect water quality by
reducing and cleaning stormwater runoff. An SPOD is hereby established as
a district which overlays other zoning districts of this chapter.
A. To protect drainageways and streams from development impacts.
B. To minimize negative impacts from development on hillside and slope
areas.
C. To protect water features from development impacts.
D. To preserve prime agriculture soils.
E. To protect existing wooded areas.
F. To minimize wetland impacts.
G. To preserve water quality.
H. To enhance water infiltration.
A. Establishment of district boundaries. The SPOD shall consist of a land
strip on each side of a watercourse. (See Illustration 16.233) The SPOD
boundary shall be based on an investigation of critical environmental
features that are related to the watercourse. The total extent of the
233. Editor's Note: Illustration 16 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 195-78 PLUMBING § 195-79
144:651
critical areas adjacent to the watercourse shall be considered in
determining boundaries of the SPOD. Where critical areas do not exist,
a minimum buffer of at least 50 feet on each side of the watercourse
shall be established.
B. Determining the critical areas. The total extent of the critical areas
adjacent to the watercourse shall be considered in determining the
boundaries of the SPOD. Critical areas include the following:
(1) Alluvial soils. All alluvial soils adjacent to the watercourse. For the
purpose of this chapter, these areas are considered hydrologically
related to the watercourse.
(2) Hydric soils. All hydric soils immediately adjacent to or bordering
within 50 feet of the watercourse. For the purpose of this chapter,
these areas are considered hydrologically related to the
watercourse.
(3) Steep slopes. Where the base of a steep slope is 50 feet or less from
the watercourse, the critical area shall extend to the top of the
steep slope(s) or ravine plus an additional 20 feet of moderate or
lesser slope.
(4) Wooded areas. Where forested land having a predominance of trees
of four-inch caliper or greater exists within 50 feet of the
watercourse, the SPOD boundary will include wooded areas within
100 feet from the watercourse.
C. Permitted uses. The following shall be permitted uses in the SPOD,
provided that they are in compliance with the provisions of the
underlying district and are not prohibited by another ordinance, and
provided that they do not require building(s), fill or storage of materials
and equipment:
(1) Agricultural uses, such as general farming, pasture grazing,
outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, no-till planting
and wild crop harvesting.
(2) Common open space.
(3) Educational or scientific use, not involving buildings or structures.
(4) Fishing, swimming, boating and hunting.
(5) Trail access to the stream or drainageway and trails in linear parks.
(6) Passive recreational areas not involving structures.
(7) Accessory residential uses, such as gardens, play areas or fences.
(8) Wildlife preserves.
D. Conditional uses.
§ 195-79 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-79
144:652
§ 195-80. Hillside and Slope Protection Overlay District (HSPOD).
The Comprehensive Plan recognizes steep slopes and hillsides as unique
areas. Slope areas are fragile and susceptible to erosion, landslides,
mudslides, degradation of their natural vegetation and increased flooding
using conventional development practices. It is the intent of this section
to provide reasonable standards for hillside development that guide
development away from steep areas; minimize grading and other site
preparation in steep areas; provide safe means for ingress and egress
while minimizing scarring from hillside construction; preserve the natural
conditions in steep areas; and prevent flooding and the deteriorating effects
of erosion to streams and drainage areas. An HSPOD is hereby established
as a district which overlays other zoning districts of this chapter.
(1) Accessory commercial uses, such as picnic areas or fences.
(2) Underground public utilities.
(3) Walking bridges.
(4) Footpaths.
(5) Driveway crossings.
(6) Any other use requiring a federal or state encroachment permit.
E. Standards.
(1) The SPOD shall be established at the time of subdivision or land
development or the application for a zoning permit if there is no
subdivision or land development proposed.
(2) In all subdivision and land development applications, the SPOD
shall be described by metes and bounds. A conservation easement
covering the SPOD shall be provided in accordance with Chapter
173, Subdivision and Land Development.
(3) In all zoning permit applications, the SPOD shall be shown on a
drawing indicating the location and measurements of the district in
accordance with the above standards.
A. Establishment of district boundaries. The HSPOD shall consist of all
land which has 25% slope or more. (See Illustration 16.234) The HSPOD
boundary shall be based on a topographic investigation of critical
sloped areas. The average natural slope of an area shall be determined
by dividing the horizontal run of the slope into the vertical rise of the
same slope and converting the resulting figure into a percentage value.
The sloped area shall be measured at right angles to the natural
contours.
234. Editor's Note: Illustration 16 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 195-79 PLUMBING § 195-80
144:653
B. Permitted uses. The following shall be permitted uses in the HSPOD,
provided that they are in compliance with the provisions of the
underlying district and are not prohibited by another ordinance, and
provided that they do not require structures, grading, fill or storage of
materials and equipment: [Amended 9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2005-8]
(1) Agricultural uses, such as general farming, pasture grazing,
outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, no-till planting
and wild crop harvesting.
(2) Common open space.
(3) Educational or scientific use not involving buildings or structures.
(4) Trail access to the stream or drainageway and trails in linear
parks..
(5) Passive recreational areas not involving structures.
(6) Accessory residential uses, such as gardens, play areas or fences.
(7) Wildlife preserves.
C. Conditional uses. [Added 9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2005-8235]
(1) Accessory commercial uses such as picnic areas or fences.
(2) Underground public utilities.
(3) Walking bridges
(4) Driveway crossings.
(5) Any other use requiring a federal or state encroachment permit.
D. Standards.
(1) The HSPOD shall be established at the time of subdivision or land
development or the application for a zoning permit if there is no
subdivision or land development proposed.
(2) In all subdivision and land development applications, the HSPOD
shall be described by metes and bounds. A conservation easement
covering the HSPOD shall be provided in accordance with Chapter
173, Subdivision and Land Development.
(3) In all zoning permit applications, the HSPOD shall be shown on a
drawing indicating the location and measurements of the district in
accordance with the above standards.
E. Up to 1/4 of the land with slopes greater than 25%, as defined by
§ 195-72A, may be removed or altered only when such slopes are
235. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections C through E as
Subsections D through F.
§ 195-80 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-80
144:654
§ 195-81. Lake and Pond Protection Overlay District (LPPOD).
The Comprehensive Plan identifies and recognizes lakes and ponds and the
natural areas around them as important hydrological and environmental
assets. It is the intent of this section to provide appropriate standards for
preserving natural and man-made lakes or ponds. These regulations are
provided to protect wildlife; preserve existing vegetation along lakes or
ponds; minimize the negative effects on lakes or ponds from agriculture
and development related erosion; minimize scenic degradation; and protect
the integrity of ponds and lakes as functioning wetland areas. An LPPOD is
hereby established as a district which overlays other zoning districts of this
chapter.
isolated, small or otherwise occur as knolls which do not adversely
affect the design of the plan or open space subdivisions or land
developments.
F. Land with slopes greater than 25%, as defined by § 195-72A, on a single
lot development may be removed or altered only when such slopes are
small, isolated.
A. Establishment of district. The LPPOD shall be established as the area in
or within 50 feet of a lake or pond. (See Illustration 16.236) All natural
and man-made lakes, ponds and established easement areas (excluding
stormwater management facilities) shall remain in permanent open
space. Because these areas may relate to other hydrologic features, no
development or diverting of these water bodies shall be permitted
without proper approval from the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection (hereinafter called "PADEP"). [Amended
9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2005-8]
B. Permitted uses. Permitted uses are as follows:
(1) Common open space.
(2) Educational or scientific use not involving buildings or structures.
(3) Fishing, swimming, boating or hunting.
(4) Passive recreational areas not involving structures.
(5) Trail access to adjacent open space.
(6) Wildlife preserves.
(7) Piers or docks. [Added 9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2005-8]
C. Standards.
(1) This buffer shall contain no more than 15% impervious surface.
236. Editor's Note: Illustration 16 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 195-80 PLUMBING § 195-81
144:655
§ 195-82. Wetland Protection Overlay District (WPOD). [Amended
7-6-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-10]
The Comprehensive Plan recognizes wetland areas as indispensable and
fragile hydrological natural resources that provide habitat for fish, wildlife
and vegetation; water-quality maintenance and pollution control; flood
control; erosion control; open space; scientific study opportunities; and
recreational opportunities. Damaging or destroying wetlands threatens
public safety and the general welfare. Because of their importance,
wetlands are to be protected from negative impacts by development and
other activities. It is the intent of this section to require planning to avoid
and minimize damage of wetlands whenever prudent or feasible; require
that activities not dependent upon wetlands be located to other upland
sites; and allow wetland losses through proper mitigation only where all
practical or legal measures have been applied to reduce these losses that
are unavoidable and in the public interest. A WPOD is hereby established as
a district which overlays other zoning districts of this chapter.
(2) At least 70% of the shoreline buffer area shall remain in its natural
state as open space.
(3) The LPPOD shall be established at the time of subdivision or land
development or the application for a zoning permit if there is no
subdivision or land development proposed.
(4) In all subdivision and land development applications, the LPPOD
shall be described by metes and bounds. A conservation easement
covering the LPPOD shall be provided in accordance with Chapter
173, Subdivision and Land Development.
(5) In all zoning permit applications, the LPPOD shall be shown on a
drawing indicating the location and measurements of the district in
accordance with the above standards.
A. Establishment of WPOD. The WPOD shall apply to all lands in or within
50 feet of a nontidal wetland or mitigated wetlands located within the
Township. (See Illustration 16.237) The WPOD shall be based on a
wetland investigation by the applicant. The environmental limitations
map of the Comprehensive Plan may be used as a guide for determining
the general location of wetlands. Wetland delineations shall be
performed in accordance with the procedures of the PADEP as specified
in the Federal Manual of Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional
Wetlands and any subsequent amendments thereto. Wetland mitigation
shall be permitted. Wetland mitigation shall be approved by PADEP.
Permits obtained from Army Corps of Engineers and/or PA Department
of Environmental Protection shall take precedence over Township
requirements for public infrastructure and utilities. [Amended
9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2005-8]
237. Editor's Note: Illustration 16 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 195-81 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-82
144:656
B. Verification of wetland delineation. Where the applicant has provided a
determination of the WPOD, the Township Engineer or hydrologist shall
verify the accuracy of, and may render adjustments to, the boundary
delineation. In the event that the adjusted boundary delineation is
contested, the applicant may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board for a
variance.
C. Permitted uses. The following uses shall be allowed within the WPOD to
the extent that they are in compliance with the provisions of the
underlying district and are not prohibited by any other ordinance,
provided that they do not require structures, fill or storage of materials
and equipment, and provided that a permit is obtained from the PADEP
and the United States Army Corps of Engineers, if applicable.
(1) Common open space.
(2) Educational or scientific use not involving buildings or structures.
(3) Fishing and hunting.
(4) Trail access to the stream or drainageway and trails in linear parks.
(5) Passive recreational areas not involving structures.
(6) Wildlife preserves.
D. Conditional uses: [Added 9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2005-8238]
(1) Accessory commercial uses, such as picnic areas or fences.
(2) Underground public utilities.
(3) Walking bridges and piers.
(4) Driveway crossings.
(5) Any other use requiring a federal or state encroachment permit.
E. Standards.
(1) The WPOD shall be established at the time of subdivision or land
development or the application for a zoning permit if there is no
subdivision or land development involved. The wetland
delineations shall be performed in accordance with the procedures
specified in the Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating
Jurisdictional Wetlands and any subsequent amendments thereto.
(2) In all subdivision and land development applications, a wetland
investigation shall be required in accordance with § 173-30 of
Chapter 173, Subdivision and Land Development. A conservation
easement covering the WP Overlay District shall be provided in
accordance with Chapter 173, Subdivision and Land Development.
238. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection D as Subsection E.
§ 195-82 PLUMBING § 195-82
144:657
The WPOD and conservation easement shall be described by metes
and bounds, indicating the location and measurements of the
district. [Amended 7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-7]
(3) In all zoning permit applications, the WPOD shall be shown on a
drawing indicating the location and measurements of the district.
(Wetland delineations shall be performed in accordance with the
procedures specified in the Federal Manual for Identifying and
Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands and any subsequent
amendments thereto.)
§ 195-82 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-82
144:658
ARTICLE XVII
Open Space Residential and Nonresidential Development
§ 195-83. Purpose.
The Comprehensive Plan recognizes that maintaining open spaces and
environmentally sensitive areas is important and desirable in preserving the
Township's rural character and quality of life. The intent of this article is to
provide reasonable standards and procedures for open space development
which will improve living, working and natural environments; promote more
economical subdivision and land development design; encourage a variety
of residential dwelling types; promote ingenuity and originality in total
subdivision and site design; protect rural character; maintain property
values; and preserve open space. These regulations provide for the
Township's administration of preserving natural features and open space.
§ 195-84. Applicability. [Amended 9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2005-8]
The open space standards of this article shall apply to subdivisions or land
developments in accordance with the following:
§ 195-85. Open space areas defined. [Amended 4-16-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-2; 9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2005-8]
Open space required in all subdivisions and land developments shall consist
of the following four categories:
A. Residential.
(1) A subdivision which involves the creation of four or more lots.
(2) Any residential subdivision or land development which involves
new street construction.
(3) A residential subdivision or land development which involves four
acres or more.
(4) Residential land developments of four units or more.
B. Nonresidential.
(1) Nonresidential subdivision or land development which involves 10
acres or more.
C. Open space requirements shall not apply to the Conservation (C),
Interchange (I) or Industrial Enterprise (IE) Districts.
A. Floodplain. Floodplain areas as determined in accordance with Article
XV.
B. Environmental Protection Overlay Districts. Environmentally sensitive
areas as determined in accordance with Article XVI.
§ 195-83 PLUMBING § 195-85
144:659
§ 195-86. Determining open space, conservation features
percentage, density and minimum lot size calculations. [Amended
4-16-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-2]
Open space development shall preserve floodplains, environmental
protection overlay districts and a percentage of conservation features as
required by § 195-85. The required open space for the total tract area shall
be in accordance with the following:
C. Conservation features. Conservation features shall consist of mature
woodlands, upland buffers around wetlands and water bodies, prime
farmland, natural meadows, critical wildlife habitats, scenic views, sites
listed on the Pennsylvania Natural Diversity Inventory, and historic
sites, rock outcroppings and culturally or archaeologically significant
sites.
D. Other land, not containing any of the three above-mentioned
categories.
A. Floodplain and Environmental Protection Overlay Districts.
B. Open space and/or conservation features percentage. The following
percentages shall specify the required conservation features of a
subdivision or land development. [Amended 8-15-2005 by Ord. No.
2004-12; 9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2005-8]
District
Minimum Percent of Open
Space
Flexible Rural Agriculture (FRA) 60% (2-acre lot area)
Rural Residential (RR) 40%
Low-Density Residential (R-1) 35%
Medium-Density Residential (R-2) 25%
Suburban Residential (R-3) 20%
Business Enterprise (BE) 20%
Neighborhood Commercial (NC) 20% residential use only
15% mixed use
10% commercial use only
Commercial Highway (CH) 10%
C. Density calculation. The following sections outline the process for
determining open space subdivision and land development densities.
(See Illustration 17.) [Amended 9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2005-8]
(1) Determine the total area of the tract.
(2) Subtract the total area of Floodplain District (Article XV) and
Environmental Overlay Districts (Article XVI) to determine the
remaining buildable area.
§ 195-85 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-86
144:660
(3) Subtract 10% of the remaining buildable area for street
construction. The final balance is the net buildable area.
(4) Divide the net buildable area by the applicable zoning district's
single-family minimum lot area to determine the maximum total
number of lots. For condominiums or multifamily dwellings, this is
the total number of units.
Illustration 17
Density Calculation
Example
Site:
A one-hundred-acre farm with small wooded stream
running through property is located in the Low-Density
Residential District (R-1). The property owner plans to
subdivide the farm for residential housing. The
following steps are used to determine the maximum
number of permitted lots for this property in the R-1
District.
STEP 1 Take total tract area, subtract any area applicable under
the Environmental Protection Overlay District (EPOD).
In this case, areas applicable under EPOD total 10 acres.
Acres
Total tract area
Environmental Overlay District
Remaining buildable area
100
-10
___
90
STEP 2 Take remaining buildable area and subtract 10% for
streets when roads will be constructed. In this case,
roads will be constructed as part of the proposed
subdivision.
Acres
Remaining buildable area
10% for streets
Net buildable area
90
-9
__
81
STEP 3 Divide the net buildable area by the lot area
requirement for the zoning district in which the
property is located. In this case, the property is located
in the R-1 District, where the minimum lot area
requirement is 0.5 acres per lot.
Acres
§ 195-86 PLUMBING § 195-86
144:661
Illustration 17
Density Calculation
Net buildable area
0.5 acres (2 units per acre)
Lot density
81
81/.0.5
162 lots
D. Minimum lot size calculation. The minimum lot size in an open space
subdivision or land development shall be determined using the
following calculation. (See Illustration 18). [Amended 9-5-2006 by
Ord. No. 2005-8]
(1) Determine the total area of the tract.
(2) Subtract the total area of the floodplain district (Article XV) and
Environmental Overlay Districts (Article XVI) to determine
remaining tract area.
(3) Subtract the required conservation features percentage in
accordance with § 195-86B from the total tract area to determine
remaining tract area.
(4) Divide the remaining tract area by the total number of lots
determined by the density calculation in § 195-86B.
Illustration 18
Minimum Lot Size Calculation
Site: One-hundred-acre farm with small wooded stream
running through property located in the Low-Density
Residential District (R-1). Property owner wishes to
subdivide farm for residential housing. Owner has
completed a density calculation (§ 195-86B) which
determined the maximum number of permitted lots
(162). Since the proposed subdivision involves four or
more lots [(§ 195-84A(1)], an area of permanent open
space is required [(§ 195-86A(3)]. When open space is
required, to achieve the potential for the same number
of lots as determined by the density calculation, in this
case 162 lots, a reduced lot size is permitted. This is
done by calculating the minimum lot size.
STEP 1 Take total tract area, subtract any area applicable under
Environmental Protection Overlay District (EPOD), and
subtract the amount of land required for open space
in accordance with the zoning district in which the
property is located. In this case, the required open space
for the R-1 District is 35% of the total tract area. The
number of acres after subtracting becomes the
remaining tract area.
§ 195-86 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-86
144:662
§ 195-87. Permitted uses. [Amended 4-16-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-2;
9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2005-8]
Illustration 18
Minimum Lot Size Calculation
Acres
Total tract area
Environmental Overlay
District
Open space requirement
(35% of 100 acres = 35
acres)
Remaining tract area
100
-10
-35
___
55
STEP 2 Convert total tract area to square feet (55 acres x
43,560 = 2,395,800 square feet)
STEP 3 Divide the square footage
of the total tract area by
the maximum number of
permitted lots as
calculated in § 195-86B:
Total tract area
Maximum number of
permitted lots
2,395,800 square feet
÷ 162
Minimum allowable lot
size
14,789 square feet
A. The following uses are permitted in open space conservation areas:
(1) Agriculture.
(2) Active recreation (excluding trails for motorized vehicles).
(3) Bikeways.
(4) Golf courses.
(5) Hiking or nature trails.
(6) Horticulture.
(7) Nature trails.
(8) Passive recreation.
(9) Picnic areas.
§ 195-86 PLUMBING § 195-87
144:663
§ 195-88. Requirements. [Amended 4-16-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-2;
9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2005-8]
(10) Playgrounds.
(11) Silviculture.
(12) Public utility facilities.
(13) Small and medium wind energy systems in accordance with
§ 195-95H. [Added 4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04; amended
5-3-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-03]
B. The total area occupied by any buildings, structures, supporting
facilities, driveways or parking areas related to the uses specified in
Subsection A shall not exceed 5% of the open space.
A. The required open space to be set aside shall preserve floodplains and
environmentally sensitive areas in accordance with Articles XV and XVI
at a minimum.
B. Required open space shall not include recreation land required for
dedication to the Township in accordance with the Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance.
C. Required open space shall not include streets, private yards, interior
yards, minimum required spacing between buildings, or off-street
parking, except as provided in § 195-87B.
D. Residential accessory structures, such as but not limited to sheds,
garages or any commercial use shall not be permitted in the open space
area.
E. All public open space shall be accessible from a public street or public
pedestrian walkway. When applicable, public pedestrian walkways or
trails shall be coordinated with the West Hanover Township Ped-Path
Plan. The Township may require an easement for a public trail system.
The minimum width of the access to the open space shall be 20 feet.
F. Further subdivision of open space lands for development, or their use
for other than the permitted uses listed in § 195-87, shall be prohibited.
G. Open space intended for recreational or public use shall be easily
accessible to pedestrians and conform to all state and federal
regulations for handicapped accessibility.
H. Open space may include overhead power line easements or rights-ofway,
underground utility transmission lines, pipelines and drainage
easements.
I. Required open space areas shall be in the form of contiguous tracts.
Where practical, linear trails shall connect to larger open space tracts
or parks. Where strips of open space land are designed as separate,
§ 195-87 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-88
144:664
§ 195-89. Roadway standards.239
Roadway standards shall be in accordance with Chapter 173, Subdivision
and Land Development.
§ 195-90. Methods of ownership and maintenance.
Open space within a development shall be owned, administered and
maintained by any of the following methods, either individually or in
combination:
noncontiguous parcels, constituting part of the required minimum open
space, these areas shall have a length-to-width ratio less than 4 to 1,
except such areas that are specifically designed as pedestrianways, in
which case they shall form a contiguous trail system.
J. In developments with culs-de-sac, pedestrian and bike linkages should
be provided from the bulbs.
K. Flag lots shall only be permitted to increase the number of lots that
abut the open space. Five percent of the total number of lots in the
subdivision may be flag lots. The minimum required lot width at the
building setback line of a flag lot shall be 25 feet. (See Illustration 12, in
the back of the chapter.)
A. Homeowners' association. Land to remain in open space may be
conveyed to a community association to be owned by the owners of the
lots within the development. Ownership thereof shall pass with
conveyance of the lots in perpetuity. A homeowners' association shall be
established for the purpose of permanently maintaining all residual,
commonly owned open space and recreational facilities. The
association shall be formed and operated to include at a minimum the
following provisions:
(1) The association shall be formed by the developer and operated with
financial subsidization by the developer before the sale of any lots
within the development.
(2) The developer shall provide a written description of the association
including its bylaws and methods for maintaining the open space.
(3) To ensure that the cost of maintaining the open space is shared
equally by all property owners, membership in the association shall
be mandatory for all purchasers of homes therein and their
successors. The conditions and timing of transferring control of the
association from developer to homeowners shall be described in
the bylaws.
239. Editor's Note: Former § 195-89, Design standards, was repealed 4-16-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-2. This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former §§ 195-90 through
195-92 as §§ 195-89 through 195-91, respectively.
§ 195-88 PLUMBING § 195-90
144:665
(4) The association shall be responsible for maintaining open space
and providing insurance coverage, enforceable by liens placed by
the association. Maintenance obligations may also be enforced by
the Township which may place liens to recover its costs.
(5) Members of the association shall equitably share the costs of
maintaining and developing the open space. Shares shall be
defined within the association bylaws. Association dues shall be
structured to provide for both annual operating costs and to cover
projected long-range costs relating to the repair of any capital
facilities within the open space area (which shall be deposited in a
fund reserved for such purposes).
(6) In the event of a proposed transfer of open space area by a
homeowners' association or the assumption of maintenance of such
land by the Township, notice of such action shall be given to all
property owners within the development.
(7) Associations shall retain or contract adequate personnel to
administer common facilities and properly and continually maintain
the open space area.
(8) Associations may lease open space to any other qualified person or
corporation for operation and maintenance of such areas, but such
a lease agreement shall, at a minimum, provide:
(a) That the residents of the development shall at all times have
access to the open space area contained therein (except that
access to land that is actively farmed shall be limited to times
of the year when the fields are fallow).
(b) That the open space areas to be leased shall be maintained for
the purposes and uses set forth in this article; and upon
request copies of such leases shall be provided to the
Township.
(c) That the operation of open space facilities may be for the
benefit of the residents only, or may be open to the residents of
the Township, at the election of the developer and/or the
association.
B. Condominiums. In order to facilitate public matters, such as the
collection of taxes on open space areas and associated facilities, such
land and facilities shall be controlled through the use of condominium
agreements, approved by the Board of Supervisors. Such agreement
shall be in conformance with the Uniform Condominium Act of 1980. All
open space areas shall be held as "common element." Condominium
associations shall be subject to Subsection A.
C. Conveyance to private, public or nonprofit conservation organizations
or preservation trust. Land to remain in open space may be conveyed to
§ 195-90 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-90
144:666
a private, public or nonprofit conservation organization or preservation
trust with the following provisions:
(1) The organization receiving such land shall be acceptable to the
Board of Supervisors, and a bona fide conservation organization
with perpetual existence.
(2) Ownership of the open space shall pass with conveyance of the lots
in perpetuity.
(3) The Township shall have the first and last offer of conveyance of
open space.
D. Transfer of easements to a private conservation organization. With the
permission of the Board of Supervisors, an owner may transfer
easements to a private, public or nonprofit organization recognized by
the Township, among whose purposes it is to conserve open space and/
or natural resources, provided that:
(1) The organization is acceptable to the Board and is a bona fide
conservation organization with perpetual existence;
(2) The conveyance contains appropriate provision for proper reverter
or retransfer in the event that the organization becomes unwilling
or unable to continue carrying out its functions; and
(3) A maintenance agreement acceptable to the Board is entered into
by the developer and the organization.
E. Open space in the Flexible Rural Agricultural (FRA) District may be
leased for graining or seed crop farming, orchards or grazing in
accordance with the following provisions:
(1) A copy of the lease agreement shall be provided to the Township.
(2) Provisions for maintenance of the property shall be included in the
lease agreement.
F. Dedication of easements. The Township may, but shall not be required
to, accept easements for public use of any portion or portions of open
space, title of which is to remain in ownership by condominium or
homeowners' association, provided that:
(1) Such land is accessible to Township residents;
(2) There is no cost of acquisition other than any costs incidental to the
transfer of ownership, such as title insurance; and
(3) A satisfactory maintenance agreement is reached between the
developer, condominium or homeowners' association and the
Township.
§ 195-90 PLUMBING § 195-90
144:667
G. Offer of dedication. The dedication shall take the form of a fee simple
ownership. The Township may, but shall not be required to, accept open
space areas, provided that:
(1) Such land is accessible to the residents of the Township;
(2) There is no cost of acquisition other than any costs incidental to the
transfer of ownership such as title insurance;
(3) The Township agrees to and has access to maintain such lands; and
(4) Where the Township accepts dedication of open space that contains
improvements, the Board of Supervisors may require the posting of
financial security to ensure structural integrity of said
improvements as well as the functioning of said improvements for a
term not to exceed 18 months from the date of acceptance of
dedication. The amount of financial security shall be determined in
accordance with Article V, § 173-17A(2) of Chapter 173,
Subdivision and Land Development.
H. Private open space conservation easement. (See Exhibit IX, Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance.) Where there are four or fewer lots
(minor subdivision) or dwelling units in an open space development, the
property owner may grant to the Township an easement and covenants
providing for the maintenance and conservation as open space in
accordance with the private open space conservation easement
agreement. Under the aforesaid agreement, ownership of the open
space areas in the approved development shall remain with property
owners of the lots created in perpetuity and shall be established for the
purpose of permanently maintaining all residual open space areas in
their nature state. The private open space easement shall be
established or revised according to the following: [Added 7-21-2003
by Ord. No. 2003-11; amended 9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2005-8]
(1) The developer and the Township shall execute the private open
space conservation easement agreement before final approval of a
subdivision or land development plan and the sale of any lot within
the development. The developer shall prepare all documentation
for each lot containing a permanent private open space
conservation area. All private open space conservation agreements
will be appropriately recorded at the County Recorder of Deeds
Office at the developer's cost.
(2) Any costs for maintaining the open space is solely the responsibility
for the property owners in the open space development individually
in accordance with the provisions of the private open space
conservation easement agreement.
(3) The individual lot owners shall be responsible for maintaining open
space and providing insurance coverage. The Township may
enforce use and maintenance obligations in accordance with the
private open space conservation easement agreement.
§ 195-90 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-90
144:668
§ 195-91. Maintenance standards.
(4) Transfer of the private open space easement from the Township to
another ownership and maintenance arrangement established in
this section is permitted in accordance with the private open space
conservation easement agreement.
(5) In the event of future subdivision and development of a property
with an existing private open space conservation easement, the
owner may resubdivide or reconfigure any future development plan
for the property in accordance with the zoning district provisions or
open space development standards in place at that time. The
private open space conservation easement shall be maintained as
originally established.
A. A narrative describing ownership, use and maintenance responsibilities
shall be submitted for all common and public improvements, utilities
and open spaces. A maintenance and operations plan shall be submitted
detailing the kinds of tasks that will need to be undertaken on a regular
basis to control invasive species (especially vines) and to promote a
varied habitat for plant and animal life, the various responsibilities for
those maintenance tasks and the entities that will perform those tasks,
both short- and long-term.
B. Failure to adequately maintain the open space in reasonable order and
condition constitutes a violation of this chapter.
C. When an open space maintenance violation exists, the Township shall
notify the owner of such violation and shall require the open space to be
maintained within 10 days from the date of notification. Failure to
comply with the terms of such notification shall constitute a nuisance
and, after the expiration of 10 days from the date of notice, the
Township may cause the open space to be maintained and may collect
the costs thereof, together with a penalty of 10% of such costs, in the
manner provided by the Pennsylvania Second Class Township Code240
for the collection of municipal liens.
D. Maintenance security. The developer shall provide a financial security
in the amount established by the developer to maintain the open space
in accordance with Article V of the current Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance. [Amended 4-16-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-2;
9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2005-8241]
E. In such cases, 75% of the net selling price of each of the density bonus
lots shall be deposited to said permanent fund. Spending from this fund
shall be restricted to expenditure of interest, in order that the principal
is preserved. [Amended 4-16-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-2]
240. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
241. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection E, Density bonus to endow
maintenance funds, as amended 4-16-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-2, and redesignated former
Subsection F as Subsection E.
§ 195-90 PLUMBING § 195-92
144:669
§ 195-92. (Reserved)
§ 195-92 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-92
144:670
ARTICLE XVIII
General Regulations
§ 195-93. Purpose.
The following general regulations shall supplement the regulations set
forth in this chapter in each district and apply throughout the Township
unless otherwise specified. If the district regulations are determined to
be in conflict with the following general regulations, the most restrictive
regulations shall be applied, unless otherwise stated.
§ 195-94. Accessory apartments in C, FRA, RR, R-1, R-2, R-3 and NC
Districts. [Amended 7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-7; 5-7-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-6]
Accessory apartments in C, FRA, RR, R-1, R-2, R-3 and NC Districts shall
meet the following standards:
A. An accessory apartment shall consist of complete and independent
living facilities, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking, and
bathroom facilities.
B. One accessory apartment shall be located only within the principal
dwelling.
C. Basement conversions must meet current building code standards for
safety and welfare of the occupant(s).
D. The owner(s) of the residence in which the accessory unit is located
shall occupy at least one of the dwelling units on the premises.
E. One accessory apartment is permitted per dwelling unit, with a
maximum occupancy of two persons.
F. The gross floor area of an accessory apartment within the principal
dwelling shall be a minimum of 600 square feet, up to a maximum of
800 square feet.
G. The Township Sewage Enforcement Officer shall inspect the on-lot
sewage system and report on the adequacy for the additional use.
H. There is no minimum lot size requirement as long as the Township
Sewage Enforcement Officer approves the on-lot system for added
usage, or the Water and Sewer Authority approves additional use of the
public sewer system.
I. An accessory apartment within the principal dwelling shall be designed
so that the appearance of the building remains that of a single-family
residence. Any new entrances shall be located on the side or in the rear
of the building.
§ 195-93 PLUMBING § 195-94
144:671
§ 195-95. Accessory uses.
J. A temporary use permit will be required each year, separate from any
building or zoning permits needed for construction. The use will
extinguish when the relative, live-in assistant, or homeowner moves on.
K. All utilities must be connected through the main dwelling unit.
L. No new mailing address shall be assigned to the apartment.
M. In the FRA (Flexible Residential Agriculture) District, accessory
apartments must be located only within a single-family detached
dwelling: a building used by one family, having only one dwelling unit
and having two side yards. (See Illustration 7.242) [Added 12-19-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-05]
A. Accessory buildings, such as but not limited to detached garages,
barns, storage buildings, garden structures and greenhouses not used
for commercial purposes, may be erected in accordance with the
following requirements: [Amended 10-7-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-11]
(1) Where lots are two acres or less, the accessory building shall not be
located in front of the principal building, with the exception of bus
shelters. [Amended 4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04]
(2) Where lots are more than two acres, the accessory building may be
located in front of the principal building but not in the front yard.
(3) Where such side or rear yard is along an alley, the accessory
building shall be located not less than five feet from the alley rightof-
way.
(4) Where such side or rear yard is adjacent to another lot, the
accessory building shall be located not less than five feet from any
lot line. [Amended 7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-7]
(5) When an accessory building is erected within the side or rear yard
adjacent to a side street on a corner lot, the accessory building
shall be not less than the required front yard depth from the
exterior side lot line.
(6) Accessory building(s) shall not cover more than 10% of the net lot
area in the C, FRA, RR or R-1 Districts. An accessory building shall
not exceed the gross floor area of the principal building. Net lot
area shall mean, for the purposes of this section, the total lot area
minus the floor area of the principal building.
(7) Accessory building or buildings shall not cover more than 10% of
the net lot area in the R-2, R-3, or NC Districts. An accessory
building shall not be more than 35% of the gross floor area of the
principal building. (Net lot area shall mean, for the purposes of this
242. Editor's Note: Illustration 7 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 195-94 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-95
144:672
section, the total lot area minus the floor area of the principal
building.) [Amended 9-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-13]
(8) An accessory building shall be no less than 10 feet from the
principal building.
(9) Solar energy collectors may be freestanding or located on roofs of a
principal or accessory building. [Added 5-4-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-09]
B. Accessory public or private parking garages located in the BE, CH and I
Districts shall meet the following requirements: [Amended 8-15-2005
by Ord. No. 2004-12]
(1) An accessory public or private parking garage shall not exceed the
building height requirements of the district in which it is located.
(2) An accessory public or private garage shall meet the setback
requirements of the principal building.
(3) An accessory public or private garage shall be the same style and
design as the principal building(s).
(4) The perimeter of an accessory public or private garage shall be
landscaped with a minimum of Level Two screening in accordance
with § 195-124.
C. Dish antennas. Dish antennas shall be a permitted accessory use in any
district and shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) All dish antennas shall meet the yard setback and height limitations
for the zoning district in which they are located.
(2) The distance of any guy anchorage or similar device shall be at
least 10 feet from any property line.
(3) Dish antennas shall not be located in the front yard.
(4) Dish antennas shall be limited to one per lot in a residential or
agricultural district.
(5) The dish antenna shall be maintained in a safe condition.
(6) If determined by the Code Enforcement Officer or his designee, a
structural engineering analysis may be required at the request of
the Zoning Officer.
(7) A dish antenna shall be five feet from any overhead electrical
power line.
D. Fences or walls. Fences or walls may be erected, altered and
maintained in accordance with the following requirements: [Amended
9-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-13; 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-02]
§ 195-95 PLUMBING § 195-95
144:673
(1) Any fence or wall in the front yard of a residential lot shall not
exceed 3 1/2 feet in height. Any fence or wall in the front yard of a
commercial lot shall not exceed eight feet in height.
(2) Any fence or wall in the side or rear yard of a residential lot may be
solid or opaque up to six feet in height, and may extend higher if at
least 50% open in character to a maximum of eight feet total.
(3) Any fence in the front yard must be kept a minimum of five feet out
of the road right-of-way.
E. Firewood storage.
(1) Stacks of firewood maintained for personal, residential use shall
not be stored to a height in excess of six feet.
(2) Stacks of firewood shall be a minimum of six feet from any property
line.
(3) Stacks of firewood may be stored in the front yard.
(4) Stacks of firewood shall not be stored in the street right-of-way or
sight distance triangle of intersections and/or driveways.
F. Swimming pools. Swimming pools shall be a permitted accessory use
where specified in the district regulations in accordance with the
following requirements:
(1) General regulations.
(a) The swimming pool shall be intended and be used solely for the
enjoyment of the occupants of the principal use of the property
on which it is located.
(b) No swimming pool shall discharge water or be drained into a
sanitary sewer system or a storm sewer system.
(c) Swimming pool installation shall be in accordance with the
current International Residential Code’s Chapter 41,
Swimming Pools. [Amended 9-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-13]
(d) Every swimming pool shall be equipped with life rings, life
preservers or other flotation devices readily available and
functional for emergency use.
(2) Location and setbacks.
(a) The swimming pool, walks or paved areas, or accessory
structures adjacent thereto, shall be 10 feet from adjoining
property lines. [Amended 7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-7]
(b) The swimming pool, or accessory building(s) adjacent thereto,
shall be 10 feet from the principal building. [Amended
7-31-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-09]
§ 195-95 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-95
144:674
(c) Swimming pools shall not be located in the front yard.
(3) Enclosure requirements.
(a) A swimming pool capable of containing water 24 inches or
more in depth shall be completely surrounded by a fence or
wall. The owner is responsible for operating or maintaining the
swimming pool and shall assure that all doors or gates in the
enclosing fence or wall are closed or securely looked at all
times when the pool is not in use by family members, guests or
other persons authorized by the person responsible. An
enclosing fence or wall shall be not less than four feet in height
and shall be so constructed in order to prevent the passage of a
sphere four inches in diameter through any opening or under
the fence. A dwelling or accessory building may be used as part
of such enclosure. [Amended 9-4-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-13]
(b) All gates and doors opening through the fence or wall
enclosure shall be equipped with a self-closing and selflatching
device for keeping the gate or doors securely closed at
all times when not in actual use, except that the door of any
dwelling which forms a part of the enclosure need not be so
equipped. Latches shall be placed at least four feet above the
ground.
(c) Should the wall of the pool be above ground, the height of the
required fence may be reduced so that the total height of the
wall of the pool and the fence shall be not less than four feet.
(d) Any mechanical equipment, such as pumps, filters or electrical
devices, which is part of the swimming pool facility shall be
within the enclosure or shall be similarly enclosed so as to
forestall persons from gaining entry to the pool by climbing
over the equipment.
(e) The Code Enforcement Officer or his designee may make
modifications in individual cases, upon a showing of good
cause, with respect to the height, nature or location of the
fence, wall, gates or latches or the necessity therefor, provided
that such modifications do not reduce the protection otherwise
herein intended. The Building Inspector may permit other
protective devices or structures to be used so long as the
degree of protection afforded by the substitute devices or
structures is not less than the protection afforded by the walls,
fence, gate and latch herein described.
G. Private antenna towers shall be a permitted accessory use where
specified in the district regulations in accordance with the following
requirements: [Added 8-4-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-12]
§ 195-95 PLUMBING § 195-95
144:675
(1) The private tower antenna shall be intended and used solely for the
enjoyment of the occupants of the principle dwelling unit on which
it is located.
(2) The private tower antenna shall be affixed to a principle or
accessory structure in such a way that there are at least two
fastening points holding the tower to said structure, or shall be a
freestanding structure with required yard setbacks equal to the
height of the tower.
(3) The maximum height of a private tower antenna shall be 75 feet.
H. Small and medium wind energy systems shall be permitted as an
accessory use in the permitted zoning districts with the following
requirements: [Added 4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-4; amended
5-3-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-03]
(1) Installation and siting.
(a) If the generator is on a tower, the tower supporting the nacelle
and generator shall be, at a minimum, 1.2 times the turbine
height from the principal structure on the property and from
any property line.
(b) If the generator is a small wind energy system, it may be
mounted on a principal or accessory structure as long as the
structure height meets ordinance requirements.
(c) Driveway access shall be provided to the base of the system if
it is mounted on a tower.
(d) The system shall conform to any applicable PAUCC
requirements under 34 Pa. Code § 403.42(e), Permit
Requirements and Exemptions.
(e) On-site transmission and power lines to and from the wind
turbine shall be underground.
(2) Safety and nuisance components.
(a) The system shall be equipped with aerodynamic overspeed
braking controls.
(b) Applicable industry standards and certifications shall be
provided.
(c) Tower climbing protection shall be provided up to a height of
15 feet.
(d) Audible sound from a wind energy facility shall not exceed 55
dba, as measured at the closest property line.
(e) Small and medium wind energy systems shall not be lighted.
§ 195-95 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-95
144:676
§ 195-96. Bulk and area modifications and exceptions.
(f) Electrical hazard warning signs shall be posted at the base of
all pad-mounted transformers and substations.
(g) All access doors shall be locked or fenced in to prevent entry by
nonauthorized persons.
(3) Visual requirements.
(a) Small and medium wind energy systems shall be of a
nonobtrusive color such as gray, tan, green, or off-white.
(b) Small and medium wind energy systems shall not display any
advertising beyond the name of the turbine manufacturer.
(4) Decommissioning. The small and medium wind energy systems'
owners shall, at their expense, complete decommissioning of the
system within 12 months after the end of the useful life of the
turbines, within 12 months of damage which prevents the system
from operating at full capacity in a safe manner, or within 12
months of a continuous nongeneration of electricity.
A. Height modifications.
(1) Height regulations shall not apply to principal barns, spires,
belfries, cupolas, towers, penthouses or domes not used for human
occupancy, or to ventilators, water tanks, bulkheads, silos or
ornamental or necessary mechanical appurtenances. However, the
minimum distance between any of the mentioned appurtenances
and any property line shall be not less than twice the height of the
appurtenance, with the exception of towers, which shall be placed
and constructed in accordance with § 195-182.1. [Amended
10-7-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-11; 8-4-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-12]
(2) For all residential uses, accessory buildings shall not exceed 15 feet
in height.
(3) Accessory barns shall not exceed 35 feet in height.
(4) In no case shall a residential accessory building or barn contain a
dwelling unit or living area of any kind.
B. Lot area. In any residential district where a public sewer is not
accessible, the lot area shall be not less than one acre.
C. Lot frontage. All lots must abut a public street and meet the lot width
requirement in the district in which it is located. [Amended 10-7-1996
by Ord. No. 1996-11]
§ 195-95 PLUMBING § 195-96
144:677
D. Flag lots shall be prohibited except as provided in § 195-88K. [Added
10-7-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-11; amended 9-4-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-13]
E. Obstruction to vision.
(1) Walls, fences, signs, other structures or obstructions shall not be
erected or altered, and hedges, trees or other plant material shall
not be planted or maintained, which may cause danger to traffic on
a street or road by obstructing the available sight distance. The
required sight distance is the minimum safe stopping sight distance
in accordance with Article VI of Chapter 173, Subdivision and Land
Development.
(2) In addition to the requirements of § 195-95D(1), on corner lots no
wall, fence, sign or other structure in excess of 3 1/2 feet in height
shall be erected or altered and no hedge or other plant material in
excess of 3 1/2 feet in height shall be permitted within 25 feet in
any direction of the intersection of the street right-of-way.
[Amended 9-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-13]
F. Projections into yards.
(1) Carports shall meet the yard requirements for the district in which
they are located.
(2) Uncovered stairways and necessary landings may project into a
required yard to a distance of not more than four feet, provided
that such stair and land shall not extend above the entrance floor of
the building, except for a railing, not to exceed three feet in height.
(3) Uncovered porches or decks, when constructed more than six
inches above the ground level, may project into a required yard to a
distance of not more than four feet, provided that such porch or
deck does not extend more than three feet above the floor level of
the ground story.
(4) Cornices, eaves, gutters, bay windows, roof overhangs or chimneys
may project into a required yard not more than 24 inches.
(5) Apparatus or architectural structures needed for efficient
operations of solar energy systems, including but not limited to
overhangs, insulating walls and roofs, solar collectors or reflectors,
may project into a required yard not more than four feet.
(6) Light fixtures, sidewalks or walkways on grade, fences,
handicapped ramps, flagpoles for official government flags of the
United States and its political subdivisions, sidewalks, walkways or
ramps when not connected to a building, vegetation, landscaping
materials, decorative lawn ornaments, bird feeders, handrails
along sidewalks or ramps may project into any required yard.
G. Yard regulations.
§ 195-96 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-96
144:678
(1) Average depth of front yards. No front yard for a principal building
shall be required to exceed:
(a) The average depth of existing front yards on lots containing a
principal building within 25 feet of the side lot line on lots
abutting on each side.
(b) The average depth of existing front yards on all lots containing
a principal building within 25 feet of the side lot line, on the
same side of the street, within the same block, and within 200
feet when 51% or more of the lots are improved with buildings,
whichever is greater.
(c) Where a vacant lot adjoins only one lot occupied by a principal
building (within 25 feet of the common side lot line) which
extends into the required front yard of such occupied lot, the
front yard depth of such vacant lot may be the average depth of
the front yard of such adjacent lot and the front yard required
for the district in which such vacant lot is located. However,
the second vacant lot from the original occupied lot must have
at least the minimum front yard depth required in the district.
(d) The measurement for determining the average front yard
depth shall be from the outside wall of principal building which
may include covered areas such as a covered porch.
(2) An accessory building shall not be erected or altered within any
front yard except a detached garage in accordance with
§ 195-95A(1).
(3) Parking shall not be permitted in a front yard within a residential
district, except driveways.
(4) Double frontage lots. Double frontage lots shall provide the
required front yard along each street. Residential double frontage
lots are not permitted.
(5) Side yard, corner lot. On a corner lot, the side yard abutting the
street shall have a width equal to the depth of the front yard
required in the district and shall be subject to all front yard
requirements of this chapter.
(6) Side yard where lines are not parallel. Where a side wall of a
building is not parallel with the side lot line or where a side yard is
irregular, the average side yard may be considered the required
minimum width, provided that the side yard shall not be narrower
than five feet nor less than 1/2 the required minimum width at any
point. The average side yard shall be determined by establishing
the average of the distance from the two closest corners of the
principal building and the side property line. The averaged side
yard distance shall be measured from the center of the principal
building.
§ 195-96 PLUMBING § 195-96
144:679
§ 195-97. Erosion and sedimentation control.
Soil erosion and sedimentation shall be minimized to prevent the loss of
valuable topsoil and the negative effects on streams in the Township. The
following standards and exceptions shall apply to all development, earth
disturbance and uses:
(7) Rear yard where lot is irregular shape. In the case of an irregular,
triangular or gore-shaped lot, the required minimum depth of a
rear yard may be deemed to be the average depth, provided that no
rear yard so averaged shall be less than 10 feet nor 1/2 the
required minimum depth at any point. The average rear yard shall
be determined by establishing the average of the distance from the
two closest corners of the principal building and the rear property
line. The average rear yard distance shall be measured from the
center of the principal building.
H. Yard reduction. A lot located in a district where residential structures
are permitted held in single and separate ownership at the effective
date of this chapter, with a lot width less than that required by the
zoning district, only one single-family dwelling may be erected, and side
yards shall be provided in accordance with the following requirements:
(1) Side yard, corner lot. On corner lots with a width of 50 feet or more,
two side yards shall be provided. The exterior side yard abutting
the street may be reduced by the number of feet by which the lot
width is less than the district requirement, but may not be reduced
to less than the required interior side yard. The interior side yard
shall be provided as required by the district regulations.
(2) For lots less than the width required by the zoning district, but not
less than 27 feet in width, two side yards shall be provided, each
equaling 20% of the lot width.
(3) For lots having a depth of less than 90 feet, the required rear yard
may be reduced by 20% of the lot depth but in no case less than 1/2
the required rear yard. [Added 10-7-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-11]
A. Erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be provided in
accordance with the regulations and standards specified in Article VI of
Chapter 173, Subdivision and Land Development.
B. In addition to the requirements of Subsection A, any developments or
uses that cause earth disturbances described below shall also require
erosion and sedimentation control measures to conform to acceptable
engineering standards and practices:
(1) Excavation, fill or any combination thereof that exceeds 500 cubic
yards.
(2) Fill will exceed three feet in depth at its deepest point as measured
from the natural ground surface.
§ 195-96 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-97
144:680
§ 195-98. Historic preservation.
The Comprehensive Plan recognizes that historic preservation is important
in maintaining the rural and historic character of the Township. Historical
resources include buildings, structures and landscapes. It is the purpose
of this section to provide reasonable standards to preserve and maintain
the historical resources of the Township for the enjoyment and education
of present and future generations; to ensure that on-site improvements or
construction is in harmony with existing historic character; to preserve
places and structures determined to be historically significant in the
Township; and to ensure the continued construction or rehabilitation of
buildings consistent with the historic style, design, form, color, proportion,
texture and material for buildings.
(3) Excavation will exceed four feet in vertical depth at its deepest
point measured from the natural ground surface.
(4) Plant or tree cover to be removed from any area exceeding 2,000
square feet on any parcel of land.
(5) Where any land located in a stream channel or body of water is
disturbed.
(6) Excavation, fill or any combination thereof that exceeds an area of
2,000 square feet.
C. Exemptions. Farming and agricultural uses shall be exempt from the
erosion and sedimentation control requirements of this section.
D. An erosion and sedimentation control plan and a letter of approval from
the Township Engineer and/or the Dauphin County Conservation
District, as applicable, shall be provided prior to the issuance of a
zoning permit. [Amended 4-4-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-2]
E. During construction, any earth disturbance activities of one acre or
more shall be required to meet the same stormwater peak flow
requirements as post-construction stormwater. [Added 6-4-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-11]
A. Review procedures. The Zoning Officer shall review an applicant's
building proposal for the alteration of a structure or building that is
listed on a national, state or local register of historic places. The Zoning
Officer shall be governed by the recommended standards of the
Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines
for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings.
B. Appeals to the Zoning Hearing Board. Appeals to the Zoning Hearing
Board may be made by any resident or property owner who is aggrieved
by the historic preservation guidelines. Appeal procedures shall be in
conformance with § 195-199.
C. Exemptions. Nothing herein shall prohibit:
§ 195-97 PLUMBING § 195-98
144:681
§ 195-99. Home occupations.
It is the intent of this section to allow for and regulate the establishment
of home occupations in the Township's residential and agricultural areas.
West Hanover Township recognizes that home occupations are conducted
(1) The ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior or architectural
features which does not involve a change in design, material, color
or outer appearance thereof.
(2) The construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration or
demolition of any feature which the Code Enforcement Officer or
his designee shall certify is required for public safety because of an
unsafe or dangerous condition.
(3) The planting of trees or shrubs when in conformity with sight
distance standards at intersections.
D. Prohibitions. No person, corporation, partnership, association or
society shall:
(1) Cause the exterior of any building or structure that is on a national,
state or local register owned or leased by them, including walls,
fences, light fixtures, steps, pavement, path, trees or any other
appurtenant features, or aboveground utility structure or any type
of outdoor advertising sign, to be erected, altered, restored or
moved without an approved zoning permit issued by the Zoning
Officer. In no event shall a building permit be issued until the
zoning permit has been approved or after written order of the
Zoning Hearing Board.
(2) Cause the portion of any building or structure owned or leased by
them that is on a national, state or local register, including walls,
fences, light fixtures, steps, pavement, path, trees or any other
appurtenant features, or aboveground utility structure or any type
of outdoor advertising sign, to be erected, altered, restored or
moved after a building permit has been issued except in
accordance with the plans submitted and approved as part of the
building permit application.
(3) Cause or allow to be demolished any building or structure that is
listed on a national, state or local register until the owner thereof
shall have given the Zoning Officer 90 days' written notice of the
proposed action. During the ninety-day period, the Zoning Officer
shall consult with the West Hanover Township Historical Society to
determine the historic significance of the site. This determination
shall be rendered within the ninety-day period and prior to the
issuance of a demolition permit. If the building(s) or structure(s) in
question do not significantly contribute to the historic character of
the Township, the Zoning Officer may waive all or part of such
ninety-day period and authorize demolition or removal.
§ 195-98 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-99
144:682
in a manner that minimizes their impact on the surrounding residential
and agricultural districts in which they are situated. It is also the purpose
of these standards to maintain and preserve the residential character of
neighborhoods and minimize the negative effects of commercial uses.
A. In the RR, R-1, R-2, R-3, NC and BE Districts, home occupations shall be
permitted as follows: [Amended 5-3-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-7;
8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
(1) Permitted home occupations. The following activities may be
conducted as home occupations in the RR, R-1, R-2 and R-3
Districts:
(a) Baby-sitting, up to five children.
(b) Barbershop.
(c) Beauty shop.
(d) Direct sale product distribution, such as but not limited to
Amway, Avon and Tupperware.
(e) Dressmaking, sewing, tailoring and contract sewing.
(f) Home cooking, preserving and baking.
(g) Mail order (not including retail sales from site).
(h) Offices, such as but not limited to accounting, architecture,
consulting, contracting, dental, engineering, financial,
insurance, interior design, lawyer, medical, real estate and
sales representative.
(i) Private individual music lessons, limited to one student at a
time.
(j) Private individual tutoring, limited to one student at a time.
(k) Telephone answering services.
(l) Typing, word processing and data processing services.
(m) Uses determined by the Zoning Officer to be of the same
general character as those listed in Subsection A(1).
(2) Standards. In addition to meeting all the requirements of the RR,
R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts in which they are located, all home
occupations shall conform to the following standards:
(a) The home occupation must be conducted solely within the
dwelling unit of the individual engaged in the particular home
occupation.
(b) No more than 20% of the total floor area of the dwelling unit
may be devoted to the home occupation.
§ 195-99 PLUMBING § 195-99
144:683
(c) The home occupation may employ residents of the property,
and not more than one additional person.
(d) One off-street parking space in addition to the requirements of
Article XXII shall be required for each home occupation. Offstreet
parking shall not be located in any front yard.
(e) The home occupation may not involve the use of any vehicle
used exclusively in the conduct of the home occupation.
(f) There shall be no production, storage or sale of merchandise or
stock in trade, except for the limited storage of paper items
associated with an office, and the sale of minor accessories
incidental to the permitted home occupation.
(g) There shall be no exterior indication of the home occupation or
variation of the residential character of the dwelling, except for
a sign in accordance with Article XXIII.
(h) There may be more than one home occupation, provided that
the home occupation does not exceed the standards of
Subsection A(2) in combination.
B. In the FRA and C Districts, home occupations shall be permitted as
follows:
(1) Permitted home occupations:
(a) All home occupations permitted in the RR, R-1, R-2 and R-3
Districts.
(b) Antique shops.
(c) Bookbinding.
(d) Catering service or food preparation.
(e) Furniture repair.
(f) Gift shops.
(g) Home crafts.
(h) Lawn mower repair.
(i) Produce.
(j) Saw sharpening.
(k) Taxidermy.
(l) Veterinary uses (including care, grooming or boarding).
(m) Uses determined by the Zoning Officer to be of the same
general character as those listed in Subsection B(1).
§ 195-99 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-99
144:684
(2) Standards. In addition to meeting all the requirements of the
zoning district in which they are located, all home occupations shall
also conform to the following operating standards:
(a) All home occupations shall be clearly incidental and secondary
to the use of the property for dwelling and agricultural
purposes and shall not alter the residential and agricultural
character of the premises.
(b) A home occupation may be conducted completely within a
dwelling unit and/or completely within an accessory building,
provided that any necessary building employed for home
occupation purposes shall be harmonious in appearance and
character with the agricultural area.
(c) No more than 600 square feet or 25% of the floor area
(whichever is less) of the dwelling unit or accessory building
may be devoted to the home occupation.
(d) Home occupation(s) may employ the residents of the property
on which they are conducted and one additional person.
(e) No additional points of access to any street, road or highway
intended to serve only the home occupation shall be permitted
unless necessary to provide safe and proper access to the
proposed use.
(f) Two off-street parking spaces in addition to the requirements
of Article XXII shall be required for each home occupation. Offstreet
parking shall not be located in any front yard.
(g) One vehicle used in the conduct of a home occupation is
permitted at the residence. The vehicle used in the conduct of
a home occupation shall be limited to one ton or less.
(h) One home occupation shall be permitted per dwelling.
C. General standards. The following standards shall apply to home
occupations located in the C, FRA, RR, R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts:
(1) No home occupation shall be conducted in such a manner that it
constitutes a nuisance. No home occupation shall employ on-street
parking or create traffic disturbance.
(2) No vehicle deliveries are permitted except those made by vehicles
allowed on residential streets in accordance with Chapter 187,
Vehicles and Traffic, Article III, Size, Weight and Type of Vehicle
and Load.
(3) A letter of adequacy, approved by the Township Sewage
Enforcement Officer, shall accompany the application for a home
occupation.
§ 195-99 PLUMBING § 195-99
144:685
§ 195-100. ECHO (Elder Cottage Housing Opportunity).243 [Added
12-19-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
ECHO housing cottages permitted in Zoning Districts C, FRA, RR, R-1, R-2,
and R-3 shall meet the following definition and standards:
D. Procedure. Applications for a home occupation permit shall be
submitted to the Zoning Officer on forms provided by the Township, and
shall be accompanied by the filing fee established by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors. If the person conducting the home occupation is
not the owner of the premises where the home occupation will be
conducted, written permission from the property owner must be
submitted to the Township along with the application. A floor plan
indicating both the dimensions of the dwelling unit or the accessory
building in which the home occupation will be conducted, and the
amount of square footage to be used for the home occupation itself,
must accompany the permit application.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED - TEMPORARY — A unit
having a front, side and rear yard(s) not attached to any other building
by any means. See illustration 7, Single-Family Detached Dwelling.244
DWELLING, TEMPORARY — A single unit which provides complete
independent living facilities for one or more persons with provisions for
living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
ECHO HOUSING (ELDER COTTAGE HOUSING OPPORTUNITY) —
Temporary detached dwelling unit placed on a property for occupancy
by either an elderly, handicapped, or disabled person(s) related, by
blood, marriage, or adoption, to the occupants of the principal dwelling,
and is detached from same.
B. Standards.
(1) ECHO housing shall provide independent living facilities, including
provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking, and bathroom facilities.
(2) Only one ECHO housing unit is permitted per parcel which houses
a principal dwelling. The single-family detached dwelling must be
owned by the principal dwelling's owner(s).
(3) The cottage shall have maximum square footage of 960 square feet
and a maximum of four occupants related by blood, marriage, or
adoption to the occupants of the principal dwelling.
243. Editor's Note: Former § 195-100, Operation and maintenance plans, was repealed 9-4-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-13.
244. Editor's Note: Illustration 7 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 195-99 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-100
144:686
(4) The legal owner(s) of the property which the ECHO housing will be
placed on shall occupy the principal dwelling for the duration that
the ECHO housing is located on the property.
(5) The Township Sewage Enforcement Officer (SEO) shall inspect any
on-lot sewage system and report on the adequacy for the additional
use, or the Water and Sewer Authority (WASA) shall approve
additional use of the public sewer system. The applicant shall
submit a letter from the SEO or WASA.
(6) ECHO housing shall be designed and constructed in accordance
with § 105-103H, Manufactured housing, Subsection H(1),
Purpose, H(2), Manufactured home classifications, and H(3),
Appearance standards; and Subsection H(3)(a), Roof, and H(3)(b),
Exterior siding, so that the appearance of the building remains that
of a single-family residence. The cottage entrance shall be located
on the side or in the rear of the building.
(7) ECHO housing shall be secured to a foundation/footing in
accordance with manufacturer's specifications and/or current State
Building Code as adopted by PAUCC, as amended.
(8) ECHO housing shall be provided with one off-street parking space
for every two occupants with direct access to a public right-of-way
(main road) for the intended occupant(s), in addition to the
required parking per § 195-141 for the principal dwelling.
(9) ECHO housing may not be installed or located within 10 feet, zero
inches of the principal dwelling and 10 feet, zero inches from
property lines. ECHO housing may be located in the side or rear
yards, and shall adhere to all side and rear yard setback
requirements for the principal dwelling.
(10) All utilities must be connected through the principal dwelling unit
(no submetering permitted).
(11) No new mailing address shall be assigned to the apartment.
(12) A temporary use permit will be required each year on or before the
next working day from the anniversary date of temporary zoning
use and occupancy permit issuance. Each year, the legal owner(s)
of the property which the ECHO housing is placed on must submit a
written request to renew the temporary use permit with the Zoning
Officer of West Hanover Township. The minimum zoning permit fee
(administration, processing and inspection) applies per Township
fee resolution approved by the Board of Supervisors each calendar
year. (Fees shall be subject to change annually without notice.)
(13) An ECHO housing temporary use permit will terminate when:
(a) The approved occupant or occupants residing in the ECHO
housing has/have passed away.
§ 195-100 PLUMBING § 195-100
144:687
§ 195-101. Stormwater management and drainage. [Amended
4-4-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-2]
All stormwater management and drainage facilities shall be provided and
maintained in accordance with Chapter 173 and Chapter 168, Stormwater
Management, of the Township Code. A D/SWM plan and a letter of approval
from the Township Engineer, as applicable, shall be provided prior to the
issuance of a SWM permit and/or zoning permit.
§ 195-102. Waste and sewage disposal.
(b) The legal owner(s) moves off site and no longer lives within the
subject property as required by § 195-100B(4).
(c) The subject property has been sold to a person not related by
blood.
(14) The legal owner(s) of the property which the ECHO housing is
placed on must submit a temporary access easement agreement
issued by Township with a full site plan for recording at the
Dauphin County Court House prior to permits being issued.
(15) The legal owner(s) of the ECHO housing property must post a bond
of $25,000 with a bonding company authorized to do business in
Pennsylvania and must be maintained as long as ECHO housing is
on site. ECHO housing shall be removed from the site within 180
days after it is no longer occupied by the person(s) approved under
the permit for intended use by the Zoning Officer. If it is not
removed within 180 days, the Township will remove the building
and charge the actual cost against the bond. If the cost of removal
exceeds the bond, the balance will be charged to the landowner. If
payment is not received within 30 days of removal, a lien will be
placed against landowner's property. [NOTE: Once the Zoning
Officer has performed a final inspection to close out the permit and
verify that the ECHO housing has been removed from the subject
property and the existing ground has been restored to
preplacement conditions (grading, and grass seeding replaced),
the Township then will process the release of the bond to the legal
owner of the property noted on the permit application issued
accordingly.]
A. All methods and plans for the on-lot disposal of sewage or wastes shall
be designed in accordance with all applicable regulations. A sewage
permit or written authorization shall be obtained from the Sewage
Enforcement Officer or the PADEP, as applicable, prior to the issuance
of a zoning permit.
B. Where public sewage is available, a sewage permit or written
authorization from the Water and Sewer Authority shall be required
prior to the issuance of a zoning permit. [Amended 10-7-1996 by
Ord. No. 1996-11]
§ 195-100 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-103
144:688
§ 195-103. General regulations for specific uses. [Added 8-15-2005
by Ord. No. 2004-12245]
A. Adult entertainment uses in I District. Adult entertainment uses located
in the I District shall meet the following requirements: [Amended
9-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-13]
(1) An adult use shall be 1,000 feet from any residential use or the
outside perimeter of the C, FRA, RR, R1, R2, R3, NC or BE District
boundary.
B. Child/adult care centers in R3, NC and BE Districts. Child/adult care
centers located in the R3, NC or BE Districts shall meet the following
requirements:
(1) Operators shall comply with all Pennsylvania Department of Public
Welfare licensing and/or regulations and any other local, state or
federal regulations.
(2) Playground facilities shall not be located in any front yard.
(3) Playground facilities shall be visually screened with a fence and
Level One screening in accordance with § 195-124.
(4) All play equipment permanently installed at such play facilities
shall meet United States Consumer Product Safety Standards.
(5) The facility shall be licensed by the appropriate state agency.
(6) In the R3 and NC Districts, the architectural style of the building
shall be in keeping with the residential character of the
neighborhood.
C. Big box stores shall be permitted in the CH District only and shall meet
the following requirements: [Added 4-6-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-02246]
(1) The structure shall be constructed, at a minimum, to LEED
(Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) Silver
Certification standards.
245. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former §§ 195-103, Adult entertainment uses
in IE District; 195-104, Child/adult care centers in R-3, HH and V Districts; 195-105, Golf
courses in FRA District or open space; 195-106, Flea markets permitted in CH District;
195-107, Manufactured home parks; 195-108, Manufactured housing; 195-109, Motor
vehicle retail sales in HH, Village and CH District; 195-110, Public utilities and facilities;
195-111, Passive recreation areas in C District; 195-112, Temporary construction and
office trailers; 195-113, Vehicle-related services in CH and I Districts; and 195-120,
Animal kennels, veterinary services and animal services in HH and V Districts, all as
amended. In addition, this ordinance provided for the redesignation of former §§ 195-114
through 195-119 as §§ 195-104 through 195-109.
246. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections C
through T as Subsections D through U, respectively.
§ 195-103 PLUMBING § 195-103
144:689
(2) All outdoor storage shall be secured and behind Level III screening
around the storage area itself (in addition to any required buffering
and screening at the property boundaries).
(3) All loading docks shall be screened from public view.
(4) All chemicals, fertilizers and pesticides shall be stored indoors,
away from any floor or storm drains.
(5) Stormwater volume reduction opportunities shall be implemented
where practicable. (See Chapter 168, Stormwater Management.)
(6) Required parking in excess of 500 spaces shall require double the
landscaping requirements or normal parking for the intended use.
(7) Parking garages or underground customer parking may be utilized
to relieve the requirements of double the landscaping identified
above.
(8) Parking areas shall not be used for overnight sleeping
accommodations or for motor vehicle repairs.
(9) There shall be no exterior speakers or sound equipment, except as
required by emergency management agencies.
(10) Access driveways and fire lanes shall be physically separated from
parking areas by curbs or islands and shall be long enough to
prevent stacking of vehicles onto public roads. These access
driveways and fire lanes shall separate the pubic parking areas
from the building and shall be designated as "one way."
(11) On-site pedestrian paths shall be clearly defined, both internally
and connecting to other developments and population centers.
(12) Traffic impact studies shall extend to all roads and intersections
within a one-half-mile radius of the project.
(13) Fire hydrants shall be installed around the access road ring with
the same frequency as public roads in new developments (roughly
every 600 feet), at locations to be recommended by the Public
Safety Advisory Board.
(14) Security cameras shall be installed in all areas of the parking lots,
and monitored on a twenty-four-hour basis.
(15) Shopping cart return islands shall be provided in the public parking
areas at a rate of one location for every 300 parking spaces if
shopping carts are allowed beyond the store entrance/exit.
(16) All other provisions of this chapter apply.
D. Golf courses in FRA District or open space. Golf courses located in the
FRA District or open space are regulated as follows:
§ 195-103 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-103
144:690
(1) The minimum lot area for a golf course shall be 100 acres.
(2) No golf hole shall be arranged so that golf balls will be driven
across any building, road or parking lot.
(3) Any points where the golf course or golf paths cross a road, the
road shall be signed to warn motorists and pedestrians.
(4) No outdoor storage or maintenance equipment or golf carts shall
be permitted.
E. Livestock permitted in the C, FRA, and RR Districts shall meet the
following regulations: [Added 4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2008-07247]
(1) There shall be no limit on the number of domestic pets or poultry
kept in or at a residence as long as the health and welfare of the
residents and the animals are protected and as long as the pets or
poultry do not become a nuisance to the neighbors.
(2) Manure piles must be managed according to § 195-103O.
(3) In any Environmental Protection Overlay District, no steep slopes
areas may be used for the purpose of pasturing animals. Paddock/
corral areas shall require stormwater and erosion controls to be
installed.
(4) All provisions of Chapter 67, Animals, shall apply.
F. Flea markets permitted in the CH District. Flea markets permitted in
the CH District shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Parking shall be in accordance with Article XXI with the following
exceptions;
(a) Off-street parking shall consist of three impervious parking
spaces per vendor, and one nonimpervious parking space per
vendor as overflow parking.
(b) All parking shall be off street.
(c) No compact parking spaces are permitted.
(d) Parking location shall be in accordance with § 195-142.
(2) All flea markets and their supporting facilities, including but not
limited to parking and rest areas, must be set back at least 100 feet
from any street or adjoining property lines.
(3) Access to the flea market shall not be through a residential
development.
(4) Overnight lodging shall be prohibited.
247. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the relettering of former Subsections D
through S as Subsections E through T, respectively.
§ 195-103 PLUMBING § 195-103
144:691
G. Manufactured home parks. Manufactured home parks permitted in the
Neighborhood Commercial (NC) District and hereafter erected shall be
laid out and improved in conformance with the Article VIII of Chapter
173, Subdivision and Land Development.
H. Manufactured housing.
(1) Purpose. It is the intent of this subsection to provide for an
alternative form of housing by permitting the use of Class A
manufactured housing, as defined herein, on single lots of record
where similar site-built units are permitted. Class A manufactured
housing shall be subject to the requirements and procedures
contained within this subsection to assure acceptable similarity in
the exterior appearance between Class A manufactured housing
and site-built dwellings that have been or might be constructed in
the Township subject to the limitations contained herein.
(a) Permitted placement.
[1] Modular homes shall be permitted in all zoning districts
where single-family dwelling units are permitted.
[2] Class A manufacture homes shall be permitted in all
zoning districts where single-family dwelling units are
permitted.
(b) Mobile homes shall be prohibited.
(2) Manufactured home classifications.
(a) Class A-New are manufactured homes meeting appearance
standards as defined in Subsection H(3).
(b) Class B-New are manufactured homes which do not meet the
appearance standards as defined in Subsection H(3).
(c) Class C-Used are manufactured homes which meet the
appearance standards as defined in Subsection H(3) which,
upon inspection of the Code Enforcement Officer or his
designee, are found to be in excellent condition and safe and fit
for residential occupancy.
(d) Class D-Used are manufactured homes which do not meet the
appearance standards as defined in Subsection H(3) which,
upon inspection of the Code Enforcement Officer or his
designee, are found to be in fair or poor condition and not safe
and/or fit for residential occupancy.
(3) Appearance standards.
(a) Roof.
§ 195-103 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-103
144:692
[1] Roof pitch. The roof must be pitched so there is at least a
three-inch vertical rise for each 12 inches of horizontal
run.
[2] Roof overhang. The overhang shall be architecturally
integrated into the design of the dwelling.
[3] The roof must consist of shingles or other material
customarily used for conventional dwellings. Roll roofing
is unacceptable.
[4] All manufactured homes shall have a controlled method of
water disposal from roofs which collects and discharges all
roof drainage to the ground surface at least five feet from
foundation walls or to an approved drainage system to
ensure that water will not accumulate under the
manufactured home and cause deteriorating effects from
humidity.
(b) Exterior siding.
[1] Permitted materials for exterior side shall include wood,
masonry or stucco finish, vertically or horizontally grooved
aluminum, vinyl siding or lap siding.
[2] Exterior siding material shall extend to ground level,
except that when a concrete or masonry perimeter
foundation is used, the siding material need not extend
below the top of the foundation.
[3] Use of flat or corrugated sheet metal for exterior walls or
roof covering is prohibited.
(c) Size.
[1] A manufactured home shall have a minimum dimension at
floor of 22 feet.
[2] Gross floor area shall be a minimum of 660 square feet.
§ 195-103 PLUMBING § 195-103
144:693
(d) Orientation of the lot. The manufactured home must be
oriented on the lot so that its long axis is parallel with the
street. A perpendicular or diagonal placement may be
permitted if there is a building addition so that the narrow
dimension of the unit, as so modified and facing the street, is
no less than 50% of the unit's long dimension. For the purpose
of this subsection, a building addition shall be an enclosed
addition which must be an integral part of the manufactured
home, such as but not limited to an attached garage, family
room or other habitable living space. The building addition
must be a minimum width of eight feet.
§ 195-103 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-103
144:694
(e) Permanent utility connections required. Manufactured homes
approved for placement within the Township shall have utilities
permanently installed in accordance with the CABO One- and
Two-Family Dwelling Code requirements and the NFPA 70,
National Electrical Code for one- and two-family dwellings.
(f) Perimeter foundation. Manufactured homes approved for
placement within the Township shall be set onto an excavated
area with foundations, footings and crawl space or basement
walls constructed in accordance with the CABO One- and Two-
Family Dwelling Code. The space between the floor joist of the
manufactured home and the excavated underfloor grade shall
be closed with a permanent blocked foundation and contain a
plastic vapor barrier at ground level.
(g) Installation requirements.
[1] In addition to the perimeter foundation requirements,
manufactured homes approved for placement within the
Township shall be anchored to the ground in accordance
with the manufacturer's specifications on a properly
engineered foundation and shall meet the requirements of
the CABO One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code.
[2] The hitch, axle and wheels must be removed.
I. Motor vehicle retail sales in CH District. Motor vehicle retail sales, new
and used, located in the CH District, shall meet the following
requirements.
(1) Vehicle display areas shall be paved.
(2) Vehicle display areas shall not block the view of access drives or
streets.
(3) Vehicle display areas shall not be located in the public right-of-way.
§ 195-103 PLUMBING § 195-103
144:695
(4) Outdoor storage (i.e., parts, vehicles, dismantled vehicles, wrecked
vehicles, equipment, lubricants, fuel or other materials) is only
permitted when located within a screened fence or wall. The
screened fence or wall shall be Level Three screening in
accordance with § 195-124.
(5) Service-related activities shall be conducted within an enclosed
building.
J. Public utilities and facilities.
(1) When located in the C, FRA, R-R, R-1, R-2, R-3, and NC Districts,
the following requirements shall apply:
(a) Outdoor storage areas shall not be permitted.
(b) The external design of the building shall be in conformity with
the buildings in the district and/or surrounding community.
(c) No storage of vehicles or equipment used in the maintenance
of the utility shall be permitted.
(d) No equipment causing noise, vibration, smoke, odor or
hazardous effects shall be installed within a transmission or
distribution facility.
(2) When located in the BE, CH, I and IE Districts, the following
requirements shall apply:
(a) Outdoor storage areas are permitted. These areas must be
screened with Level Three screening in accordance with
§ 195-124.
(b) The public utility and/or facility shall be enclosed with a chain
link fence, six feet in height topped with barbed wire or
enclosed with Level Three screening in accordance with
§ 195-124.
(3) In addition to the requirements of Subsections J(1) and 2 above,
cellular and personal communications system facilities shall meet
the following requirements:
(a) All cellular towers shall be freestanding structures, limited in
height to 200 feet.
(b) Setbacks from the base of a freestanding cellular tower. If a
new antenna support structure is constructed, the minimum
distance between the base of the antenna support structure
and any property line shall be the distance of the fall zone as
determined by an engineering statement from a licensed and
registered professional engineer, plus 10 feet.
(c) In order to reduce the number of antenna support structures
needed in the Township, the support structure shall be
§ 195-103 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-103
144:696
required to accommodate other users (i.e., cellular phone
companies, police, fire, ambulance, Township or other
emergency agencies).
(d) Cellular and personal communications system facilities shall
be licensed by the Federal Communications Commission.
(e) Lighting shall comply with §§ 195-131 and 195-132. Lighting
shall be approved by the Federal Aviation Administration and
the Federal Communications Commission requirements.
K. Passive recreation areas in C District. Passive recreation areas, such as
but not limited to day camps, picnic areas, archery ranges, and gun
clubs, located in the C District are regulated as follows: [Amended
9-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-13]
(1) A minimum of one trash dumpster shall be provided on the site.
(2) Adequate trash collection and removal shall be provided. A
maintenance plan shall be required to ensure that the premises is
monitored for trash and debris.
(3) At least one portable toilet shall be provided, except if permanent
facilities are available.
(4) Parking may consist of stabilized nonimpervious surface, i.e.
gravel.
L. Temporary construction and office trailers.
(1) Temporary construction trailers:
(a) Shall be permitted in all zoning districts during construction.
(b) When construction ceases, the temporary construction trailer
must be removed.
(c) Shall be permitted while construction is in progress and a valid
building permit has been issued for the building.
(d) Shall not be used as a dwelling.
(e) Shall meet the setback requirements in the district where it is
located.
(2) Temporary office trailers:
(a) Shall not be permitted to remain on the property for more than
two years, except as extended by the Zoning Officer upon a
showing of good cause by the applicant.
(b) Shall be a permitted use in the NC, BE and CH Districts.
(c) Shall not be used as a dwelling.
§ 195-103 PLUMBING § 195-103
144:697
(d) Shall not be used for public use.
(e) Shall meet the setback requirements in the district where it is
located.
M. Vehicle-related services in the CH and I Districts. Vehicle-related
services, such as but not limited to auto body shops, automobile
garages and automobile service stations, located in the CH and I
Districts shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Outdoor storage (i.e., parts, vehicles, equipment, lubricants, fuel or
other materials) is only permitted when located within a screened
fence or wall. The screened fence or wall shall be Level Three
screening in accordance with § 195-124.
(2) Service related activities shall be considered within an enclosed
building.
N. Animal kennels, veterinary services and animal services in NC and CH
Districts. Animal kennels, veterinary services and animal services
located in the NC and CH Districts shall meet the following
requirements.
(1) The minimum lot size shall be 1.5 acres.
(2) All structures related to the use shall be located at least 100 feet
from the neighboring dwelling. [Amended 9-4-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-13]
(3) Fenced areas where animals may roam shall be at least 25 feet
from any lot line.
(4) Outdoor animal enclosures such as pens, holding areas and run
enclosures or fenced areas shall be limited to rear yards.
(5) Outdoor enclosures or fenced areas for animals must be screened
with Level Two screening in accordance with § 195-124.
[Amended 9-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-13]
(6) The area where animals are kept shall be maintained in a clean,
safe and sanitary condition.
(7) The indoor area where animals are kept shall be soundproofed in a
manner to prevent sound and odor from traveling outside, such as
solid-core doors, sound-absorbent ceilings and forced-air
ventilation. [Amended 9-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-13]
(8) Cremation or disposal of dead animals shall not be permitted.
O. No-impact home-based business. No-impact home-based businesses
shall be a permitted accessory use where specified in the district
regulations in accordance with the following requirements. The
business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the
property and surrounding residential uses.
§ 195-103 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-103
144:698
(1) The business shall employ no employees other than family
members residing in the dwelling.
(2) There shall be no display or sale of retail good and no stockpiling or
inventory of a substantial nature.
(3) There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including,
but not limited to, parking, signs or lights.
(4) The business activity may not use any equipment or process which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or
electronic interference, including interference with radio or
television reception, which is detectable in the neighborhood.
(5) The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally associated with
residential use in the neighborhood.
(6) The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling
and may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.
(7) The business may not involve any illegal activity.
P. Manure storage facilities. Manure storage facilities shall be a permitted
accessory use where specified in the district regulations in accordance
with the following requirements.
(1) Construction and subsequent operation of the waste storage
facility shall be in accordance with all applicable state and federal
regulations, including, but not limited to the Pennsylvania Nutrient
Management Act.
(2) All manure/animal waste shall be properly stored and disposed of
so as not to be objectionable at the site's property line.
(3) Setback requirements. From any property line, at least 100 feet.
Q. Forest management activities. These regulations are provided in order
to preserve forests and the environmental and economic benefits that
they provide as well as to encourage the owners of forestland to
continue to use their land for forestry purposes, including the long-term
production of timber, recreation, wildlife and amenity values. Forestry
activities are permitted by right in all districts subject to the
regulations of any or all environmental protection overlay districts. The
following requirements are applicable to all timber harvesting within
the Township. These provisions do not apply to the cutting of trees for
the personal use of the landowner. [Amended 2-7-2011 by Ord. No.
2010-4]
(1) Notification of commencement or completion. For all timber
harvesting operations that are expected to exceed two acres, the
landowner or designated representative shall notify the Township
Zoning Officer at least seven business days before the operation
§ 195-103 PLUMBING § 195-103
144:699
commences and within seven days before the operation is
completed. No timber harvesting shall occur until the notice has
been provided and permits obtained as required. Notification shall
be in writing and shall specify the land on which harvesting will
occur, the expected size of the harvest area and, as applicable,
the anticipated starting or completion date of the operation and
harvesting plan. This written notification shall also specify any
private roads affected, dates of effect, plans to restore any damages
to private roads and contact information for the harvesting
operations submitted to owners abutting the private road used to
access the harvesting site.
(2) Preparation of a harvesting plan under forest management
activities.
(a) Every landowner shall submit prepare a written harvesting
plan in the form specified in this section:
[1] If improvement cutting of more than 10 acres is involved;
or
[2] If clear-cutting of more than two acres is involved.
(b) No timber harvesting shall occur until the plan has been
prepared, reviewed by the county and Township, permits
issued by the Township, and proper notification of
commencement is provided to the Township. The provisions of
this plan shall be followed throughout the operation. The plan
shall be available at the harvest site at all times during the
operation and shall be provided to the Township Zoning Officer
upon request.
(3) Responsibility for compliance. The landowner and the timber
harvesting operator shall be jointly and severally responsible for
complying with the terms of the harvesting plan.
(4) Contents of the harvesting plan.
(a) Use the "Erosion and Sediment Control Plan for a Timber
Harvesting Operation," Form No. DEP 3930-FM-WM0155, rev.
7/2004, or as amended;
(b) Each harvesting plan shall include a site map containing the
following information:
[1] Site location and boundaries, including both the
boundaries of the property on which the timber harvest
will take place and the boundaries of the proposed harvest
area within that property;
[2] Significant topographic features related to Township
environmental protection overlay districts;
§ 195-103 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-103
144:700
[3] Location of all earth disturbance activities such as roads,
landings and water control measures and structures;
[4] Location of all crossing of waters of the commonwealth;
and
[5] The general location of the proposed operation to
Township and state highways, including any accesses to
those highways.
(5) Compliance with state law and local ordinances. The harvesting
plan shall address and comply with the requirements of all
applicable state and local laws and regulations, including, but not,
limited to, the following:
(a) Erosion and sedimentation control regulations contain in 25
Pa. Code Chapter 102, promulgated pursuant to the Clean
Streams Law (35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.), and § 195-97 of the
Township Code of Ordinances.
(b) Stream crossing and wetlands protection regulations
contained in 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 105, promulgated pursuant
to the Dam Safety and Encroachments Act (32 P.S. § 693.1 et
seq.), and Article XVI of Chapter 195 of the Township Code of
Ordinances.
(c) Stormwater management plans and regulations issued
pursuant to the Storm Water Management Act (32 P.S. § 680.1
et seq.) and Chapter 168, the Township's Stormwater
Management Ordinance.
(6) Relationship of state and local laws, regulations and permits to the
harvesting plan. Any permits required by state laws and
regulations shall be attached to and become part of the harvesting
plan and shall be attached to Township permit applications. An
erosion and sedimentation pollution control plan that satisfies the
requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102 and § 195-97 of the
Township Code of Ordinances shall also satisfy the minimum
requirements for the harvesting plan and associated map specified
previously, provided that all information required by these
subsections is included or attached.
(7) Responsibility for road maintenance and repair; road bonding. The
landowner and the timber harvesting operator shall be responsible
for repairing any damage to Township roads caused by traffic
associated with the timber harvesting operation to the extent the
damage is in excess of that caused by normal traffic. Pursuant to 67
Pa. Code Chapter 189, the Township may require the landowner or
timber harvesting operator to furnish a bond to guarantee the
repair of such damages, upon approval by the Board of
Supervisors.
§ 195-103 PLUMBING § 195-103
144:701
(8) Exemptions from forest management requirements: the removal of
dead or diseased trees or invasive species, the cutting of trees for
personal firewood consumption by the landowner, or with the
landowner's permission, and the operation of orchards, Christmas
tree farms, or nursery stock.
(9) Stormwater management calculations. Any land development plan
submitted within five years of forest management activities shall
use pre-construction figures for stormwater runoff based upon
forested land in good condition. (See Chapter 168, Stormwater
Management, for additional requirements.)
R. Bars to be located in the NC District are regulated as follows:
(1) The applicant shall provide evidence that the bar meets the
following standards:
(a) All buildings and structures shall be designed to be compatible
to the residential neighborhood. To the best extent possible,
the buildings and structures should be designed to have the
exterior appearance of a residence.
(2) The applicant shall provide evidence that the proposed use will not
be detrimental to adjoining properties with regard to the following:
(a) Noise.
(b) Light.
(c) Hour of operation.
(d) Litter.
(e) Waste disposal.
(f) Loitering.
(g) Security.
(h) Adequate screening and/or buffering.
(3) An operation and maintenance plan shall be furnished and
implemented by the applicant in accordance with Article XVIII,
§ 195-100.
S. Wind energy facilities. [Added 4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04248]
(1) A narrative describing the proposed wind energy facility, including
an overview of the project, the project location with site plan, the
approximate generating capacity of the facility, details of the wind
turbines to be constructed, along with ancillary structures.
248. Editor's Note: Former Subsections S through U were redesignated as Subsections T
through V, respectively, pursuant to this ordinance.
§ 195-103 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-103
144:702
(2) An agreement between the landowner and the operator indicating
permission of the landowner shall be provided.
(3) Evidence of no harm to wildlife and birds along the Kittatinny
Flyway shall be provided with the land development plan.
(4) The operator shall be a signatory to the Pennsylvania Game
Commission Wind Energy Voluntary Cooperation Agreement.
(5) Copies of comments from all reviewing agencies shall be provided.
(6) No limit on turbine height.
(7) Redundant aerodynamic overspeed braking controls shall be
mandatory.
(8) The tower supporting the nacelle and generator shall be, at a
minimum, 1.5 times the turbine height from any property line and
from any residential dwelling unit.
(9) Lighting shall be kept to a minimum of a white strobe, and only if
required by the Federal Aviation Administration. Otherwise, no
lighting shall be permitted. [Amended 5-3-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-03]
(10) "Abandonment" shall be defined as being out of service for a
continuous twelve-month period, and either a letter explaining the
out-of-service period and requesting a time extension shall be sent
to the Township or decommissioning shall be initiated.
(11) Bonding of the cost of decommissioning shall be reviewed by the
Township Engineer and be provided as part of the land
development approval.
(12) Access around the base of the tower and any ancillary structures
shall be restricted via a six-foot chain link fence with locked gate.
(13)No signs shall be permitted in or on the facility other than the
manufacturer identification and electrical hazard warning signs.
[Amended 5-3-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-03]
(14) The tower shall be maintained as per the manufacturer's original
finish.
(15) All electrical lines connecting to the utility network shall be
underground.
(16) The wind energy facility shall meet all applicable building codes,
such as PAUCC, 34 Pa. Code § 403.42(e).
(17) The design of the wind energy facility shall meet and be certified by
the Underwriters Laboratories or similar certifying organizations.
§ 195-103 PLUMBING § 195-103
144:703
(18) The applicant shall make reasonable efforts to avoid any disruption
or loss of radio, television, telephones or similar signals and shall
mitigate any harm caused by the facility.
(19)Wind energy facilities shall have a visual screen from the public
right-of-way or be located greater than 300 feet from the public
right-of-way.
T. Work release facility in CH District. The applicant shall provide
evidence that the proposed facility shall meet the following standards:
[Added 2-17-2009 by Ord. No. 2008-18]
(1) Each building shall be at least 500 feet away from any residential
dwelling unit.
(2) The facility shall not be within 1,000 feet of any school, nor within
1,000 feet of another work release facility.
(3) The facility shall be licensed by the appropriate state or federal
agency.
(4) No more than 150 residents shall be allowed in any one structure.
(5) A specific use permit shall be issued for the first year, after which a
review is required for each subsequent two-year permit renewal.
Any change of ownership shall trigger a new cycle of use permits,
starting with a one-year permit.
(6) Signs identifying the use shall not be permitted.
(7) Twenty-four-hour on-site supervision shall be mandatory.
(8) Only nonviolent crime detainee residents shall be permitted to
reside in the premises.
(9) Any outdoor recreational or sitting/smoking area shall be secured.
(10) Level Three screening shall be provided along the sides and rear of
the property.
(11) Common cooking and eating facilities shall be provided.
(12) The facility shall be connected to public water and public sewer.
Documentation from the West Hanover Township Water and Sewer
Authority for capacity and compliance shall be provided.
(13) Adequate parking for residents, staff and visitors shall be provided.
U. Halfway house/treatment center in CH District. The applicant shall
provide evidence that the proposed facility shall meet the following
standards: [Added 2-17-2009 by Ord. No. 2008-18]
(1) The facility must be at least 500 feet from any residential dwelling
unit.
§ 195-103 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-103
144:704
(2) The facility must be at least 1/2 mile from any bar or establishment
serving alcoholic beverages, public recreation facility, elementary
or secondary school, or day-care center.
(3) No more than 150 residents shall be allowed in any one structure.
(4) A specific use permit shall be issued for the first year, after which a
review is required for each subsequent two-year permit renewal.
Any change of ownership shall trigger a new cycle of use permits,
starting with a one-year permit.
(5) Signs identifying use shall not be permitted.
(6) Twenty-four-hour on-site supervision shall be mandatory.
(7) Any and all medications shall be under lock and key, and with
records kept in accordance with state requirements.
(8) A fence with Level One screening shall be provided between this
facility and all adjoining properties.
(9) Common cooking and eating facilities shall be provided for the
residents.
(10) The facility shall be connected to public water and public sewer.
Documentation from the West Hanover Township Water and Sewer
Authority for capacity and compliance shall be provided.
(11) Adequate parking for residents, staff and visitors shall be provided.
(12) Any medication used in the treatment of the residents shall be
specifically identified in the use permit application.
V. Detention center in CH District. The applicant shall provide evidence
that the proposed facility shall meet the following standards: [Added
2-17-2009 by Ord. No. 2008-18]
(1) Each building shall be at least 1,000 feet away from any residential
dwelling unit.
(2) The facility shall not be within 2,000 feet of any school, nor within
2,000 feet of another work release facility, halfway house, or other
detention center.
(3) The facility shall be licensed by the appropriate state or federal
agency.
(4) No more than 500 residents in any one structure.
(5) A specific use permit shall be issued for the first year, after which a
review is required for each subsequent two-year permit renewal.
Any change of ownership shall trigger a new cycle of use permits,
starting with a one-year permit.
(6) Signs identifying the use shall not be permitted.
§ 195-103 PLUMBING § 195-103
144:705
§ 195-103.1. Medical marijuana. [Added 3-19-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-02]
(7) Twenty-four-hour on-site supervision shall be mandatory.
(8) Any outdoor recreational or sitting/smoking area shall be behind
solid walls at least 12 feet in height.
(9) Level Three screening shall be provided along the sides and rear of
the property.
(10) The facility shall be connected to public water and public sewer.
Documentation from the West Hanover Township Water and Sewer
Authority for capacity and compliance shall be provided.
(11) Adequate parking for staff and visitors shall be provided.
(12) Fences shall be allowed up to 20 feet in height and may be topped
with special security wiring.
(13) Security systems shall be tied directly in with the Pennsylvania
State Police Troop H headquarters.
(14) Complete backup power systems shall be installed.
(15) A buffer yard of 100 feet shall be provided outside any structure,
parking lot, or security fence and in which only grass shall be
planted and mowed.
(16) All current building code requirements shall apply.
A. Academic clinical research centers.
(1) Parking requirements will follow the parking schedule found in
Article XXII, § 195-141, Off-street parking regulations, and/or as
listed for colleges, universities, technical or fine arts schools, as
appropriate.
(2) An academic clinical research center may only grow medical
marijuana in an indoor, enclosed, and secure building which
includes electronic locking systems, electronic surveillance and
other features required by the DOH. The grower/processor facility
shall not be located in a trailer, cargo container, mobile or modular
unit, mobile home, recreational vehicle or other motor vehicle.
(3) All external lighting serving an academic clinical research center
must be shielded in such a manner to not allow light to be emitted
skyward or onto adjoining properties.
(4) A buffer planting is required where an academic clinical research
center adjoins a residential use or district.
B. Medical marijuana grower/processor.
§ 195-103 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-103.1
144:706
(1) A medical marijuana grower/processor may only grow medical
marijuana in an indoor, enclosed, and secure building which
includes electronic locking systems, electronic surveillance and
other features required by the DOH. The grower/processor facility
shall not be located in a trailer, cargo container, mobile or modular
unit, mobile home, recreational vehicle or other motor vehicle.
(2) The floor area of a medical marijuana grower/processor shall
include sufficient space for production, secure storage of marijuana
seed, related finished product cultivation, and marijuana-related
materials and equipment used in production and cultivation or for
required laboratory testing.
(3) There shall be no emission of dust, fumes, vapors, odors, or waste
into the environment from any facility where medical marijuana
growing, processing or testing occurs.
(4) Marijuana remnants and by-products shall be secured and properly
disposed of in accordance with the DOH policy and shall not be
placed within any unsecure exterior refuse containers.
(5) The grower/processor shall provide only wholesale products to
other medical marijuana facilities. Retail sales and dispensing of
medical marijuana and related products is prohibited at medical
marijuana grower/processor facilities.
(6) Growers/processors may not locate within 1,000 feet of the
property line of a public, private, or parochial school or day-care
center.
(7) All external lighting serving a medical marijuana grower/processor
must be shielded in such a manner to not allow light to be emitted
skyward or onto adjoining properties.
(8) Parking requirements will follow the parking schedule found in
Article XXII, § 195-141, Off-street parking regulations.
(9) A buffer planting is required where a medical marijuana grower/
processor adjoins a residential use or district.
(10) Entrances and driveways to a medical marijuana grower/processor
must be designed to accommodate the anticipated vehicles used to
service the facility.
(a) All accesses must secure the appropriate highway occupancy
permit (state or Township).
(b) The clear sight triangle found in Article XXI, § 195-138J, must
be considered and maintained.
(c) The driveway must be designed and improved to the standards
expressly described in Article XXI, § 195-138K, and § 173-25L
of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
§ 195-103.1 PLUMBING § 195-103.1
144:707
(11) Loading and off-loading areas within the structure are preferred. If
an external loading dock arrangement is designed, it should be
from within a secure environment.
C. Medical marijuana transport vehicle service.
(1) A traffic impact study is required where the office is operated.
(2) Parking requirements will follow the parking schedule found in
Article XXII, § 195-141, Off-street parking regulations.
(3) All external lighting serving a medical marijuana transport vehicle
service must be shielded in such a manner to not allow light to be
emitted skyward or onto adjoining properties.
(4) A buffer planting is required where a medical marijuana transport
vehicle service adjoins a residential use or district.
(5) Entrances and driveways to a medical marijuana transport vehicle
service must be designed to accommodate the anticipated vehicles
used to enter and exit the premises.
(a) All accesses must secure the appropriate highway occupancy
permit (state or Township).
(b) The clear sight triangle found in Article XXI, § 195-138J, must
be considered and maintained.
(c) The driveway must be designed and improved to the standards
expressly described in Article XXI, § 195-138K, and § 173-25L
of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
(6) If for some reason a medical marijuana product is to be temporarily
stored at a medical marijuana transport vehicle service facility, the
facility must be secured to the same level as a medical marijuana
grower/producer and dispensary.
(7) Loading and off-loading areas within the structure are preferred. If
an external loading dock arrangement is designed, it should be
from within a secure environment.
D. Medical marijuana dispensary.
(1) A medical marijuana dispensary must be legally registered in the
commonwealth and possess a current valid medical marijuana
permit from the DOH.
(2) A medical marijuana dispensary may only dispense medical
marijuana in an indoor, enclosed, permanent, and secure building
and shall not be located in a trailer, cargo container, mobile or
modular unit, mobile home, recreational vehicle or other motor
vehicle.
§ 195-103.1 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-103.1
144:708
(3) A medical marijuana dispensary may not operate on the same site
as a facility used for growing and processing medical marijuana.
(4) Medical marijuana dispensaries shall have a single secure public
entrance and shall implement appropriate security measures to
deter and prevent the theft of marijuana and unauthorized
entrance into areas containing medical marijuana.
(5) Permitted hours of operation of a dispensary shall be 8:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m. (of the same calendar day).
(6) A medical marijuana dispensary shall comply with the setback,
parking, landscaping, coverage, and building height requirements
of the applicable zoning district to determine the building envelope
and maximum allowable floor area. A medical marijuana dispensary
shall have an interior customer waiting area equal to a minimum of
25% of the gross floor area.
(7) A medical marijuana dispensary shall:
(a) Not have a drive-through service;
(b) Not have outdoor seating areas;
(c) Not have outdoor vending machines;
(d) Prohibit the administering of, or the consumption of, medical
marijuana on the premises; and
(e) Not offer direct or home delivery service.
(8) A medical marijuana dispensary may dispense only medical
marijuana to certified patients and caregivers and shall comply
with all lawful, applicable health regulations.
(9) A medical marijuana dispensary may not be located within 1,000
feet of the property line of a public, private or parochial school or a
day-care center. This distance shall be measured in a straight line
from the closest exterior wall of the building or portion thereof in
which the business is conducted or proposed to be conducted to the
closest property line of the protected use, regardless of the
municipality in which it is located.
(10) A medical marijuana dispensary shall be a minimum distance of
1,000 feet from the next nearest medical marijuana facility. This
does not include complementing or supporting businesses covered
by different definitions. This distance shall be measured in a
straight line from the closest exterior walls of the buildings or
portions thereof in which the businesses are conducted or
proposed to be conducted, regardless of the municipality in which
it is located. This separation distance does not apply to the distance
between the grower/processor or academic clinical research
§ 195-103.1 PLUMBING § 195-103.1
144:709
§ 195-104. Outdoor storage of recreation vehicles. [Added
10-7-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-11]
Within any residential district, or upon any property where the principal
use is a residential dwelling, outdoor storage of recreational vehicles, (i.e.,
boats, travel trailers, trucks and trailers used for transport) shall be
permitted subject to the following regulations.
centers and the specific dispensary they serve or with which they
partner.
(11) Any medical marijuana facility lawfully operating shall not be
rendered in violation of these provisions by the subsequent location
of a public, private or parochial school or a day-care center.
(12) All external lighting serving a medical marijuana dispensary must
be shielded in such a manner to not allow light to be emitted
skyward or onto adjoining properties.
(13) Parking requirements will follow the parking schedule found in
Article XXII, § 195-141, Off-street parking regulations, as listed for
medical and dental offices, including outpatient clinics.
(14) A buffer planting is required where a medical marijuana dispensary
adjoins a residential use or district.
(15) Entrances and driveways to a medical marijuana dispensary must
be designed to accommodate the anticipated vehicles used to
service the facility.
(a) All accesses must secure the appropriate highway occupancy
permit (state or Township).
(b) The clear sight triangle found in Article XXI, § 195-138J, must
be considered and maintained.
(c) The driveway must be designed and improved to the standards
expressly described in Article XXI, § 195-138K, and § 173-25L
of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
(16) Loading and off-loading areas within the structure are preferred. If
an external loading dock arrangement is designed, it should be
from within a secure environment.
A. Stored recreational vehicles shall not be connected to utilities,
including water and sewer.
B. Recreational vehicles shall be stored in a driveway or within the side or
rear yards. In no case shall a recreational vehicle be stored within a
building setback. On vacant lots, the vehicle must be stored behind the
required front yard setback line for principal uses of the district.
§ 195-103.1 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-104
144:710
§ 195-105. Outdoor storage of tires. [Added 10-7-1996 by Ord. No.
1996-11]
The outdoor storage of tires shall be permitted in the IE and CH Districts
only and shall be subject to the following regulations:
C. All areas used for storing recreational vehicles shall be maintained so
as to keep vegetation properly trimmed and debris or litter properly
disposed.
D. Stored recreational vehicles shall not be used as a dwelling.
E. Recreational vehicles must be currently registered and inspected.
[Added 9-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-13]
A. Outdoor storage of tires or tire-derived materials shall be within a sixfoot
solid screened fence with Level Three screening. [Amended
9-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-13]
B. Storage restrictions.
(1) When waste tires or tire-derived materials are stored outdoors,
each stockpile:
(a) Shall have a horizontal area not greater than 10,000 square
feet. [Amended 9-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-13]
(b) Shall have a vertical height not greater than eight feet.
(c) Shall be separated from any other waste tire stockpile by at
least 50 feet measured from the base of the stockpile. This area
shall be maintained free of waste, equipment and structures.
(2) No person shall store waste tires or tire-derived materials:
(a) In the one-hundred-year floodplain.
(b) Within 300 feet of a wetland.
(c) Within 300 feet measured horizontally from an occupied
dwelling unit.
(d) Within 300 feet of a watercourse. [Amended 9-4-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-13]
(e) Within 50 feet of any property line or fence. [Amended
9-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-13]
C. Open burning of waste tires or tire-derived materials shall be
prohibited.
D. Outdoor storage of tires or tire-derived materials shall meet all
Department of Environmental Protection regulations for the storage of
tires or tire-derived materials.
§ 195-104 PLUMBING § 195-105
144:711
§ 195-106. Outdoor storage of domestic composting. [Added
10-7-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-11]
The placement of framed enclosure(s) for compost as an accessory
residential use is permitted in accordance with the following requirements:
§ 195-107. Outdoor display of merchandise. [Added 10-7-1996 by
Ord. No. 1996-11; amended 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
The outdoor display of merchandise shall be permitted in the NC, CH, I and
IE Districts only and shall be subject to the following requirements:
§ 195-108. Trailers used for storage. [Added 10-7-1996 by Ord. No.
1996-11]
Storage within a trailer shall be prohibited within any zoning district.
E. Outdoor storage of tires or tire-derived materials shall meet all BOCA
Property Maintenance Code requirements.
F. Conditions conducive to the harboring of vectors (i.e., rats, mosquitoes,
etc.) shall be eliminated.
G. Upon cessation of waste tires or tire-derived materials storage
activities, the property owner or occupant shall immediately remove all
waste tires, tire-derived materials and residuals from the site, and shall
provide for the processing or disposal of such materials or wastes in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection regulations.
A. Domestic composting structures shall be subject to all yard
requirements for the district in which they are located.
B. Only waste materials from the residential use shall be deposited in the
compost, and in no case shall meat or meat by-products be composted.
C. All composts shall be properly maintained so as not to become a
nuisance to nearby properties.
A. Outdoor display of merchandise shall be permitted for retail sales only.
B. Outdoor display of merchandise shall not be considered outdoor
storage. Merchandise shall not be displayed outdoors on a continuous
basis. Merchandise displayed for more than 12 consecutive months
shall be considered outdoor storage. [Amended 9-4-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-13]
C. No outdoor display of merchandise shall be permitted in the public
right-of-way. [Amended 9-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-13]
§ 195-105 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-109
144:712
§ 195-109. Outdoor storage of merchandise. [Added 10-7-1996 by
Ord. No. 1996-11; amended 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
Outdoor storage of merchandise or stock-in-trade shall be permitted in the
NC, CH, I and IE Districts only and shall meet the following requirements:
§ 195-110. Planned business development. [Added 8-15-2005 by
Ord. No. 2004-12]
Planned business developments located in the BE Districts shall meet the
following requirements:
§ 195-111. Specific standards for commercial recreation areas in
CH and IE Districts. [Added 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-13]
A. Outdoor storage of merchandise or stock-in-trade shall be within a
screened fence area with Level One screening in accordance with
§ 195-124.
A. Accessory use standards.
(1) Accessory uses are permitted uses on the first floor only of
principal structures occupied by multiple tenants.
(2) Accessory uses are permitted to occupy no more than 20% of the
total square footage of any principal structure.
(3) Retail sales of goods, personal services or business personal
services shall be of a nature to support principal uses within the
campus style development.
B. Outside storage. Outside storage shall not be permitted.
C. Motor vehicle access. Direct access must be provided via a collector or
greater as identified in the Township's Comprehensive Plan.
D. Business campus circulation. The business campus development must
include a comprehensive circulation system consistent with the
Township's Master Ped/Path Plan and Comprehensive Recreation Plan.
The circulation system shall ensure connectivity within the
development as well as with surrounding neighborhoods.
E. Landscaped front yards. Within any lot submitted for subdivision
approval after the adoption of this section, a maximum of 80% of the
required minimum front yard setback areas shall be maintained in
landscaped green space. The intent is that the remaining twenty (20%)
percent would be used for driveways, fire lanes, visitor parking,
handicapped parking and walkways. Other vehicle parking is intended
to primarily be placed to the side or rear of buildings.
F. Facade treatments. Development should avoid metal or cinder block
construction. A minimum of 75% of the facades of buildings facing onto
streets consist of glass, brick or other decorative masonry.
§ 195-109 PLUMBING § 195-111
144:713
§ 195-112. Solar energy systems. [Added 5-4-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-09]
Solar energy systems shall be allowed in all zoning districts and shall meet
the following standards:
A. The applicant shall provide evidence that commercial recreation areas
shall meet the following standards:
(1) In addition to the parking standards required by Article XXII, the
Board of Supervisors may require an unimproved, grassed overflow
area to be provided for peak use periods. Such overflow parking
areas shall be accessible only from the interior driveways of the
permanent parking lot. Overflow parking areas shall be designed to
prevent vehicles from crossing adjoining property or directly
accessing adjoining roads.
(2) Any collection of admission and/or parking fees from booths or any
other structures, or any other means such as roaming parking
attendants, shall be set back and arranged to prevent vehicle
backups on adjoining roads during peak arrival hours.
(3) Any outside pedestrian waiting lines shall be provided with a means
of shade.
(4) All other requirements of land development according to Ch. 173,
Subdivision and Land Development, or Ch. 195, Zoning.
B. The applicant shall provide evidence that the commercial recreation
areas will not be detrimental to adjoining properties with regard to the
following:
(1) Noise.
(2) Light.
(3) Hours of operation.
(4) Litter.
(5) Waste disposal.
(6) Loitering.
(7) Security.
(8) Adequate screening and/or buffering.
A. Shall be designed so that all components of the system will not pollute
the environment if a failure occurs.
B. May be passive, photovoltaic, or hot water in nature.
C. All applicable zoning and building permits shall be obtained prior to
construction.
§ 195-111 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-112
144:714
§ 195-113. Wetland Protection Overlay District (WPOD). [Added
3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-01]
Establishment of WPOD. The WPOD shall apply to all lands in or within
50 feet of a nontidal wetland or mitigated wetlands located within the
Township. (See Illustration 16.249) The WPOD shall be based on a wetland
investigation by the applicant. The environmental limitations map of the
Comprehensive Plan may be used as a guide for determining the general
location of wetlands. Wetland delineations shall be performed in accordance
with the procedures of the PADEP as specified in the Federal Manual of
Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands and any subsequent
amendments thereto. Wetland mitigation shall be permitted. Wetland
mitigation shall be approved by PADEP. Permits obtained from the Army
Corps of Engineers and/or Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection shall take precedence over Township requirements for public
infrastructure and utilities.
§ 195-114. Bus shelters. [Added 5-4-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-07]
Accessory bus shelters shall meet the following standards:
D. If the collector is roof-mounted, documentation that the roof can
support the weight shall be provided.
E. Shall meet the height and setback restrictions for principal structures
and/or accessory structures, as specified in Chapter 195, Zoning.
F. No adjacent property owner shall be required to cut or remove any
vegetation or structures.
A. Shall be located a minimum of two feet outside of the normal road rightof-
way, or may be within additional land dedicated to the appropriate
state or local government as right-of-way, over and above that required
by the ordinance for streets.
B. Shall not be in an intersection sight triangle, nor in a driveway line of
sight.
C. The applicant shall provide a letter of consent from the property owner.
D. If the property owner consent is withdrawn, the applicant shall remove
the shelter within 15 days of notification of such withdrawal.
E. A letter of need and safety shall be provided with the application from
either the school district or public bus transportation authority.
F. The shelter shall not exceed 200 square feet in size.
G. The shelter shall have at least one transparent end facing oncoming
traffic and a transparent front facing the road.
249. Editor's Note: Illustration 16 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 195-112 PLUMBING § 195-114
144:715
§ 195-115. (Reserved)
§ 195-116. (Reserved)
§ 195-117. (Reserved)
§ 195-118. (Reserved)
§ 195-119. (Reserved)
§ 195-120. (Reserved)
H. The shelter shall be maintained in a clean, structurally sound condition
by the applicant, and any necessary repairs shall be made within 15
days of notification.
I. Signs shall cover no more than 15% of the total wall area of the
structure and shall not be posted on the transparent walls. Signs
require separate permits.
J. Any lighting elements shall not be visible from outside the shelter.
K. Private shelters solely for residents of the property are exempt from
requirements of this section but shall not have any advertising on them.
§ 195-114 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-120
144:716
ARTICLE XIX
Development Standards
[Amended 9-16-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-7; 7-20-1998 by Ord. No.
1998-6; 9-7-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-12]
§ 195-121. Purpose.
The Township recognizes that the process of development alters natural
topography and vegetation. Development creates impervious cover and
artificial light that can have a negative effect on the ecological balance
and visual character of an area by causing increases in air temperatures,
acceleration of runoff, erosion and sedimentation process, glare and noise
and incompatibilities of land uses. The Township intends to protect its
economic base and quality of life through the preservation and
enhancement of the unique natural beauty, environment and native plant
communities located within its boundaries. Recognizing that the
Comprehensive Plan promotes the protection of health, safety and welfare
of the public and encourages quality development, the Township declares
that this article is adopted for the following specific purposes, to:
§ 195-122. Buffering.250
Buffer yards required by this section are intended to separate different
land uses from each other and are intended to eliminate and/or minimize
nuisances such as dirt, litter, noise, glare, signs, unsightly buildings or
parking areas, and to provide spacing to reduce adverse impacts of noise,
A. Aid in stabilizing the environment's ecological balance within the
Township.
B. Provide buffering and visual screening between uses of different
character.
C. Enhance the Township's appearance.
D. Safeguard and enhance land values and protect public and private
investments.
E. Conserve energy.
F. Protect native plant communities, thereby supporting the ecosystem
and providing habitats for a variety of wildlife.
G. Allow for creativity in providing for buffering, landscaping and
screening.
H. Complement the existing Tree and Vegetation Preservation Ordinance
contained in Chapter 173, Subdivision and Land Development.
250. Editor's Note: Illustration 25 entitled "Planting Configuration of Buffer" is included at the
end of this chapter.
§ 195-121 PLUMBING § 195-122
144:717
light, odor or danger from fire and explosion. Buffer yards shall meet the
following requirements:
A. A buffer yard shall be located at the perimeter of the lot for any given
use and shall not be located in any portion of a public right-of-way or
proposed right-of-way.
B. Permitted uses in a buffer yard: stormwater management facilities as
long as it doesn’t infringe on screening requirements, underground
utility facilities, picnic areas, greenways or pedestrian walkways.
Buildings or storage of any kind shall not be permitted in a buffer yard.
[Amended 9-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-13]
C. A buffer yard and screening shall be provided between districts and
uses as follows: [Amended 8-4-2003 by 2003-10]
(1) A buffer yard of 50 feet shall be required between residential uses
or districts and nonresidential uses or districts. Level Three
screening shall be required within the buffer yard.
(2) A buffer yard of 25 feet shall be required between multifamily
residential uses or districts and single-family/two-family residential
uses or districts. Level One screening shall be required within the
buffer yard.
(3) A buffer yard of 50 feet shall be required between residential uses
or districts and industrial uses and districts. Level Three screening
shall be required within the buffer yard.
(4) A buffer yard of 25 feet shall be required between commercial uses
or districts and industrial uses or districts. Level Two screening
shall be required within the buffer yard.
(5) A buffer yard of 50 feet shall be provided where residential uses or
districts are adjacent to minor arterial streets. Level One screening
shall be required except in sight triangles. A buffer yard of 100 feet
shall be provided where residential uses or districts are adjacent to
interstate highways. Level Three screening shall be required.
[Amended 9-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-13]
(6) Buffer requirements in the Neighborhood Commercial (NC)
District. A standard buffer yard of 10 feet shall be provided
between any residential and nonresidential use located within the
Neighborhood Commercial (NC) District. Level One screening shall
be installed in the required buffer yard, except along parking areas
where Level Two screening shall be installed. [Amended
9-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-13]
D. Parking lots shall not encroach into a buffer yard. Buffer yards shall not
be used for parking.
E. A buffer yard shall not be required in front yards except as required in
Subsection C(5).
§ 195-122 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-123
144:718
§ 195-123. Landscaping.
It is the intent of this section to provide a set of minimum standards
for landscaping to improve and maintain community appearance, the
environment, rural character and value of properties within the Township
in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan. Landscaping shall be required
for any land development or major preliminary or major final subdivision.
A. Minimum required landscaping. Nonresidential and multifamily
residential land developments in the R-3, NC, BE, CH, I and IE Districts
shall have a minimum of 20% landscaping of the total gross lot area,
excluding building floor area, impervious surface and sensitive
environmental features defined in the Comprehensive Plan and Article
XVI, Environmental Protection Overlay District. [Amended 8-15-2005
by Ord. No. 2004-12]
(1) At least 60% of all trees, shrubs and groundcover required by this
section shall be native plants, except that a minimum of 30% of the
vegetation chosen for erosion control shall be native plants from
Subsection E(1), Vegetation acceptable for erosion control. Plants
chosen shall be appropriate for their intended function and location
based on plant characteristics in accordance with Subsection D(7),
native plants for the landscape. Plants chosen shall be appropriate
for their intended function and location based on plant
characteristics.
(2) The required landscaped area shall include a minimum of 12
deciduous or evergreen trees for each one acre with a minimum of
two-and-one-half-inch caliper at time of planting. As an alternative,
six trees for each one acre shall be required if deciduous trees are
four inches in caliper or greater at the time of planting, and
evergreen trees are nine feet in height or greater at the time of
planting. A combination of tree sizes is permitted where at least
one of larger sized trees may be substituted for two smaller sized
trees.
(3) Five deciduous shrubs or hedges may be substituted for one
deciduous tree for a maximum of 20% of the tree requirement.
(4) The preservation of existing deciduous or evergreen trees of fourinch
caliper or greater within the net lot area may be substituted
for 50% of the tree requirement. (Net lot area for this section shall
be total gross lot area minimum building floor area, impervious
surface and sensitive environmental features as defined in the
Comprehensive Plan and Article XVI, Environmental Protection
Overlay District.) The number of existing trees must meet or
exceed 50% of the number of trees required in Subsection A(1).
(5) The remaining area required to be landscaped shall be ground
cover.
§ 195-123 PLUMBING § 195-123
144:719
(6) Cost estimate for posting of securities in accordance with Chapter
173, Subdivision and Land Development.
(7) All trees, shrubs, hedges or ground cover that die or are destroyed
shall be replaced within six months.
B. Street trees. Shade trees shall be required along with all existing and
new streets within a subdivision or land development.
(1) Location. Street trees shall be installed along the street frontage or
both sides of the street, where applicable. Street trees shall be
planted along the street frontage within five feet of the right-of-way
line. Where trees are planted along street spacing shall depend on
the tree size as follows:
Tree Size at Maturity
(feet)
Planting Internal
(feet)
Large More than 40 50 to 70
Medium 30 to 40 40 to 50
Small Less than 30 30 to 40
(2) When the spacing interval exceeds 40 feet, small ornamental trees
may be placed between the large trees. If a street canopy effect is
desired, trees may be planted closer together, following the
recommendations of a landscape architect.
(3) Street trees shall be planted as not to interfere with utilities,
roadways, sidewalks, streetlights, clear sight triangles and safe
sight distance in accordance with Article VI and Exhibit VI of
Chapter 173, Subdivision and Land Development.
C. Minimum planting specifications, at the time of planting, except as
specified in § 195-124, Screening.
(1) Deciduous trees shall have a minimum caliper measurement of 21/
2 inches, measured a minimum of six inches above the soil line.
(2) Coniferous trees shall have a minimum height of six feet.
(3) Evergreen shrubs, except for those used as low ground covers,
shall have an average height of 20 inches.
(4) Deciduous shrubs shall have an average height of 30 inches.
(5) Trees with less than three inches in caliper shall be properly staked
or trees with more than three inches in caliper shall be guyed and
be properly protected for a period of one year from the date of
planting.
(6) Any nylon rope used in balling the tree must be cut and removed
from the root ball.
§ 195-123 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-123
144:720
(7) Trees and shrubs shall be hardy, not prone to disease or pests and
suitable for use as a screening hedge including dense foliage.
(8) Shrubs to be used on slopes steeper than 3 to 1 shall be chosen
from Appendix A of the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance (SALDO).251 Ground cover to be used on slopes steeper
than 3 to 1 shall be chosen from Appendix A of the SALDO, except
that no more than 50% of berm area may be composed of
ornamental grass or legume mixture. [Amended 9-4-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-13]
(9) Mulch for grass seed mix must be straw mulch as specified in
PennDOT Publication 408 ("Pub. 408"), except that slopes steeper
than 3 to 1 shall receive erosion control blankets/mats as specified
in Pub. 408. Mulch shall be placed around trees, shrubs and ground
cover. Mulch shall be shredded bark or other organic mulch, if
approved by Township officials, in continuous beds surrounding
vegetation. Mulch shall not be the sole cover but shall be used in
conjunction with vegetative ground cover which shall cover 95% of
the area within two years of planting. A system of staking, matting
and/or netting shall be installed on slope/mound areas steeper than
3 to 1 to be mulched, but that will not inhibit vegetative growth and
that will not be visible two years after planting.
(10) Stabilization measures shall include erosion control blankets or
mats as specified in PennDOT Pub. 408 for slopes steeper than 3 to
1.
(11) Landscaping trees for parking lot requirements shall be in
accordance with § 195-142J and K, General parking regulations.
[Added 9-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-13]
D. Landscape plan. All landscaping shall be drawn to scale on a site
development plan and submitted to the Zoning Officer prior to the
issuance of a zoning permit or with the land development or major
preliminary or final subdivision application. The landscape plan shall be
prepared and certified by a landscape architect licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The landscape plan shall contain the
following data as a minimum:
(1) An on-site characterization identifying type, size and height of
existing plant materials to be preserved. [Amended 9-4-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-13]
(2) A plant schedule describing plant materials, including names
(common and botanical), location, qualities, caliper sizes, heights,
spread, and spacing at installation.
(3) Location, height and type of plant material proposed for buffer
yards, screening and fencing.
251. Editor’s Note: See Appendix A at the end of Ch. 173.
§ 195-123 PLUMBING § 195-123
144:721
§ 195-124. Screening.
Screening shall be provided as required by this article. The purpose of
screening is to provide an effective visual barrier and to protect property
(4) The manner in which trees and shrubs are to be planted shall be
indicated on a tree and shrub planting detail.
(5) The manner in which lawn areas and ground cover are to be
planted shall be indicated on a ground cover detail.
(6) A description of how existing healthy trees are proposed to be
retained and protected from damage during construction should be
described in the construction detail.
(7) Size, height, location and material of proposed seating, lighting,
planters, sculptures and water features.
(8) Location and dimension of sight triangles as defined in the Chapter
173, Subdivision and Land Development.
E. Native plant requirements. The use of native species benefits land
developers by reducing landscape maintenance cost and will benefit the
community and the environment by reestablishing a native plant
community. Native plants shall be selected in accordance with Chapter
173, Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, Appendix A.
[Amended 9-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-13]
F. Maintenance plan. Landscaping required in this section shall be
maintained in a healthy, growing condition at all times. It shall be the
responsibility of the property owner of record or his delegated
representative to properly maintain and care for any landscape screen
or other treatment as approved by the Township. In order to ensure
proper maintenance of landscaping, a maintenance plan addressing the
following shall be required:
(1) The maintenance plan shall be prepared and certified by a
landscape architect, registered and licensed in the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
(2) Project narrative.
(3) Description of short-term maintenance procedures for 18 months
following the date of planting. [Amended 9-4-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-13]
(4) Long-term lawn and planting maintenance.
(5) Eighteen-month contractors' warranty of all lawn and plant
materials. [Amended 9-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-13]
(6) Warranty period begins when the maintenance bond for public
improvements begins. [Added 9-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-13]
§ 195-123 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-124
144:722
against traffic, trespass, noise, heat, glare, dust, unsightly or distracting
activity, to preserve property values and assure compatibility of uses.
A. The following list describes various levels of screening.
(1) Level One. This buffer shall contain screening materials which, at
maturity, provide intermittent visual obstruction from the ground
to a height of four feet, as well as intermittent visual obstruction
from a height of four feet to a height of 30 feet. Vegetative
screening materials within intermittent visual obstruction areas
shall contain horizontal openings no greater than 20 feet in width
upon the plant's maturity. Grouping of plant materials is
encouraged to achieve a more natural appearance. See Figure 1.252
[Amended 8-4-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-10]
(a) Evergreen trees: minimum five-foot planting height.
(b) Deciduous trees: minimum two-inch caliper and six-foot
planting height.
(c) Shrubs: eighteen-inch planting height, reaching a minimum of
30 inches within two years. All shrubs (deciduous or
evergreen) must have a minimum spread of 12 inches to 15
inches when planted.
(d) Minimum planting width: 10 feet.
(2) Level Two. This buffer shall contain screening materials which, at
maturity, provide semiopacity from the ground to a height of six
feet and intermittent visual obstruction from a height of six feet to a
height of 30 feet. Vegetative screening materials within
intermittent visual obstruction areas shall contain horizontal
openings no greater than 20 feet in width; and vegetative screening
material within semiopaque areas shall contain openings no
greater than 10 feet in width upon the plants' maturity. Grouping of
plant material is encouraged to achieve a more natural appearance.
See Figure 2.253 [Amended 8-4-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-10]
(a) Evergreen trees: minimum five-foot planting height.
(b) Deciduous trees: minimum two-inch caliper and six-foot
planting height.
(c) Shrubs: minimum eighteen-inch planting height, reaching a
minimum of 30 inches within two years. All shrubs (deciduous
and evergreen) must have a minimum spread of 12 inches to 15
inches when planted.
252. Editor's Note: Figure 1, Level One Cross Section, is included at the end of this chapter as
Illustration 26.
253. Editor's Note: Figure 2, Level Two Cross Section, is included at the end of this chapter as
Illustration 26.
§ 195-124 PLUMBING § 195-124
144:723
(d) Minimum planting width: 10 feet.
(3) Level Three. The buffer shall contain screening materials which, at
maturity, provide opacity from the ground to a height of 30 feet.
Vegetative screening materials within opaque areas shall contain
no horizontal openings upon the plants’ maturity. Trees within the
buffer shall consist primarily of Eastern white pine, Norway spruce
and Eastern red cedar grouped to achieve a desired opacity. All
plantings are required to be planted with sixty-percent native
species. Screening shall consist of the following: [Amended
9-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-13]
(a) Minimum six-foot-high freestanding/retaining wall, solid fence,
or berm (in accordance with Appendix B of the Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance254).
(b) Evergreen trees: minimum eight-foot tree planting height,
deciduous trees two-inch minimum caliper, six-inch planting
height, and shrubs with a minimum eighteen-inch planting
height, with a minimum spread of 12 to 15 inches when
planted.
(c) Minimum planting width: 12 feet.
B. Uses. The following specific uses or features shall be screened with a
Level Three screening from adjacent properties and from public view
from a street: [Amended 9-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-13]
(1) Dumpster and trash-handling areas.
(2) Loading docks.
(3) Outdoor storage or any material stocks or equipment, including but
not limited to motor vehicles, farm or construction equipment or
other similar items.
(4) Rooftop equipment shall be visually screened with a wall, fence or
permanent enclosure.
(5) Service entrances and public utility services.
(6) Basins and stormwater management facilities, except for
bioretention infiltration areas.
(7) Berm screening is required across the rear of through lots when
the rear road is a collector or higher classification. The standards
for berms shall be in accordance with Chapter 173, Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance, Appendix B.
254. Editor’s Note: Appendix B is included at the end of Ch. 173, Subdivision and Land
Development.
§ 195-124 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-124
144:724
§ 195-125. Lighting.
Lighting shall be required in subdivisions and land developments. These
lighting requirements provide appropriate standards to ensure adequate
nighttime safety and security while minimizing the spillover of light and
glare on operators of motor vehicles, pedestrians and land uses near the
light source. The Comprehensive Plan recognizes that proper lighting
design is an instrument for preserving rural character or creating a sense of
place within developments. However, it is the safety, welfare, nuisance and
hazardous aspects of lighting that form the basis of these regulations.
C. Maintenance. All required plantings shall comply with § 195-123E. All
required fences or walls shall be permanently maintained in good
condition and, whenever necessary, repaired and replaced.
A. Requirements. Exterior lighting shall be provided in parking areas,
pedestrian sidewalks and walkways and nonresidential driveway
intersections in accordance with the following standards. Lighting used
for security purposes shall also conform to the following standards.
These regulations permit an option of providing a lower light post for
luminaries with a no cutoff design or a higher pole, up to 60 feet, for
luminaries that totally cut off light spillover at a cutoff angle smaller
than 90º. The maximum height light post permitted shall be dependent
upon the amount of cutoff provided. Exterior lighting shall meet one of
the following standards:
(1) When the light source or luminaire has no cutoff:
Maximum
Permitted
Illumination
(footcandles)
Maximum
Permitted Height
of Luminaire
(feet)
Residential 0.2 10 feet
Nonresidential 0.3 20 feet
(2) When a luminaire has a total cutoff angle greater than 90º, the
maximum illumination and the maximum permitted luminaire
height shall be: [Amended 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
Zoning District
Maximum
Permitted
Illumination
(footcandles)
Maximum
Permitted Height
at Illumination
(feet)
Conservation 0.3 15
Agriculture 0.5 20
Rural Residential 0.5 20
R-1 0.5 20
§ 195-124 PLUMBING § 195-125
144:725
Zoning District
Maximum
Permitted
Illumination
(footcandles)
Maximum
Permitted Height
at Illumination
(feet)
R-2 0.75 25
R-3 0.75 25
NC 1.5 35
BE 1.5 35
Highway
Commercial
1.5 35
Interchange 2.0 40
Industrial Enterprise 2.0 40
(3) When a luminaire has a total cutoff of light at an angle less than 90º
and is located so that the bare light bulb, lamp, or light source is
completely shielded from the direct view of an observer five feet
above the ground at the point where the cutoff angle intersects the
ground, then the maximum permitted illumination and maximum
permitted height at the luminaire shall be as follows. (See
Illustration 20.255) [Amended 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
Zoning District
Maximum
Permitted
Illumination
(footcandles)
Maximum
Permitted Height
of Luminaire
(feet)
Conservation 0.5 20
Agriculture 1.5 30
Rural Residential 1.0 25
R-1 1.0 25
R-2 1.5 30
R-3 1.5 30
NC 2.0 35
BE 2.0 35
Highway
Commercial
3.0 40
Interchange 4.0 50
Industrial Enterprise 5.0 60
(4) Exemption for specified uses.
255. Editor's Note: Illustration 20 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 195-125 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-125
144:726
§ 195-126. Sidewalks. [Amended 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12;
9-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-13; 6-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-07]
The Comprehensive Plan recognizes the importance of providing a safe
and efficient circulation system that includes facilities for pedestrians. It
is the intent of this section to provide a set of minimum standards for
the location of sidewalks for the purpose of providing safe and convenient
transportation routes for pedestrians; protecting the public safety; reducing
traffic congestion by encouraging alternative modes of transportation;
(a) Because of their unique requirements for nighttime visibility
and their limited hours of operation, public and private
recreational uses such as ball diamonds, playing fields, tennis
courts and volleyball courts are exempt from the above
requirements. These uses must meet all other requirements of
this section and Article XX, § 195-132, Lighting.
(b) Outdoor public and private recreational uses specified above
shall not exceed a maximum permitted post height of 80 feet.
(c) Outdoor public and private recreational uses may exceed a
total cutoff angle of 90º, provided that the luminaire is shielded
to prevent light and glare spillover to adjacent residential uses.
The maximum permitted illumination at the interior buffer yard
line shall not exceed two footcandles.
(d) Low-level pedestrian lighting for sidewalks should be provided
as necessary for safety. Low-level sidewalk illumination for
nonresidential uses shall be between 0.5 to 0.10 footcandles.
Low-level sidewalk illumination for residential uses shall be
between 0.2 to 0.13 footcandles.
(5) Additional requirements.
(a) Flickering or flashing lights shall not be permitted.
(b) Light sources or luminaries shall not be located within buffer
yard areas except for pedestrian walkways.
(c) The location and type of lighting required by this article shall
be shown on the site plan submitted for development.
(d) Low-level pedestrian lighting for sidewalks should be provided
as necessary for safety. Low-level sidewalk illumination for
nonresidential uses shall be between 0.5 to 1.0 footcandle.
Low-level sidewalk illumination for residential uses shall be
between 0.2 and 0.3 footcandle.
(6) Nighttime lighting (from 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.) shall be reduced
by two-thirds of the limits imposed by this section, in order to
prevent light pollution while still allowing enough light for safe
ingress and egress. [Added 4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-02]
§ 195-125 PLUMBING § 195-126
144:727
promoting the recreational use of sidewalks; encouraging a social focus
for residents; and ensuring that pedestrian facilities are equal to or above
automobile-related facilities. Sidewalks shall be required along all internal
public or private roads serving multiple dwelling units or apartment
buildings on one lot and along all parking lot entrances.
A. Requirements. Sidewalks shall be required in the following locations:
(1) In the NC, BE, CH, I and IE Districts.
(2) Within 1,000 feet of the NC, BE, CH, I and IE Districts.
(3) Within R-3 Districts where the density equals or exceeds four
dwelling units per acre.
(4) Along any roadway served by mass transit.
(5) Within and along the perimeter of any land development that is a
pedestrian trip generator, such as schools, parks and recreation
facilities, community activity centers, employment concentrations,
and shopping and commercial centers.
B. Other required locations, placement and construction.
(1) In accordance with § 173-27A of Chapter 173, Subdivision and
Land Development, sidewalks are required in other locations.
(2) Placement. The placement of sidewalks shall be in accordance with
§ 173-27B of Chapter 173, Subdivision and Land Development.
(3) Construction. Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with
§ 173-25F(14) of Chapter 173, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 195-126 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-126
144:728
ARTICLE XX
Performance Standards
§ 195-127. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to provide appropriate standards relating
to the operation of commercial, industrial and residential uses throughout
the Township. Such operations and uses may create such excessive air
pollution, electromagnetic interference, fire and explosive hazards, glare,
heat, light, noise, odor, outdoor storage and waste disposal, vibration and
water pollution, as a deterrent to public health, comfort, convenience,
safety and welfare. This article is intended to require potential nuisances to
be measured factually and objectively; to ensure that all uses will provide
methods to protect the community from hazards and nuisances which can
be prevented by process of control and nuisance elimination; and to protect
activities from arbitrary exclusion or persecution based solely on the
nuisance production. These standards are, therefore, provided to protect
the public interest and promote public heath and welfare.
§ 195-128. Air pollution.
To protect and enhance the air quality in the Township, all sources of
air pollution shall comply with any and all regulations set forth by the
Federal Environmental Protection Agency and Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection. In addition, the following shall apply:
A. Odor. In any district, no odor shall be permitted at any lot line
exceeding the lowest amount set forth in Table III, Odor Thresholds, of
Chapter 5, Physiological Effects, of the Air Pollution Abatement Manual
of the Manufacturing Chemists Association, according to the latest
edition of such table for the compounds therein described. For
compounds not described in Table III, odor thresholds may be
established by methods indicated in Chapter 5 of the manual, and no
odor shall be permitted at any lot line exceeding the amount
determined by the application of such methods.
B. Smoke. For the purposes of grading the density or equivalent opacity of
smoke, the Ringlemann No. 1 from any chimney, stack, vent, opening or
combustion process is prohibited; however, smoke of a shade not to
exceed Ringlemann No. 3 is permitted for up to three minutes total in
any one eight-hour period.
C. Particulate matter.
(1) The rate of particulate matter emission from all sources within the
boundaries of any lot shall not exceed a net figure of one pound per
acre of lot area during any one-hour period, after deducting from
the gross hourly emission per acre the correction factors set forth
in the following table:
§ 195-127 PLUMBING § 195-128
144:729
§ 195-129. Electromagnetic interference.
In all districts, no use, activity or process shall be conducted which
produces electric and/or magnetic fields which adversely affect public
health, safety and welfare, including but not limited to interference with
normal radio, telephone or television reception from off the premises where
the activity is conducted.
§ 195-130. Fire and explosive hazards.
The BOCA National Fire Prevention Code shall regulate hazards of fire and
explosion arising from the storage, handling or use of substances, materials
or devices and from conditions hazardous to life, property or public welfare
in the occupancy of a structure or premises.
Allowance for Height of Emission*
Height of Emission Above
Grade
(feet)
Correction
(Pounds Per Hour Per Acre)
50 0.01
100 0.06
150 0.10
200 0.16
300 0.30
400 0.50
NOTE:
*Interpolation for intermediate values not shown in table.
(2) Determination of the total net rate of emission of particulate matter
within the boundaries of any lot shall be made as follows:
(a) Determine the maximum emission in pounds per hour from
each source of emission and divide this figure by the number of
acres of lot area, thereby obtaining the gross hourly rate of
emission in pounds per acre.
(b) From each gross hourly rate of emission derived in Subsection
C(1) above, deduct the correction factor (interpolating as
required) for height of emission set forth in the table, thereby
obtaining the net rate of emission in pounds per acre per hour
from each source of emission.
(c) Add together the individual net rates of emission derived in
Subsection C(2) above to obtain the total net rate of emission
from all sources of emission within the boundaries of the lot;
such total shall not exceed one pound per acre of lot area
during any one-hour period.
§ 195-128 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-131
144:730
§ 195-131. Glare and heat.
Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be conducted within an
enclosed building or with other effective screening in such a manner as to
make such glare or heat completely imperceptible from any point along the
property line. No heat from any use shall be sensed at any property line
to the extent of raising the ambient temperature of air or materials more
than 5º Fahrenheit. Any operation or activity that produces glare shall be
conducted so that direct or indirect light from the source shall not cause
illumination in excess of five-tenths footcandles measured at the property
line.
§ 195-132. Lighting.
Exterior lighting, except for overhead streetlighting and warning,
emergency, or traffic signals, shall be installed in accordance with Article
XIX, § 195-125, in such a manner that the light source will be sufficiently
obscured to prevent glare on public streets and walkways or into any
residential area. The installation or erection of any lighting which may be
confused with warning signals, emergency signals or traffic signals shall be
unlawful. Any lighting that produces glare shall not cause illumination in
excess of five-tenths footcandles measured at the property line.
§ 195-133. Noise.
In all zones, the sound-pressure level for all uses and activities shall not
exceed the decibel limits in the octave bands designated in the following
table and shall comply with the following standards:
A. Measurement. Lighting levels shall be measured in footcandles.
Measurement shall be taken with a direct reading portable light meter
or light-reading equipment recommended by the Township Engineer.
B. Method. Readings shall be taken by qualified personnel so that the
light-reading meter has been exposed long enough to provide a
constant reading. Measurements shall be made after dark with the light
sources in question on, then with the same sources off. The difference
between the two readings shall be compared to the maximum permitted
illumination at the property line at ground level. This procedure
eliminates the effects of moonlight and other ambient light.
A. Permitted decibel levels. At no point at or beyond the property line shall
the measured sound level exceed the maximum permitted sound levels
designated in the table below:
§ 195-131 PLUMBING § 195-133
144:731
Maximum Permitted Sound Level in Decibels Along the
Property Line
Octave Band Cycles
Per Second Residence Districts
Nonresidential
Districts
0 to 75 67 73
75 to 150 62 68
150 to 300 58 64
300 to 600 54 60
600 to 1,200 49 55
1,200 to 2,400 45 51
2,400 to 4,800 41 47
Over 4,800 37 43
B. Measurement. Sound levels shall be measured with a sound-level meter
and associated octave band filter manufactured in accordance with the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI). Noises capable of being
measured shall be those noises which cause rapid fluctuations of the
sound-level meter with a variation of no more than plus or minus two
decibels. Noises incapable of being measured, such as those of
irregular and/or intermittent nature, shall be controlled so as not to
become a nuisance to adjacent uses.
C. Exemptions. The following activities or sources are exempt from these
noise standards:
(1) Activities covered by the following: stationary signaling devices,
domestic power tools, air-conditioning and air-handling equipment
for residential purpose, operating motor vehicles, and refuse
collection vehicles.
(2) The unamplified human voice.
(3) The lowing of cattle, the clucking of fowl, the neighing of horses or
other normal sounds of reasonably cared for agricultural animals,
as well as the sounds of necessary farming equipment for a bona
fide agricultural operation. Noises related to domestic animals are
regulated by Chapter 67 of the Code.
(4) Fixed-wing aircraft operations. [Amended 11-6-2006 by Ord.
No. 2006-7]
(5) Construction or routine maintenance of public service utilities.
(6) Temporary activities relating to the construction and maintenance
of buildings and facilities including site preparation between 6:00
a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
(7) Church bells or chimes.
§ 195-133 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-133
144:732
§ 195-134. Outdoor storage and refuse disposal.
Outdoor storage requirements for any use or activity shall conform to the
BOCA National Property Maintenance Code. In addition, the following shall
apply:
§ 195-135. Toxic and hazardous substance storage.
Storage of toxic and hazardous substance shall meet the requirements of
the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code.
§ 195-136. Ground vibration.
Every use shall be so operated that the ground vibration inherently and
recurrently generated is not perceptible, without instruments, at any point
of any boundary line of the lot on which the use is located. Vibrations from
temporary construction and vehicles which leave the lot (such as trucks,
trains, airplanes and helicopters) are excluded.
(8) The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons of an
emergency, or the emission of sound in the performance of
emergency work.
(9) Occasionally used safety signals, warning devices and emergency
pressure relief values.
A. No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or
manner that they may be transferred off the lot by natural causes or
forces.
B. All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which
constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible by or otherwise be
attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only in closed
containers.
C. In no case shall outdoor storage or waste disposal cause contamination
to wells, ground water, watercourses or any body of water.
§ 195-133 PLUMBING § 195-136
144:733

ARTICLE XXI
Motor Vehicle Access
§ 195-137. Purpose.
Whenever motor vehicle access is provided from the street onto the lot, the
following regulations shall apply.
§ 195-138. Driveways and curbs.
Access to the lot shall comply with the following requirements. (See
Illustration 21.256)
A. Not more than two driveways for each 100 feet of frontage on any street
or private road are permitted for each lot. [Amended 9-4-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-13]
B. In the RR, FRA, R-1, R-2, R-3 and NC Districts, single-family attached
driveways may abut so long as all other requirements of this section are
met. [Amended 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12; 9-4-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-13]
C. In the RR, FRA, R-1, R-2, R-3 and NC Districts, no residential driveway
shall be closer to a side property line than three feet except shared
driveways permitted by Chapter 173, Subdivision and Land
Development. No portion of a driveway, including radius, may cross an
extended side property except for single-family attached driveways.
[Amended 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12; 9-4-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-13]
D. Each driveway shall be paved between the street and the principal
structure upon the lot. Where a residential principal structure upon the
lot is more than 50 feet from the street right-of-way line, the length of
the paved driveway shall be no less than 50 feet, beginning at the street
pavement. The entire radius shall fall within the right-of-way. Driveways
located on an unpaved street are exempt from the paving requirement.
Where a nonresidential structure is constructed, the length of driveway
to be paved shall extend from the street pavement to either the paved
parking area or the structure itself if no parking area is provided.
Agricultural operations structures are exempt from this requirement.
[Amended 11-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-10]
E. The minimum and maximum widths for driveways shall conform to the
standards in Chapter 173, Subdivision and Land Development.
F. There shall be a minimum 10 feet of tangent distance between the
intersecting road radius and the radius of the driveway. The distance
from the edge of pavement of the intersecting road to the radius of the
driveway shall be a minimum of 20 feet on curbed roads or 30 feet on
uncurbed roads. This standard may be increased based on traffic
256. Editor's Note: Illustration 21 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 195-137 PLUMBING § 195-138
144:735
volume, sight distance and other site constraints as recommended by
the Township Engineer. [Amended 4-21-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-6]
G. Driveways shall not cross the street right-of-way within five feet of a fire
hydrant, catch basin or drain inlet.
H. Residential driveways shall not cross the street right-of-way within 40
feet of another driveway of the same dwelling unit, except in the case
where dual access driveways are deemed necessary by the Township
Engineer to permit safe ingress and egress, where these dimensions
may be reduced to not less than 12 feet between two access drives.
[Amended 9-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-13]
I. Nonresidential driveways shall not cross the street right-of-way in NC,
BE, CH, I and IE Districts within 20 feet of a property line unless two
adjoining property owners mutually agree in a legally recorded
instrument (i.e., deed, recorded subdivision) to a common driveway.
[Amended 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
J. Driveways shall be located in safe relationship to sight distance and
barriers to vision in accordance with Chapter 173, Subdivision and
Land Development.
K. Driveways shall be constructed in accordance with the design and
improvement standards of Chapter 173, Subdivision and Land
Development.
L. Driveways located on a state road shall obtain a highway occupancy
permit from the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation prior to the
issuance of a zoning permit.
M. Prior to the issuance of a zoning permit, a site plan shall be submitted
which includes the driveway location, width, construction
specifications, sight distance and distance from property lines. A zoning
permit shall be required when a driveway is newly installed, added,
enlarged or relocated.
N. Any new residential driveway required to be paved shall be constructed
within a period of one year from the issuance of an occupancy permit
for the improvement upon the lot. Any added, enlarged or relocated
driveway shall be paved within one year of the issuance of a zoning
permit. Any new nonresidential driveway shall be paved prior to
receiving an occupancy permit or as soon as weather allows (referring
to a paving season). [Amended 11-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-10]
§ 195-138 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-138
144:736
ARTICLE XXII
Off-Street Parking
§ 195-139. Purpose.
The Township recognizes in its Comprehensive Plan that off-street areas are
necessary to accommodate the needs of commercial businesses, residential
uses and the general public. It is the intent of this article to promote public
health, safety and welfare by providing reasonable standards for off-street
parking areas that:
§ 195-140. General parking regulations.
A. Minimize conflicts between pedestrians and motor vehicles.
B. Create visually attractive parking areas.
C. Ensure a sufficient number of spaces for the intended use of the
property.
D. Ensure adequate lighting.
E. Ensure adequate drainage.
F. Provide for efficient maneuverability and safe vehicle and pedestrian
circulation.
G. Protect the character and stability of residential, business, institutional
and industrial areas.
H. Preserve the value of land and buildings on surrounding properties.
A. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided to lessen congestion in the
streets. The facilities required herein shall be available to patrons
throughout the hours of operation of the particular business or use for
which such facilities are provided. As used herein, the term "parking
space" includes either covered garage space or uncovered parking
space located off the public right-of-way.
B. Unless determined unnecessary by the Township Engineer, parking
spaces and approaches thereto shall be paved in accordance with
Chapter 173, Subdivision and Land Development, standards. Outdoor
parking spaces shall not be deemed to be part of the open space of the
lot on which they are located.
C. All commercial, public, institutional and industrial uses shall provide
handicapped parking spaces in accordance with the Americans with
Disabilities Act Accessibilities Guidelines for Buildings and Facilities,
developed by the U.S. Architectural and Transportation Barriers
Compliance Board. The applicant shall certify in writing or plan note
that a zoning application and/or subdivision/land development plan
complies with all relevant ADA requirements. [Amended 9-16-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-8]
§ 195-139 PLUMBING § 195-140
144:737
§ 195-141. Off-street parking requirements. [Amended 3-15-1999
by Ord. No. 1999-3; 7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-7; 12-15-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-20; 6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-8; 12-19-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-10; 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-03]
Any of the following permitted uses or buildings hereafter established,
erected or enlarged; any use or building hereafter converted into one of
the following uses; and any open space hereafter used shall be provided
with not less than the minimum off-street parking spaces as set forth
below, together with adequate access drives, driveways or other means of
circulation and access to and from a street. However, in no case shall the
minimum number of off-street parking spaces be less than two. Current ADA
requirements for handicapped parking must be met.
Off-Street Parking Space Requirements
Uses Required Parking Spaces
Residential
Bed-and-breakfast homes 1 space per sleeping room, plus 2
per permanent residents
Community residential homes 1 space per 2 beds; plus 1 space
per employee on the largest work
shift
Congregate care residences 1.5 spaces per each congregate
care unit, plus 1 space per
employee on the largest work shift
Multifamily dwelling units 3 per unit
Single-family attached 3 per unit or detached
Single-family detached 3 per lot
Stacked flat dwelling 3 spaces per unit
Nonresidential
D. In residential districts, no part of any minimum front yard setback shall
be used for parking purposes, except that the driveway area located
within the front yard setback may be used for off-street parking. For
nonresidential uses, parking may be permitted no closer than 15 feet
from the street right-of-way line.
E. The parking of any nonmotorized vehicle (including boats and trailers)
or any motorized vehicle not having a current and valid registration and
inspection certificate is prohibited within any street right-of-way.
F. Each use shall be calculated individually.
G. Any single use requiring more than 500 parking spaces shall provide a
minimum of 10% of the interior parking lot area to be landscaped
according to § 195-142J(1)(a) and (b). [Added 4-6-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-02]
§ 195-140 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-141
144:738
Off-Street Parking Space Requirements
Uses Required Parking Spaces
Agricultural services, animal
services or kennels
1 space for each 400 square feet of
gross floor area
Assembly uses such as theaters,
stadiums, auditoriums, sports
arena
1 space for every 3 fixed seats or 1
space for every 50 square feet of
gross assembly area when there is
no fixed seating
Automotive services 2 spaces for each service bay, plus
1 space for each employee on the
largest work shift. Service bay is
not a parking space.
Automobile wash 2 stacking spaces for each washing
module, plus 1 parking space for
each washing module. A washing
module is not a parking space.
Bar or nightclub 1 space for each 100 square feet of
gross floor area or 1 space for
every 2 persons allowed within the
maximum occupancy load,
whichever is greater
Barber or beauty shop 3 spaces for each operator chair.
"Chair" does not include dryer
chairs, washing/rinsing chairs or
waiting area chairs.
Business services, repair services 1 space for each 400 square feet of
gross floor area
Church 1 space for each 4 seats in the
primary place of worship
Data centers, stand-alone 2 spaces per person on the largest
working shift, or 1 space for each
1,500 square feet of gross floor
area, whichever is greater;
however, the premises shall be
designed to accommodate a likely
secondary use for the property as
another type of commercial
structure
Financial institution 1 space for each 200 square feet of
gross floor area
Government buildings and uses 1 space for each 400 square feet of
office space, plus 1 space for each
50 square feet of assembly area,
meeting room, conference, etc.
§ 195-141 PLUMBING § 195-141
144:739
Off-Street Parking Space Requirements
Uses Required Parking Spaces
Home occupations 1 space per home occupation
Hospitals, nursing homes 1 space for each three hospital
beds; 1 space for every 400 gross
floor square feet of administration
areas
Hotels, motels, boarding and
lodging/rooming houses
1 space for each guest room, plus 1
space for each 2 employees on the
largest shift
Industrial 1 space for each 600 square feet of
gross floor area used for industrial
purposes (processing, assembly,
treatment, storage, fabrication,
etc.) or 1 space for each 3
employees on the largest shift,
whichever is greater, plus 1 space
for every 400 square feet of office
administration, management area
Laundromat 1 space for each 3 washing or
drying machines
Library 1 space for each 400 square feet of
gross floor area
Membership organizations 1 space for each 400 square feet of
office space, plus 1 space for each
50 square feet of assembly area,
meeting room, conference, etc.
Museum or art gallery 1 space for each 300 square feet of
gross floor area
Medical or dental office clinics 1 space for each 200 square feet of
gross floor area
Office building 1 space for each 400 square feet of
gross floor area
Personal services 1 space for each 300 square feet of
gross floor area
Public utilities and facilities 1 space for each 400 square feet,
plus 1 space per stored vehicle
Recreation areas: (if no
grandstands for public viewing)
Athletic fields 20 spaces per field
Basketball courts 5 spaces per court
Billiard halls 2 spaces per table
§ 195-141 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-141
144:740
Off-Street Parking Space Requirements
Uses Required Parking Spaces
Bingo 1 space for every 100 square feet of
gross floor area or 1 for every 2
persons
Bowling alley 5 spaces for each alley
Campground 1 parking space for each campsite
Golf:
Regulation 7 spaces for each golf hole
Driving range 2 spaces for each driving tee
Miniature golf 3 spaces for each hole
Health club 1 space for each 200 square feet of
gross floor or 1 space for every 2
persons allowed within the
maximum occupancy, whichever is
greater
Park 2 spaces per acre
Skating rink 1 space per each 100 square feet of
area
Swimming pool 2 spaces for every 100 square feet
of floor area
Tennis courts or racquetball
courts
2 spaces per each court, plus 1 for
each 200 square feet of clubhouse
noncourt floor area
Restaurant 1 space for each 100 square feet of
gross floor or 1 space for every 2
persons allowed within the
maximum occupancy, whichever is
greater
Restaurant, fast-food With seating: 1 space for each 100
square feet of gross floor or 1 space
for every 2 persons allowed within
the maximum occupancy, whichever
is greater
Without seating: 1 space for each
50 square feet of gross floor area,
with a minimum of 10 spaces
§ 195-141 PLUMBING § 195-141
144:741
Off-Street Parking Space Requirements
Uses Required Parking Spaces
With drive-in facilities: In addition
to the parking spaces required
above, 8 stacking spaces for the
drive-in window with a minimum of
5 spaces for the ordering station.
Such spaces shall be designed so as
not to impede pedestrian or
vehicular circulation on the site or
on any abutting street.
Retail, general:
Under 2,000 square feet 1 space for each 250 square feet of
gross floor area
2,000 to 100,000 square feet 1 space for every 275 square feet of
gross floor area
Over 100,000 1 space for every 200 square feet of
gross floor area
Retail, grocery and convenience
store
1 space for every 200 square feet of
gross floor area
Schools:
Elementary, secondary 1 space per classroom, plus 1 space
for every 400 square feet of
administrations areas or 1 space for
each 6 seats in an auditorium or
other places of assembly, whichever
is greater
High school 2.5 spaces per classroom, plus 1
space for every 400 square feet of
administration areas or 1 space for
each 6 seats in an auditorium or
other places of assembly, whichever
is greater
Trade, technical school 1 space for every 2 students based
on the design capacity of the
building, plus 1 for every 400
square feet of administrative area
Studio 1 space for every 600 square feet of
floor area
Studio, dancing or music 5 spaces, plus 1 space for every 150
square feet of studio area in excess
of 500 square feet
§ 195-141 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-141
144:742
Off-Street Parking Space Requirements
Uses Required Parking Spaces
Truckstop In addition to the vehicle parking
space requirements for each use
provided at a truckstop, 75% of the
required vehicle parking spaces
shall be truck parking spaces
Truck terminals 1 space for each 1,000 square feet
of gross floor area or 1 space for
each employee on the largest shift,
whichever is greater. In addition to
the off-street parking requirements
and when there are 10 or more
loading berths provided, trailer
parking spaces shall be provided at
1 trailer parking space for each
additional loading berth.
Veterinary services 1 space for every 500 square feet of
gross floor area
Warehousing 1 space for each 1,000 square feet
of building area up to 20,000
square feet, plus 1 space for each
2,000 square feet of building area
between 20,000 square feet and
40,000 square feet, plus 1 space for
each 3,000 square feet of building
area in excess of 40,000 square
feet, or 1 space for each employee
on the largest shift, whichever is
greater. In addition to the off-street
parking requirements and when
there are 10 or more loading berths
provided, trailer parking spaces
shall be provided at 1 trailer
parking space for each 4 loading
berths.
Wholesaling 1 space for each 1,000 square feet
of gross floor area, or 1 space for
each employee on the largest shift,
whichever is greater. In addition to
the off-street parking requirements
and when there are 10 or more
loading berths provided, trailer
parking spaces shall be provided at
1 trailer parking space for each 4
loading berths
§ 195-141 PLUMBING § 195-142
144:743
§ 195-142. Location and management requirements.
A. Existing parking. Buildings and uses existing on the effective date of
this chapter shall not be subject to the requirements of this article in
accordance with the following:
(1) The type or extent of use is not changed; and
(2) Provided that any parking facility now serving such structures or
uses shall not in the future be reduced.
B. Changes in requirements. Whenever there is an alteration of a building
or a change or extension of a use which increases the parking
requirements, the total additional parking required for the alteration,
change or extension shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of this article.
C. Conflict with other uses. No parking area shall be used for any use that
interferes with its availability for the parking need it is required to
serve.
D. Continuing obligation. All required parking facilities shall be provided
and maintained so long as the use exists which the facilities were
designed to serve. Reasonable precautions are to be taken by the
property owner or business owner to assure the availability of required
facilities for the employees or other persons for whom the parking
areas are designed to serve. The property owner or business owner
shall ensure that the parking area at no time constitutes a nuisance,
hazard or unreasonable impediment to traffic.
E. Drainage, surfacing and maintenance.
(1) The area of parking lots, including driveways, shall be graded,
surfaced with 1.5 inches ID-2 wearing course, two inches ID-2
binder course and six inches subbase, at a minimum, where there is
no truck traffic and drained in accordance with other applicable
codes and ordinances enacted by the Township and approved by
the Township. Pavement sections with higher structural
capabilities may be designed as necessary in accordance with
Design of Hot Mix Asphalt Pavements for Commercial, Industrial
and Residential Areas, National Asphalt Pavement Association,
1991, as amended. Alternate pavement sections, including
concrete, can be considered if properly designed and then
approved by the Township. Pervious pavement shall be considered
as a viable option. [Amended 9-16-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-8;
6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-8]
(2) Parking areas shall be kept clean and free from rubbish and debris.
(3) In all cases, such drainage, surfacing and maintenance activities
and plans shall conform to other applicable Township codes and
ordinances.
§ 195-142 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-142
144:744
F. Joint use. Two or more uses may provide for required parking in a
common parking lot if the total space provided is not less than the sum
of the spaces required for each use individually.
G. Computation of spaces. [Amended 6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-8]
(1) Where the computation of required parking spaces results in a
fractional number, any fraction shall be counted as one.
(2) Ghost parking spaces may be utilized on a land development plan if
the applicant shows reasonable likelihood that usage will be less
than the number required by ordinance. If, after construction,
through complaint investigation or observation, the usage is above
what was constructed, the Board of Supervisors shall decide if
additional parking shall be constructed according to current
standards. Board of Supervisors review shall only apply to the
initial ghost parking applicant and use. All subsequent owners and/
or uses shall be reviewed through the land development process or
use permit application.
(3) The number of handicap-accessible parking spaces required shall
be determined by Table 1106.1 of the current International
Building Code, as amended from time to time. [Added 6-4-2012
by Ord. No. 2012-04]
H. Location of spaces.
(1) Off-street parking spaces for single- and two-family residential uses
shall be provided on the same lot.
(2) Parking spaces for multifamily dwelling building(s), commercial,
industrial and other nonresidential uses shall be readily accessible
to the building(s) served. Such space shall be in the same zoning
district as the principal building or use, and conform to the
following requirements:
(a) Required parking spaces shall be located within 200 feet of the
principal building or use when located on the same side of the
street. [Amended 6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-8]
(b) Required parking spaces shall be located within 400 feet of the
principal building or use when linked to a pedestrian trail or
sidewalk when located on the same side of the street.
[Amended 6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-8]
(c) Fifty percent of the required parking spaces may be located
across a minor or local collector street with the following
conditions:
[1] Crosswalks shall be provided in order to ensure safe
pedestrian access to and from the parking area.
§ 195-142 PLUMBING § 195-142
144:745
[2] Safety lighting shall be provided at the crosswalk to
illuminate the cross area when the parking area is used in
early morning or at night.
[3] A pedestrian crossing sign in accordance with PennDOT
Publications 68 and 236 shall be provided on each side of
the road. [Amended 9-16-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-8]
[4] Parking lots located across a street shall be safe for
pedestrian use. To ensure safety, the design of the
crosswalk shall consider the speed limit, sight distance,
visibility, road conditions and other safety factors. In the
event that the crosswalk is deemed to be unsafe, the
Zoning Officer shall not permit parking areas across a
street.
[5] In the event that the crosswalk becomes a safety hazard
due to increased traffic, adjacent development, the change
of street classification or other circumstances that will
affect pedestrian safety, the parking lot shall be
abandoned.
(d) The distances specified herein shall be measured from the
nearest point of the parking lot to the nearest point of the
principal building or use that the parking lot is required to
serve.
(3) The applicant for a use or building permit shall submit, with his
application, a legal document approved by the Township Solicitor
that subjects such parcels of land to parking uses in connection
with the principal use to which it is accessory. Prior to the issuance
of a zoning permit, the Zoning Officer shall cause such legal
documents to be recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds.
I. Lighting.
(1) All public parking lots shall be adequately lighted during nighttime
and early morning operating hours.
(2) Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking or loading areas
shall be in accordance with Article XIX, § 195-125, Lighting.
J. Landscaping.257 [Amended 9-16-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-8]
(1) Interior of parking lot.
(a) A minimum of 5% of the interior parking lot area shall be
landscaped when:
257. Editor's Note: Former Subsection J, Screening, was repealed 9-16-1996 by Ord. No.
1996-8.
§ 195-142 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-142
144:746
[1] There are a total of 40 or more parking spaces in the
parking lot; or
[2] There are one or more interior space aisle(s) provided in
the parking lot with 10 or more parking spaces.
(b) The required 5% interior parking lot landscaped area shall be
landscaped with shade trees and ground cover. The following
alternatives are permitted separately or in combination:
[1] Provide a continuous landscape strip between every four
rows of parking. The landscape strip shall be a minimum of
eight feet in width to accommodate shade trees and other
landscaping.
[2] Provide large planting islands (over 600 square feet) to be
located throughout the lot and planted with shade trees
and ground cover located at the ends of parking rows.
[3] Provide planting islands at a minimum of nine feet wide
between every 10 to 15 spaces to avoid long rows of
parked cars.
(c) A minimum of one shade tree shall be required for each eight
spaces.
(2) Perimeter of parking lot. Perimeter landscaping located within the
ten-foot required parking setback from a building shall be ground
cover and shrubs or hedges. Shade trees are not required in the
ten-foot setback area.
K. Trees.
(1) Trees.
Small3 Medium4 Large4
Interior dimension 5 feet NA NA
Setback (from trunk
perimeter)
NA 6 feet2 10 feet2
Area, single tree 901 2501 8001
Area, each additional tree
in a group
251 901 2001
NOTES:
1Square feet.
2The largest tree in any group will be considered as the first tree
for counting purposes.
§ 195-142 PLUMBING § 195-142
144:747
§ 195-143. Design standards.
NOTES:
3Each small tree shall be located in a planting area of at least
90 square feet (plus 25 square feet for each additional tree in a
group) with a minimum interior dimension of five feet.
4Each medium and large tree shall be located in a planting area or
undisturbed area that conforms to the minimum as specified in the
chart above.
(2) Perimeter of parking lot. Perimeter shade trees and ground cover
shall be planted within an eight-foot-wide landscape strip around
the entire perimeter of the lot, except along the street, to be
planted in accordance with Article XIX, § 195-123B. Existing shade
trees may be used to meet the perimeter requirement of this
section. The eight-foot-wide landscape strip may include a sidewalk
or walkway. Perimeter landscaping may be in any required buffer
yard. Perimeter landscaping does not constitute screening. (See
Illustration 22.258) [Amended 7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-7]
(3) Contiguous properties. When a parking lot abuts a residential use
or residential district, Level Three screening in accordance with
Article XIX, § 195-124, shall be provided along the entire property
line.
L. Maintenance. Maintenance of parking lot landscaping shall be in
accordance with Article XIX, § 195-123E.
A. The minimum dimensions of parking facilities to be provided shall be as
follows:
(1) In all districts, noncompact parking spaces per vehicle shall be not
less than nine feet wide and 19 feet long. Handicapped parking
shall meet current ADA Standards. [Amended 6-4-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-8]
(2) Parking space and aisle dimensions shall be not less than those
listed in the following table. (See Illustration 23.259)
Parking Aisle -- Width
Angle of
Parking
(degrees)
Stall Width
(feet)
Stall
Depth*
(feet)
One-Way
(feet)
Two-way
(feet)
90º 9 19 25 25
60º 9 19 18.5 20
258. Editor's Note: Illustration 22 is included at the end of this chapter.
259. Editor's Note: Illustration 23 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 195-142 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-143
144:748
Parking Aisle -- Width
Angle of
Parking
(degrees)
Stall Width
(feet)
Stall
Depth*
(feet)
One-Way
(feet)
Two-way
(feet)
45º 9 19 13.5 20
30º 9 19 12 20
Parallel 8 22 12 20
*NOTE:
Depth of parking space is the measurement from the curb or edge
of the parking space toward the interior portion of the space to
be occupied by a parked vehicle and not including any part of the
aisle or driveway.
(3) All dead-end parking lots shall be designed to provide sufficient
backup area for the end parking spaces of the parking area.
(4) Parking areas shall be designed so that each motor vehicle may
proceed to and from the parking space provided for it without
requiring the moving of any other motor vehicle.
(5) Where more than 10 parking spaces are required, a maximum of
40% of the parking spaces may be provided for compact vehicles.
Each compact parking space shall be not less than eight feet wide
by 17 feet long. All compact parking spaces shall be located in the
same area and be marked to indicate spaces designated for
compact parking.
(6) Trucks and trailers. [Amended 3-15-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-3]
(a) Where truck parking spaces or trailer parking spaces are
provided and/or required, parking space and aisle dimensions
shall not be less than listed in the following table:
Parking Aisle -- Width
Angle of
Parking
(degrees)
Stall
Width
(feet)
Stall
Depth*
(feet)
One-Way
(feet)
Two-way
(feet)
90º 12 60 75 75
60º 12 60 56 60
45º 12 60 41 60
30º 12 60 36 60
§ 195-143 PLUMBING § 195-143
144:749
*NOTE:
Depth of parking space is the measurement from the curb or
edge of the parking space toward the interior portion of the
space to be occupied by a parked vehicle and not including
any part of the aisle or driveway.
(b) Where truck parking spaces or trailer parking spaces are
provided and/or required, the minimum width shall be 12 feet
and the minimum depth shall be 60 feet. Aisle widths in truck
parking areas shall be 75 feet for one-way or two-way.
B. Setbacks for parking areas shall be provided as follows:
(1) All parking spaces and access drives shall be located at least 10
feet from any multiple dwelling building, office, commercial,
institutional, industrial and other similar nonresidential buildings
located on the lot. The ten-foot setback between the parking area
and building shall be for the purpose of providing a pedestrian
access walkway and perimeter landscaping.
(2) All parking spaces and access drives shall be at least eight feet
from any side or rear lot line, except where buffer yards are
required, in which case the standards set forth in Article XIX,
§ 195-122, shall apply. The required setback shall not include
screening.
(3) No off-street parking area shall be located within a public right-ofway.
C. Separation.
(1) In no case shall parking lots be designed to require or encourage
vehicles to back into a public or private street in order to leave the
parking areas.
(2) All paved off-street parking spaces shall be marked with paint or
other methods so as to indicate their location.
D. Curbing. Curbing is important for safe and efficient parking areas.
[Added 9-16-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-8]
(1) Curbing within a parking lot may be required in a land
development if determined necessary by the Township Engineer to:
(a) Channelize and control vehicular movement in a safe manner
through the parking area.
(b) Direct stormwater and drainage within the parking lot and to
landscaped infiltration areas. [Amended 6-4-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-8]
(c) Define parking areas.
§ 195-143 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-143
144:750
§ 195-144. Off-street loading and unloading.
(d) Delineate and/or protect perimeter and interior landscaped
areas from vehicles.
(e) Separate vehicle movement from pedestrian movement as
necessary for safety.
(2) When required, curbing shall be constructed in accordance with
Article VI, § 173-25F(10), of Chapter 173, Subdivision and Land
Development.
(3) Construction specifications for curbing to be installed in parking
areas shall be submitted with the land development application.
(4) Where curbs are provided in a parking lot, the minimum curb radii
shall be designed for appropriate use as approved by the Township
Engineer. (See § 173-25F of the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.) [Amended 6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-8]
E. In no case shall parking lots be designed to require or encourage
vehicles to back into a public or private street in order to leave the
parking areas.
F. All paved off-street parking space shall be marked with paint or other
methods so as to indicate their location.
G. Curb radius. Where curbs are provided in a parking lot, a minimum of a
five-foot radius curvature shall be required for all curblines. (See
Illustration 23.260)
A. Required berths and spaces.
(1) In addition to the off-street parking requirements set forth herein,
any building erected, converted or enlarged for commercial, office,
manufacturing, institutional, hospital or other similar uses
requiring the delivery or pickup of products or materials shall
provide adequate off-street areas for the loading and unloading of
vehicles. Such areas shall be provided for as follows:
Use
Gross Floor Area
(square feet)
Number of
Spaces
Commercial, wholesale
manufacturing, hospital
laundry, institutional, or
similar uses
Under 8,000 1
8,000 to 40,000 2
Over 40,000 to
100,000
3
260. Editor's Note: Illustration 23 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 195-143 PLUMBING § 195-144
144:751
Use
Gross Floor Area
(square feet)
Number of
Spaces
Over 100,000 to
250,000
4
Each additional
200,000
1
Office buildings or hotels Under 100,000 1
Over 100,000 to
300,000
2
Over 300,000 3
(2) All off-street loading and unloading areas shall be provided and
maintained so long as the use exists which the facilities were
designed to serve.
B. Design standards. Off-street loading facilities shall be designed to
conform to the following specifications.
(1) Each required berth shall be not less than 12 feet in width, 45 feet
in length and 14 feet in height, exclusive of drives and maneuvering
space and located entirely on the lot being served.
(2) There shall be appropriate means of access to a street or alley, as
well as adequate maneuvering space. Maneuvering space for
tractor trailers shall be a minimum of 75 feet in width.
(3) Drainage, surfacing and maintenance.
(a) The area of off-street loading facilities, including driveways,
shall be graded, surfaced with an impervious surface (asphalt,
concrete or blacktop) and drained in accordance with other
applicable codes and ordinances enacted by the Township and
approved by the Township Engineer.
(b) Parking areas shall be kept clean and free from rubbish and
debris.
(c) In all cases, such drainage, surfacing and maintenance
activities and plans shall conform to other applicable codes and
ordinances enacted by the Township.
§ 195-144 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-144
144:752
ARTICLE XXIII
Signs
§ 195-145. Purpose.
The Comprehensive Plan recognizes that attractive, appropriately
coordinated, well-designed signs can have a positive impact on local
business and the community in general. Recognizing that the
Comprehensive Plan promotes quality development and a pleasing
community character that will stimulate business and attract people, this
article provides appropriate sign standards and regulations for the
following purposes:
§ 195-146. Administration procedures.
A. To promote safety, comfort and well-being of the users of streets, roads
and highways in the Township.
B. To reduce distractions and obstructions from signs which would
adversely affect traffic safety, and to alleviate hazards caused by signs
projecting over or encroaching upon public ways.
C. To discourage excessive visual competition in signage and ensure that
signs aid orientation and adequately identify uses and activities to the
public.
D. To preserve or enhance Township character by requiring new and
replacement signage which is:
(1) Creative and distinctive.
(2) Compatible with the surroundings.
(3) Appropriate to the type of activity to which it pertains.
(4) Expressive of the identity of individual proprietors or of the
community as a whole.
(5) Appropriately sized in its context so as to be easily readable. (See
Illustration 24.261)
A. Permit; application procedure.
(1) No sign, with the exception of those outlined in § 195-147A and
signs installed by the direction of municipal, state, federal or other
governmental agency, shall be erected, placed, installed, altered,
relocated or replaced until a permit has been applied for and
issued. Applications shall be on forms provided by the Township
and shall be made to the Zoning Administrator. An application for
an off-premises sign shall be accompanied by written consent of the
261. Editor's Note: Illustration 24 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 195-145 PLUMBING § 195-146
144:753
owner or lessee of the property upon which the sign is to be erected
or placed. Permit requirements apply to temporary signs.
(2) Fall site plan, construction plans and specifications shall be
submitted with the application showing the location, dimensions,
message, materials, illumination, letter sizes, colors, location of
sign in relationship to the building and details of construction,
including load stresses and anchorage. Plans shall be drawn to
scale and be sufficiently clear, comprehensive, detailed and legible
so that, together with any accompanying specifications and
information, determination can be made as to whether or not the
proposed sign will comply with the requirements of these
regulations and with the installation requirements of the Building
Code of the Township.262 [Amended 3-3-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-02]
(3) Any sign permit issued shall be valid only while such sign and
support structure is maintained in a safe, sound and nonhazardous
condition.
(4) If necessary, a conforming sign may be removed and reinstalled for
normal maintenance activities without requiring the submission of
an application.
B. Measurement of sign area. The area of a sign shall be computed in the
following manner:
(1) The measurement of sign area shall mean the entire area within a
single perimeter enclosed by one continuous line, connecting the
extreme edges or points of a sign, together with any material or
color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate
such sign from the background against which it is placed.
(2) When two sides of a double-faced sign are located not more than 28
inches apart at the widest point and not more than 18 inches apart
at the narrowest point, and display identical writing or
representation, only one of the sides shall be used to determine the
surface area. Any additional sides of a multifaceted sign shall be
considered as a separate sign for purposes of computing the total
surface area of the sign.
(3) Sign area shall not include the main supporting sign structure in
determining sign area.
C. Measurement of height. The height of a sign shall be computed as the
distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the
highest attached component of the sign. Normal grade shall be
construed to be the lower of existing grade prior to construction, or the
newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling,
berming, mounding or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the
262. Editor's Note: See Ch. 88, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 195-146 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-146
144:754
§ 195-147. Signs exempt from permit and fee requirements;
prohibited signs.
sign. In cases in which the normal grade cannot reasonably be
determined, sign height shall be computed on the assumption that the
elevation of the normal grade at the base of the sign is equal to the
elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a public street or the
grade of the land at the principal entrance to the principal structure on
the lot, whichever is lower.
D. Measurement of setback requirements. The setback requirement shall
be measured from the outermost edge of the sign to the existing rightof-
way line.
E. Signs within intersection sight triangles. [Amended 9-16-1996 by
Ord. No. 1996-9]
(1) No signs may obstruct the line of sight in accordance with Chapter
173, Subdivision and Land Development, Exhibits VI and VII.
(2) To ensure clear line of sight, signs that may be located in the
intersection sight triangle shall be at a height under three feet or
over 12 feet, provided that all other ordinance requirements have
been met.263 [Amended 3-3-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-02]
A. Exempt signs from sign permit and fee. A sign permit and fee shall not
be required for any of the following signs. The exemption shall apply
only to the requirement for obtaining a sign permit and paying the fee
and shall not be construed as relieving the owner or applicant of such
sign from the responsibility for applying and obtaining a building and
electrical permit for erection, for maintaining it in a safe condition and
from being in conformance with the applicable requirements stated in
this article. See the definitions found in § 195-10, "Signs." [Amended
6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-5; 3-3-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-02]
(1) Address sign.
(2) Private sale or event sign, noncommercial.
(3) Construction sign.
(4) Driveway or trespassing sign.
(5) Home occupation sign.
(6) Memorial signs, tablets or plaques depicting the National Register
of Historic Places, the name of the building and date of erection
when cut into a masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or
other noncombustible material. Any sign which has been
authenticated as historically significant and accurate for its specific
263. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, Line of sight, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 9-16-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-9.
§ 195-146 PLUMBING § 195-147
144:755
location, whether original or a replica, shall be exempt from the
regulations of this article.
(7) Political signs.
(8) Real estate signs.
(9) United States, state and municipal flags.
(10)Works of art that do not include a commercial message.
(11) Security signs under one square foot in size.
B. Prohibited signs. Prohibited signs are as follows:
(1) Flashing or animated signs. (Flashing or animated signs that are
clocks, time or temperature signs or barber poles shall not be
considered as prohibited signs if they comply with the other
provisions of this article.) [Amended 9-16-1996 by Ord. No.
1996-9]
(2) Signs on vehicles permanently parked or intended as directional
signs. Temporary portable or trailer signs in or on a vehicle are
prohibited.
(3) Signs that violate or advertise activities that violate federal, state
or local laws, regulations or ordinances.
(4) Signs which by reason of size, location, movement, content,
coloring or manner of illumination obstruct the vision of drivers
leaving or entering a public street from another street or driveway
and/or obstruct or detract from the visibility or effectiveness of any
traffic control device or traffic sign on a public street.
(5) Signs which make use of words such as "stop," "look," "one-way,"
"danger," "yield," "go slow," "caution" or any similar words,
phrases, symbols, lights or characters in such a manner as to
interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic or which imitate an official
traffic sign or signal.
(6) Signs which advertise an activity, business, product or service no
longer produced or conducted. In such case, such sign shall be
removed within 30 days after the activity, business, product or
service is discontinued.
(7) Signs which are placed or located within the public right-of-way,
except signs erected at the direction of municipal, state, federal or
other governmental agency.
(8) Signs painted on, pasted or attached to or supported by utility
poles, trees, a stone, cliff or other natural object.
(9) String lights around signs.
§ 195-147 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-147
144:756
§ 195-148. Signs in C, FRA, RR, R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts.
[Amended 7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-7; 6-4-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-5]
Signs in the Conservation (C), Flexible Residential Agriculture (FRA), Rural
Residential (RR), Low-Density Residential (R-1), Medium-Density
Residential (R-2) and Suburban Residential (R-3) Districts shall meet the
following requirements:
(10) Signs which obstruct free ingress to or egress from a fire escape,
door or other exitway.
(11) Signs which are structurally unsafe or in a state of disrepair.
(12) Roof signs, except integral roof signs.
(13) Inflatable signs.
(14) Signs that emit smoke, visible vapors, particles, sound or odor.
(15) Signs that incorporate or employ open flames.
(16) Illuminated signs which adversely affect: [Amended 9-16-1996
by Ord. No. 1996-9]
(a) Safe vision of operators of vehicles moving on public or private
streets or parking areas.
(b) Any residential district or any part of a building or property
used for residential purposes.264
(17) Any sign in any public right-of-way, except governmental signs
related to public health, safety and welfare. [Added 6-4-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-5]
A. Permitted signs. (See Table of Permitted Signs, 195:A28, and
Illustration 24, Sign Types, 195:A23, found at the end of this
chapter.265) [Amended 3-3-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-02]
(1) Address sign.
(2) Construction sign.
(3) Development sign.
(4) Directional sign.
(5) Home occupation sign.
264. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(17), Search lights, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 9-16-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-9.
265. Editor's Note: Said table and illustration are included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 195-147 PLUMBING § 195-148
144:757
§ 195-148.1. Table of Permitted Signs. 266[Added 6-4-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-5]
§ 195-149. Signs in NC, BE, CH, I and IE Districts. [Amended
8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
Signs in the Neighborhood Commercial (NC), Business Enterprise (BE),
Commercial Highway (CH), Interchange (I) and Industrial Enterprise (IE)
Districts shall meet the following requirements:
(6) Nonresidential. One identification wall sign not to exceed 12
square feet in area shall be permitted for each principal
nonresidential use.
(7) Nonresidential. One identification and information freestanding
sign per street frontage, not to exceed 32 square feet in area, shall
be permitted for each principal nonresidential use. For more than
one nonresidential use, the freestanding sign shall be a joint
identification sign.
(8) Nonresidential. One information sign not to exceed 12 square feet
in area shall be permitted for each principal nonresidential use.
(9) Political sign.
(10) Real estate signs. Signs indicating the private nature of a driveway,
or trespassing signs, provided that the size of any such sign shall
not exceed 216 square inches.
(11) Signs of schools, colleges, churches, hospitals, sanitariums or other
institutions of a similar nature (freestanding, wall and/or
projecting), not exceeding 64 square feet in sign area. Such sign
shall not exceed eight feet in height and must be set back two feet.
(12) Temporary signs used for a period of no more than 30 days for
nonresidential uses only.
B. General sign standards.
(1) Any illuminated sign shall meet the lighting standards of § 195-125,
Lighting.
A. Permitted signs.
(1) Identification signs. [Amended 9-16-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-9;
6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-5;267 4-6-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-02; 3-3-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-02]
266. Editor's Note: The Table of Permitted Signs is included as an attachment to this chapter.
267. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection
A(7) through (12) as Subsection A(8) thorugh (13), respectively.
§ 195-148 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-149
144:758
Type of Sign
Number
Permitted
Maximum Area
(square feet)
Wall signs for 1
establishment on 1
lot
Unlimited 1 square foot per lineal
foot of store frontage,
up to 400 square feet
maximum
Side facade: 50% of the
area permitted for the
front facade
Window or
projecting signs
1 per
establishment
1 square foot per lineal
foot of store frontage,
up to 32 square feet
maximum
1 per facade for a
corner building
Side facade: 50% of the
area permitted for the
front facade
Flag signs 1 for every 20 feet
of street frontage
15 square feet
Freestanding signs
for 1 establishment
on the lot
1 per 300 feet of
street frontage
64 square feet
1 per street for
corner lots and
through lots
64 square feet
Freestanding signs
for 2 establishments
on the lot
1 per 300 feet of
street frontage
32 square feet per
establishment
Freestanding signs
for 3 or more
establishments on
the lot
1 joint
identification sign
per 300 feet of
street frontage
32 square feet for the
name of the building or
office park, and 16
square feet for the
name of each
establishment
1 joint
identification sign
per street for
corner lots and
through lots
32 square feet for the
name of the building or
office park, and 16
square feet for the
name of each
establishment
(2) Address signs.
(3) Awning signs.
§ 195-149 PLUMBING § 195-149
144:759
§ 195-150. Standards for specific types of signs.
(4) Billboard signs.
(5) Construction signs.
(6) Development signs.
(7) Electronic signs.
(8) Integral roof signs.
(9) Off-premises information signs.
(10) Political signs.
(11) Product signs.
(12) Real estate signs.
(13) Temporary signs.
B. General sign standards. [Added 6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-5]
(1) Any illuminated sign shall meet the lighting standards of § 195-125,
Lighting.
A. Address sign.
(1) Address signs shall be permitted in all districts.
(2) Two signs shall be permitted per dwelling unit, excluding
mailboxes.
(3) An address sign may be a wall, awning or freestanding sign.
[Amended 6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-5]
(4) Freestanding signs shall be set back a minimum of two feet from
the right-of-way, except mailboxes.
(5) Such sign shall not exceed 10 feet in height.
(6) Such sign shall not exceed two square feet in area.
B. Awning sign.
(1) Awning signs shall be permitted in NC, BE, CH, I and IE Districts.
[Amended 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
(2) Such sign must be painted on or attached flat against the surface of
the awning but not extend beyond the valance or be attached to the
underside.
(3) A minimum of eight feet above sidewalk level must be allowed for
pedestrian clearance.
§ 195-149 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-150
144:760
C. Billboard signs.
(1) Billboard signs shall be permitted in the CH, I and IE Districts.
(2) Billboard signs shall not exceed 672 square feet of sign area in
Zoning Districts I and IE only. [Amended 3-3-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-02]
(2a) Billboard signs shall not exceed 300 square feet of sign area in
Zoning District CH. [Added 3-3-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-02]
(3) Billboard signs shall not be less than 32 square feet of sign area.
[Amended 3-3-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-02]
(4) Billboard signs shall not be a wall or projecting sign.
(5) Back-to-back, V-type, side-by-side and double-decked signs are
permitted and shall be treated as one structure.
(6) Billboard signs must be set back 20 feet.
(7) Placement.
(a) No billboard sign shall be permitted within 100 feet of a
residential property.
(b) No billboard sign shall be placed within 50 feet of a street
intersection.
(c) No billboard sign shall be permitted within 100 feet of a public
recreation facility, park, school or church.
(8) A ten-foot landscaped strip shall be provided extending five feet
beyond each end.
(a) Must be located 2,000 feet apart in any direction.
(b) Shall be considered a principal use.
(c) Only one billboard shall be permitted per lot.
D. Construction signs.
(1) Construction signs shall be permitted in all districts.
(2) Such signs shall not exceed 16 square feet in area in Zoning
Districts C, FRA, RR, R-1, R-2, and R-3. [Amended 3-3-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-02]
(2a) Such signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in area for Zoning
Districts NC, BE, CH, I, and IE limited to prime contractors only
and 12 square feet in area for subcontractor. [Added 3-3-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-02]
§ 195-150 PLUMBING § 195-150
144:761
(3) Construction signs shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from the
right-of-way. [Amended 3-3-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-02]
(4) Construction signs shall not exceed eight feet in height.
(5) Such a sign shall be permitted on the property 30 days prior to
start of construction and not more than 30 days following the
completion of said construction.
E. Development signs:
(1) Shall be permitted in all districts.
(2) Shall not exceed 24 square feet in area.
(3) Shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from the public right-of-way.
(4) Shall not exceed eight feet in height.
F. Directional signs.
(1) Directional signs shall be permitted in R-3, NC, BE, CH, I and IE
Districts. [Amended 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
(2) One directional sign is permitted per entrance or exit.
(3) Directional signs shall be set back a minimum of two feet from the
right-of-way. [Amended 3-3-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-02]
(4) Directional signs shall not exceed three feet in height so as to avoid
conflict of site distances from driveway and/or intersections.
[Amended 9-16-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-9; 3-3-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-02]
(5) Directional signs shall not exceed 12 square feet in sign area.
G. Electronic signs. [Added 6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-5268]
(1) Electronic signs must comply with all applicable Zoning Ordinance
requirements, including sign placement and size requirements, and
lighting performance standards.
(2) The message and/or pattern cannot change more often than every
10 seconds. This includes streaming letter and/or number
messages. [Amended 4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-03]
(3) Where erected in conjunction with a freestanding business
identification sign, no more than 1/3 of the allowable sign size may
be electronic.
H. Freestanding signs.
268. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former Subsections G
through V as Subsections H through W, respectively.
§ 195-150 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-150
144:762
(1) Freestanding signs shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet when
parking is located in the side or rear of the building. Freestanding
signs shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet when parking is
located in the front of the building. Freestanding directional signs
shall be set back a minimum of two feet from the right-of-way.
These standards shall apply unless otherwise specified. [Amended
9-16-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-9; 3-3-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-02]
(2) On corner lots or private exitways, no freestanding sign shall be
erected within the intersection sight triangles as defined by
§ 195-146E. [Amended 9-16-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-9]
(3) Maximum height of a freestanding sign shall be 35 feet, unless
otherwise specified. The maximum height of a freestanding sign
located in the I District shall be 80 feet.
(4) Freestanding identification signs must be 150 feet apart per lot or
establishment, whichever applies.
(5) Freestanding identification signs must be 10 feet from side
property lines.
(6) A flag sign that is installed permanently shall be considered a
freestanding sign and shall comply with all requirements of this
chapter, except United States, state and municipal flags.269
[Amended 9-16-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-9]
I. Home occupation signs.
(1) Home occupation signs shall be permitted in FRA, RR, R-1, R-2,
R-3, and NC Districts. [Amended 8-15-2005 by Ord. No.
2004-12]
(2) Home occupation signs shall not exceed two square feet in area.
(3) One home occupation sign shall be permitted per dwelling.
(4) A home occupation sign may be a wall, freestanding or projecting
sign.
(5) A freestanding home occupation sign shall not exceed three feet in
height. [Amended 6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-5; 3-3-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-02]
(6) A freestanding home occupation sign shall be set back a minimum
of two feet from the right-of-way and not be taller than three feet
above finish grade, so as to avoid conflict of site distances from
driveway and/or intersections. [Amended 3-3-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-02]
269. Editor's Note: Former Subsection H(7), which allowed an individual business in a
completely detached building on a single lot to have a freestanding sign, was repealed
6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-5.
§ 195-150 PLUMBING § 195-150
144:763
J. Illuminated signs.
(1) Illuminated signs shall be sufficiently obscured to eliminate light or
glare on residential properties and public roads.
(2) Light produced from illuminated signs shall comply with Article XX,
§ 195-132. [Amended 9-16-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-9]
(3) Gas-filled light tubes (i.e., neon) shall be allowed.
(4) Internal illumination is permitted in:
(a) Individual back-lit letters which are silhouetted against softly
illuminated walls.
(b) Individual letters with translucent faces, containing soft
lighting elements inside each letter.
(c) Metal-faced box signs with cut-out letters and self-glow
fluorescent tubes.
(5) Direct external lighting shall be permitted as follows:
(a) Signs shall be illuminated only with steady, stationary, shielded
light sources directed solely onto the sign without causing
glare.
(b) Light sources which cast light on signs shall be shielded by
opaque material so that the bulbs, floodlights or tubes are not
visible off the property on which the signs are located.
K. Individual identification and joint identification signs.
(1) The display board shall be of an integrated and uniform design.
(2) Joint freestanding identification signs shall be required for three or
more establishments on the same lot. The maximum sign area
permitted is 32 square feet for the sign bearing the name of the
building or office park, and 16 square feet for the name of each
establishment located therein. [Amended 9-16-1996 by Ord. No.
1996-9; 3-3-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-02]
(3) A joint sign shall be freestanding only.
(4) For wall signs, the maximum square footage of sign area shall be
one square foot per linear foot of store frontage up to 400 square
feet maximum. [Amended 6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-5270;
3-3-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-02]
270. Editor's Note: Former Subsection K(4), which contained provisions for properties with
over 300 feet of frontage, was repealed 6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-1. This ordinance also
provided for the redesignation of former Subsections K(5) and K(6) as Subsections K(4)
and K(5), respectively.
§ 195-150 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-150
144:764
(5) For wall signs on buildings with more than one facade, one wall
sign shall be permitted for each facade. The maximum sign area
shall be 50% of the area permitted for the store frontage.
L. Integral roof signs.
(1) Integral roof signs shall be permitted in the NC, BE, CH, I and IE
Districts. [Amended 6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-5]
(2) Integral roof signs shall not extend more than six inches from the
roof.
(3) Integral roof signs shall be considered a wall sign when calculating
square footage. [Added 9-16-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-9]
M. Information signs.
(1) Information signs may be located in the R-3, NC, BE, CH, I and IE
Districts and nonresidential uses in the C, FRA, RR, R-1 and R-2
Districts. [Amended 6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-5]
(2) Information signs may be wall, projecting or freestanding.
(3) Information signs shall not exceed 12 square feet in sign area.
[Amended 9-16-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-9]
N. Nonconforming signs.
(1) Nonconforming signs shall be permitted to continue subject to the
following provisions:
(a) In the event that a business ceases operation for a period of
time in excess of 30 days, the sign owner or lessee, or the
property owner, shall immediately remove any sign identifying
or advertising such business or any product sold thereon. Any
subsequent signs shall thereafter comply with this article.
(b) In the event that a nonconforming sign is damaged, dangerous,
destroyed or in disrepair to any extent by any means, such sign
shall be removed, with any subsequent sign complying with the
terms of this article.
(c) A nonconforming sign shall be made to comply with the
requirements of this article when the sign frame is replaced or
the sign is relocated. [Amended 9-16-1996 by Ord. No.
1996-9]
(d) All nonconforming signs within the Township shall be made to
conform to all pertinent regulations or be removed within 10
years after the effective date of this chapter, except that
business identification signs on legal nonconforming uses may
be continued and maintained as part of the legal
nonconforming use.
§ 195-150 PLUMBING § 195-150
144:765
(e) This section shall not apply to temporary signs.
O. Off-premises signs. Off-premises signs shall be permitted in the NC, BE,
CH, I and IE Districts, and: [Amended 8-15-2005 by Ord. No.
2004-12]
(1) Shall not be larger than two square feet in area, unless otherwise
specified. [Amended 3-3-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-02]
(2) Must be set back two feet from the right-of-way. [Amended
3-3-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-02]
(3) Must be located 500 feet apart.
(4) There shall be not more than two off-premises signs at one location.
P. Painted wall sign.
(1) A sign painted on a wall shall be considered a wall sign and meet
the requirements applicable to the zoning district in which it is
situated.
(2) Advertising painted upon or displayed upon a barn or other
structure shall be considered a sign and shall comply with the
regulations of this article.
Q. Political sign.
(1) Political signs shall be permitted in all districts.
(2) Such signs are permitted if they are stationary, unlighted and
temporary.
(3) Such signs shall be removed within seven days after a voting day.
[Amended 8-7-2000 by Ord. No. 2008; 5-16-2005 by Ord. No.
2004-17]
(4) Political signs shall be no larger than 16 square feet in size and be
no taller than six feet. [Amended 8-7-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-8;
5-16-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-17271]
R. Product sign.
(1) Product signs shall be permitted in NC, BE, CH, I and IE Districts.
[Amended 6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-5; 3-3-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-02]
(2) A product sign may be a wall, freestanding or projecting sign.
(3) The product name shall not occupy more than 25% of the sign area.
271. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection P(5), requiring an escrow deposit, as amended
7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-7, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed
5-16-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-17.
§ 195-150 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-150
144:766
S. Projecting sign.
(1) Projecting signs shall be attached to the building wall and not
exceed 32 square feet maximum in area. [Amended 3-3-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-02]
(2) The supporting framework for projecting signs shall be in
proportion to the size of such sign.
(3) Projecting signs which overhang a pedestrian or vehicular way
(including sidewalks) shall be covered by a liability insurance
policy which names the property owner as the insured party.
(4) Signs shall not project into a public right-of-way.
(5) There shall be no more than one projecting sign per establishment.
(6) Projecting signs shall have a minimum clearance of eight feet
above grade level.
(7) Projecting signs shall have a minimum clearance of 13 feet when
projecting over a private vehicular way.
T. Real estate sign.
(1) Real estate signs shall be permitted in all districts.
(2) In the C, RR, FRA, R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts, real estate signs shall
meet the following requirements:
(a) Real estate signs shall not exceed two square feet in area.
[Amended 3-3-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-02]
(b) Real estate signs shall not exceed three feet in height.
[Amended 3-3-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-02]
(c) Setback for real estate signs shall be two feet from the right-ofway
and not be taller than three feet above finish grade, so as
to avoid conflict of site distances from driveway and/or
intersections. [Amended 3-3-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-02]
(d) Not more than one sign shall be placed upon any property
unless such property has a frontage of 100 feet or more, in
which case two signs shall be permitted for one property.
(e) For corner lots, each street frontage may be permitted one sign
unless such property has a frontage of 100 feet or more, in
which case two signs shall be permitted for each street
frontage.
(f) Real estate signs must be removed within 48 hours after
transfer of property.
§ 195-150 PLUMBING § 195-150
144:767
(3) In NC, BE, CH, I and IE Districts, real estate signs shall meet the
following requirements: [Amended 8-15-2005 by Ord. No.
2004-12]
(a) Real estate signs shall not exceed 20 square feet in area.
(b) Real estate signs shall not exceed eight feet in height.
(c) Setback for real estate signs shall be two feet from the right-ofway.
The location shall not obstruct site triangle distances.
[Amended 3-3-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-02]
(d) Not more than one sign shall be placed upon any property
unless such property has a frontage of 100 feet or more, in
which case two signs shall be permitted for one property.
(e) For corner lots, each street frontage may be permitted one sign
unless such property has a frontage of 100 feet or more, in
which case two signs shall be permitted.
(f) Real estate signs must be removed within 48 hours after
transfer of property.
U. Temporary signs.
(1) Portable or trailer signs, banner or pennant signs, flag signs or
search lights may be placed only within the NC, BE, CH, I or IE
Districts. [Amended 9-16-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-9; 8-15-2005
by Ord. No. 2004-12]
(2) Portable or trailer signs.
(a) Portable or trailer signs shall only be displayed for a period not
greater than 30 consecutive days.
(b) Portable or trailer signs may be displayed for a period not to
exceed 90 days within a calendar year.
(c) A zoning permit shall be issued for each thirty-day period.
(3) Banner signs or pennants.
(a) Banner signs or pennants shall be displayed for a period not to
exceed 30 days for special events such as grand openings,
promotions, etc. [Amended 3-3-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-02]
(b) A zoning permit shall be issued for each thirty-day period.
[Amended 3-3-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-02]
(c) Banner signs or pennants may be displayed for a period not to
exceed 30 days in a calendar year.
(4) Flag signs.
§ 195-150 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-150
144:768
(a) Flag signs that are not permanently installed shall be displayed
for a period not to exceed 30 days for special events such as
grand openings, promotions, etc. [Amended 3-3-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-02]
(b) Flag signs may be displayed for a period not to exceed 30 days
in a calendar year.
(c) A zoning permit shall be issued for each thirty-day period.
[Amended 3-3-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-02]
(5) Search lights. [Added 9-16-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-9]
(a) Search lights shall only be displayed for a period not greater
than 24 consecutive hours.
(b) Search lights may be displayed for a period not to exceed 72
hours within a calendar year.
(c) A zoning permit shall be issued for each twenty-four-day
period.
(6) The above requirements do not apply to signs exempt from sign
permits and fees in accordance with § 195-147A. [Amended
9-16-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-9]
V. Wall signs.
(1) Individual letters or symbols used to create a wall sign shall meet
the following requirements:
(a) Letters or symbols shall not project more than 12 inches from
the building surface.
(b) Such letters and symbols shall not obscure the architectural
features of the building to which they are attached.
(c) Such letters and symbols shall not extend above the lowest
part of the roof, nor beyond the ends of the wall to which they
are attached.
(2) A wall sign shall not project more than 12 inches horizontally from
the wall of the building and must be a minimum of eight feet above
the sidewalk.
(3) Where a lot fronts on more than one street, the aggregate sign area
facing each street frontage shall be calculated separately.
(4) Wall signs shall not extend above the lowest point of the roof, nor
beyond the ends of the wall to which it is attached.
(5) Wall signs shall not extend higher than the eave line or top of the
parapet wall of the principal building.
§ 195-150 PLUMBING § 195-150
144:769
W. Window signs. Window signs shall not exceed more than 30% of the
window area in which they are displayed.
§ 195-150 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-150
144:770
ARTICLE XXIV
Nonconforming Buildings and Uses
§ 195-151. Intent.
§ 195-152. Continuation of nonconformity.
The Zoning Officer shall be responsible for the proper registration of
premises occupied by a lawful nonconforming use, lot, building or structure
existing after the effective date of this chapter and issuance of a certificate
of nonconformance, which shall be for the purpose of ensuring to the
owner the right to continue such nonconformity in accordance with the
provisions of Article XXIV. It is the property owner's responsibility to assist
the Zoning Officer in the identification and registration of nonconforming
uses, lots, buildings and structures they are accountable for. A certificate of
nonconformance shall be required when a nonconforming use, structure or
A. Within the districts established by the Zoning Ordinance passed June 3,
1968, or amendments that may be later adopted, there exist lots,
buildings, structures and uses which were lawful before this chapter
was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated or
restricted under the terms of this chapter or later amendment.
[Amended 1-20-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-2]
B. The legitimate interests of those who lawfully established these
nonconformities are recognized in Article XXIV by permitting such uses
to continue subject to regulations for and limitations upon their
restoration, reconstruction or extensions. It is recognized, however,
that nonconformities substantially and adversely affect the
development, maintenance, use and taxable value of other properties in
the district that are subject to the regulations of this chapter. In order
to secure eventual compliance with the standards of this chapter, it is
therefore necessary to regulate nonconformities and to prevent their
reestablishment once they have been discontinued. It is further the
intent of this chapter that nonconformities not be used as grounds for
adding other buildings or structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the
same district.
C. To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall affect the plans,
construction or designated use of any building or structure on which
actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date or
amendment to this chapter. Actual building construction means the
placing and fastening of construction materials in a permanent manner.
In the case where a demolition or removal of an existing building or
structure has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such
demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction if a
building permit has been obtained, provided that work shall be
diligently carried on until completion of the building or structure is
accomplished and a certificate of occupancy is issued.
§ 195-151 PLUMBING § 195-152
144:771
building is proposed or changed to another nonconforming use, expanded
or repaired prior to the issuance of building or zoning permits.
§ 195-153. Nonconforming lots of record. [Amended 1-20-1997 by
Ord. No. 1997-2]
In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted,
notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter, a
single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected
on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment
of this chapter passed June 3, 1968. This provision shall apply even though
such lots fail to meet the requirements for area, width or street frontage
requirements, that are generally applicable in the district, provided that
yard dimensions and other requirements not involving area, width or street
frontage, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which
such lot is located. Any variance of yard requirements shall be obtained only
through application to and authorization by the Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 195-154. Nonconforming uses.
A. Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter,
passed June 3, 1968, a lawful use of land, building or structures exists
that is made no longer permissible under the terms of this chapter, such
use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to
the following provisions:
(1) Restoration. When nonconforming use status applies to the land,
the removal of the use shall eliminate the nonconforming status of
the land and any further use of land shall conform to the applicable
zoning requirements of that district. "Removal," for the purpose of
this subsection, is defined as the removal by any means to any
extent of more than 50% of the replacement cost at the time of
removal.
(2) Extension. A nonconforming use of a building may be extended to
any portion of the building that was designed or arranged for such
use at the time of adoption or amendment of this chapter.
(3) Reconstruction. In the event that a building or structure containing
a nonconforming use is damaged or destroyed by any means to any
extent, it may be reconstructed, provided that such reconstruction
does not occupy a greater area than the structure that was
damaged or destroyed and provided that the reconstruction starts
within one year.
(4) Repairs and maintenance. On any building or structure devoted in
whole or in part to a nonconforming use, work may be done as
ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls,
fixtures, wiring or plumbing. Remodeling shall be limited to 25% of
the current replacement value of the building at the time the
application for the permit is made.
§ 195-152 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-154
144:772
B. Nothing in Subsection A shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening
or restoring to a safe condition of any structure or part thereof declared
to be unsafe by the Code Enforcement Officer or his designee upon
order of such Officer.
C. Termination of nonconforming use status.
(1) Abandonment. A nonconforming use of land, building or structure
which has been abandoned shall not thereafter be returned to such
nonconforming use, except when the discontinuance is due to a
death and administration of the decedent's estate, in which event
the discontinuance shall not be presumed to start until estate
administration is terminated or a court order concerning the
disposition of the estate has been entered or when the property is
part of a bankruptcy proceeding. For purposes of administration of
this chapter, a nonconforming use shall be considered abandoned
when:
(a) The use has been discontinued for a period of three years; or
(b) The characteristic equipment and furnishings of the
nonconforming use have been removed from the premises and
have not been replaced by similar equipment within three
years.
D. Replacement of nonconforming use. Any land, structure or building on
which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use shall
thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which such land,
structure or structure and premises in combination is located and the
nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
E. Moving. No such nonconforming use of land, building or structure shall
be moved in whole or in part to any other position on the property
occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of
this chapter.
F. Accessory structure. No accessory structure or building not conforming
to the requirements of this chapter shall be erected in connection with
such nonconforming use of land, building or structure. Any existing
accessory structure shall be allowed to expand as provided by the
requirements of Subsection H. Accessory structures in the
Conservation District are permitted, provided that the accessory
structure meets the requirement of § 195-95. [Amended 1-20-1997 by
Ord. No. 1997-2]
G. Expansion of single-family dwellings within the Conservation District.
Land, building or structures devoted to a residential single-family use
not permitted by this chapter in the Conservation District may be
allowed to expand, provided that the expansion meets the requirements
of §§ 195-19A, D, E, F, G, J and K.
§ 195-154 PLUMBING § 195-154
144:773
H. Special exceptions. The Zoning Hearing Board may grant a special
exception to the following nonconforming situations; expansion of a
nonconforming use and change of an existing nonconforming use to
another nonconforming use. [Amended 1-20-1997 by Ord. No.
1997-2]
(1) Expansion. Land, building or structures devoted to a residential or
nonresidential use not permitted by this chapter in the district in
which it is located may be allowed to expand once by not more than
25% of the existing lot area for nonconforming uses of land or floor
area for nonconforming building or structure. The expansion of
land, building or structure use containing a nonconforming
residential, business or manufacturing use may be authorized by
the Zoning Hearing Board only if the following findings of fact are
made relative to the proposed expansion:
(a) That the proposed expansion will not adversely affect the
health, safety and welfare of persons residing or working in the
district.
(b) That the expansion shall not exceed 25% of the total floor area
of the nonconforming use.
(c) That such expansion shall only be authorized by the Zoning
Hearing Board once.
(d) That the proposed expansion will not cause a depreciation of
the value of other property and uses permitted in the district.
(e) That the proposed expansion will be able to adequately handle
increases in traffic and safely ingress and egress.
(f) That the proposed expansion will not adversely affect the
privacy of persons residing in the immediate vicinity.
(g) That the proposed expansion will not reduce parking incidental
to the nonconforming use.
(h) That the proposed expansion will not increase the hazard in the
area of fire, offensive noise, smoke, dust, debris or other
objectionable influences.
[1] That the proposed expansion will not inhibit the
desirability, feasibility and likelihood of future permitted
uses in the district.
[2] Such expansion shall not be authorized unless the area
that is expanded conforms to applicable off-street parking
provisions of Article XXII.
[3] The Zoning Hearing Board may specify other reasonable
restrictions upon the proposed expansion as deemed
necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of
§ 195-154 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-154
144:774
§ 195-155. Nonconforming buildings or structures. [Amended
1-20-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-2]
Where a lawful building or structure exists at the effective date of adoption
or amendment of this chapter, passed June 3, 1968, that could not be
built under the terms of this chapter by reason of restrictions on area,
lot coverage, height, yards or other characteristics of the structure or its
location on the lot, such building or structure may be continued so long as
it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
persons residing within the vicinity of the nonconforming
use.
(2) Change. Any nonconforming use of land, building or structure may
be changed to another nonconforming use, provided that the
following condition is met:
(a) That the proposed use is of the same or more restricted
classification. When a nonconforming use has been changed to
a use of a more restricted classification, such use shall not
thereafter be changed to a use of a lesser restrictive
classification.
A. Expansion of residential or nonresidential buildings or structures. A
nonconforming residential or nonresidential building or structure
which contains a permitted use may be enlarged or altered, provided
that such enlargement or alteration conforms to the following
requirements:
(1) Shall be permitted to expand once by not more than 25% of the
existing floor area. Such expansion shall not extend beyond the
existing nonconforming front, side or rear yard building lines. No
enlargement or alteration shall occur in any required front yard in
a manner that increases its nonconformity.
(2) The area expanded shall meet the parking requirements of Article
XXII.
B. Moving. No nonconforming residential or nonresidential structure shall
be moved in whole or in part for any distance to another location on the
same or on another lot unless the entire structure shall thereafter
conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located after
being moved.
C. Reconstruction. In the event that a nonconforming residential or
nonresidential structure which contains a permitted use is damaged or
destroyed by any means to any extent, it may be reconstructed,
provided that such reconstruction does not occupy a greater area than
the structure that was damaged or destroyed, and provided that the
reconstruction starts within two years.
§ 195-154 PLUMBING § 195-156
144:775
§ 195-156. Effect of district changes.
Whenever the boundaries or uses of a district shall be changed, the
foregoing provisions shall also apply to any nonconforming lots, uses,
buildings or structures existing therein or created thereby.
§ 195-156 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-156
144:776
ARTICLE XXV
Conditional Uses
§ 195-157. Specific standards for conditional uses.
In addition to the general criteria in § 195-188F, the following standards
shall be applied to each individual conditional use. These standards must
be satisfied prior to approval of any application for a conditional use. The
applicant shall be required to demonstrate compliance with these standards
and must furnish whatever evidence is necessary to demonstrate such
compliance. All uses must comply with the standards expressed within the
underlying district unless those standards expressed for each conditional
use specify different standards; in such cases, the specific conditional use
standards shall apply.
§ 195-158. Boardinghouses in R-3 District.272
Boardinghouses to be located in the R-3 District are regulated as follows:
§ 195-159. Churches in FRA, RR and R-1 Districts.
Churches to be located in the FRA, RR and R-1 Districts are regulated as
follows:
A. The applicant shall provide evidence that the boardinghouse shall meet
the following standards:
(1) Traffic generated by the boardinghouse shall not exceed that which
would be generated by the principal permitted uses in the R-3
District.
(2) The minimum lot area shall be one acre.
(3) Serviced by public water and public sewage.
(4) Rooms for lodging shall have a minimum gross floor area of 150
square feet.
(5) An operation and maintenance plan shall be furnished and
implemented by the applicant in accordance with Article XVIII,
§ 195-100.
(6) The boardinghouse shall be occupied by the owner(s) at all times.
A. The applicant shall provide evidence that the church shall meet the
following standards:
(1) The minimum lot area shall be two acres.
(2) The minimum lot width shall be 200 feet.
272. Editor’s Note: Former § 195-158, Bars in HH District, was repealed 8-15-2005 by Ord. No.
2004-12. See now § 195-103R. This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of
former §§ 195-159 through 195-169 as §§ 195-158 through 195-168, respectively.
§ 195-157 PLUMBING § 195-159
144:777
§ 195-160. Community activity buildings in RR, R-1, R-2 or R-3
Districts.
Community activity buildings located in the RR, R-1, R-2 or R-3 Districts are
regulated as follows:
(3) There shall be vehicular access to a local collector road.
(4) Accessory parking, picnic areas, accessory church-related
residences, church-related educational or day-care facilities or
other accessory uses shall not be located on a separate lot.
(5) On-street parking shall be prohibited.
(6) Parking areas should be secured from vehicular access when not in
use.
(7) In church-related education, day-care facilities or other
transportation services, a passenger "dropoff and pickup" area
shall be provided and arranged so that passengers do not have to
cross traffic lanes on or adjacent to the site.
(8) The screening requirements of Article XIX, § 195-124, may be
reduced to Level Two screening upon approval by the Board of
Supervisors.
B. Church-related educational or day-care facilities for children shall
provide outdoor play areas in accordance with the following
requirements:
(1) Required play areas shall be provided at a rate of 100 square feet
per child.
(2) Off-street parking lots shall not be used for outdoor play areas.
(3) Play areas shall not be located in the front yard.
(4) Play areas must be set back 25 feet from all property lines.
(5) Outdoor play areas should provide a means of shade, such as shade
trees or pavilions.
(6) All play equipment installed in play areas shall meet United States
Consumer Product Safety Standards.
A. The applicant shall provide evidence that the community activity
building shall meet the following standards:
(1) All buildings and structures shall be designed to be compatible to
the residential neighborhood. To the best extent possible, the
buildings and structures should be designed to have the exterior
appearance of a residence.
§ 195-159 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-160
144:778
§ 195-161. Convenience stores in R-1 District.
Convenience stores located in the R-1 District are regulated as follows:
(2) The minimum lot area for a community activity building shall be
two acres.
B. The applicant shall provide evidence that the proposed use will not be
detrimental to adjoining properties with regard to the following:
(1) Noise.
(2) Lighting.
(3) Hours of operation.
(4) Loitering.
(5) Security.
(6) Adequate screening and/or buffering.
A. The applicant shall provide evidence that the convenience store shall
meet the following standards:
(1) The convenience store shall be located on a collector road in
accordance with the functional classification of roads in the
Comprehensive Plan.
(2) All buildings and structures shall be designed to be compatible to
the residential neighborhood. To the best extent possible, the
buildings and structures should be designed to have the exterior
appearance of a residence.
(3) The minimum lot size shall be one acre.
(4) No outdoor storage shall be permitted.
(5) No automobile-related uses, arcades or adult-related uses shall be
permitted with the exception of one gasoline pump island.
Additional gasoline pump islands may be permitted upon approval
by the Board of Supervisors.
(6) The gasoline canopy shall be set back 15 feet from the property line
and/or right-of-way line.
B. The applicant shall provide evidence that the proposed use will not be
detrimental to adjoining properties with regard to the following:
(1) Noise.
(2) Light.
(3) Hours of operation.
§ 195-160 PLUMBING § 195-161
144:779
§ 195-162. Elementary or secondary schools and institutions of
higher education in RR and FRA District. [Amended 11-19-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-5]
Elementary or secondary schools and institutions of higher education
located in the RR and FRA District are regulated as follows:
§ 195-163. Hazardous waste management facilities in IE District.
Hazardous waste management facilities located in the IE District are
regulated as follows:
(4) Litter.
(5) Waste disposal.
(6) Security.
(7) Adequate screening and/or buffering.
C. An operation and maintenance plan shall be furnished and implemented
by the applicant in accordance with Article XVIII, § 195-100.
A. The applicant shall provide evidence that the elementary or secondary
schools and institutions of higher education shall meet the following
standards:
(1) Play areas shall not be located in the front yard.
(2) "Dropoff" and "pickup" areas shall be provided and arranged so
that passengers do not have to cross traffic lanes on or adjacent to
the site.
(3) All accessory uses, structures or buildings shall be located in the
rear yard.
(4) Minimum lot size shall be five acres.
(5) Impervious surface coverage shall not exceed 25%.
(6) Maximum height of school auditoriums and gymnasiums shall not
exceed 50 feet in height. All other faculties shall not exceed the
height requirement of the district in which it is located.
B. The applicant shall provide evidence that the proposed use will not be
detrimental to adjoining properties with regard to the following:
(1) Noise.
(2) Lighting.
(3) Loitering.
(4) Adequate screening and/or buffering.
§ 195-161 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-163
144:780
A. The applicant shall provide evidence that the hazardous waste
management facility shall meet the following standards:
(1) The applicant shall demonstrate continued compliance with all
applicable state and federal standards and regulations. Evidence of
compliance shall be in the form of a written statement.
(2) Minimum lot area shall be two acres.
(3) A facility shutdown contingency plan during a facility shutdown
shall be submitted to the Township.
(4) The hazardous waste facility shall be connected to the public sewer.
The applicant shall submit documentation that the Water and
Sewer Authority will supply the needed sewage service to the site.
(5) If groundwater or surface water will be used to provide water to
the development, a water feasibility study shall be provided to
enable the Township to evaluate the impact of the proposed
development on the groundwater or surface water supply and on
existing wells. The purpose of the study will be to determine if
there is an adequate supply of water for the proposed development
and to estimate the impact of the new development on existing
wells in the vicinity. The water feasibility study shall be reviewed
and approved by the Township Engineer.
(6) The applicant shall provide an analysis of the physical conditions of
the primary road system serving the proposed use. The analysis
shall include information on current traffic flows on this road
system, and projections of traffic generated by the proposed use.
Improvements to the road shall be provided by the applicant to
ensure safe turning movements to and from the site and safe
through movement on the existing road.
(7) Any area used for the unloading, transfer, storage, processing,
incineration or deposition of hazardous waste must be completely
screened from ground level view at the property line.
(8) The outdoor storage shall be completely enclosed by an eight-foot
solid screened fence.
(9) The outdoor area devoted to the storage shall be set back at a
minimum of 100 feet unless reduced by the Board of Supervisors.
In no case shall the minimum setback for an outdoor area devoted
to the storage of junk be less than 50 feet.
(10)No material may be stored or stacked so that it is visible from
adjoining properties and/or roads.
(11) All driveways onto the site shall be paved for a distance of at least
200 feet from the street right-of-way line.
§ 195-163 PLUMBING § 195-163
144:781
§ 195-164. Health clubs in R-3 District.
Health clubs located in the R-3 District are regulated as follows:
(12) All uses shall provide stacking lanes into the facility so that vehicles
waiting to be weighed, unloaded or loaded will not back up onto
public roads.
(13)No use will be located within 200 yards of any body of water, well
or any water intakes for homes or public water supply system.
B. The applicant shall provide evidence that the proposed use will not be
detrimental to adjoining properties with regard to the following:
(1) Noise.
(2) Light.
(3) Hours of operation.
(4) Litter.
(5) Waste disposal.
(6) Security.
(7) Adequate screening and/or buffering.
C. An operation and maintenance plan shall be furnished and implemented
by the applicant in accordance with Article XVIII, § 195-100.
A. The applicant shall provide evidence that the health club shall meet the
following standards:
(1) All buildings and structures shall be designed to be compatible to
the residential neighborhood. To the best extent possible, the
buildings and structures should be designed to have the exterior
appearance of a residence.
(2) The minimum lot area for a health club shall be two acres.
(3) The maximum lot area for a health club shall be five acres.
(4) All eating or retail uses shall be directly associated with the health
club. The eating or retail uses shall not be directly accessible from
the exterior of the building and shall be conducted within the
principal building.
(5) A health club shall have vehicular access to a local collector road.
B. The applicant shall provide evidence that the proposed use will not be
detrimental to adjoining properties with regard to the following:
(1) Noise.
§ 195-163 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-164
144:782
§ 195-165. Hospitals in BE and CH Districts. [Amended 8-15-2005
by Ord. No. 2004-12]
Hospitals located in the BE and CH District are regulated as follows:
§ 195-166. Incinerators in IE District.
Incinerators located in the IE District are regulated as follows:
(2) Lighting.
(3) Hours of operation.
(4) Loitering.
(5) Security.
(6) Adequate screening and/or buffering.
A. The applicant shall provide evidence that the hospital shall meet the
following standards:
(1) Minimum lot area shall be five acres.
(2) Hospitals shall be serviced by public sewer and water.
(3) The property shall have vehicular access to a local collector, minor
arterial or principal arterial roads.
(4) Emergency entrances shall be located on a building wall facing
away from adjoining residential uses or districts.
B. The applicant shall provide evidence that the proposed use will not be
detrimental to adjoining properties with regard to the following:
(1) Noise.
(2) Lighting.
(3) Security.
(4) Adequate screening and/or buffering.
(5) Waste disposal.
A. The applicant shall provide evidence that the incinerator shall meet the
following standards:
(1) The applicant shall demonstrate continued compliance with all
applicable state and federal standards and regulations. Evidence of
compliance shall be in the form of a written statement.
(2) Minimum lot area shall be two acres.
§ 195-164 PLUMBING § 195-166
144:783
(3) Any area used for the unloading, transfer, storage, processing,
incineration or deposition of refuse must be completely screened
from ground level view at the property line.
(4) The outdoor area devoted to the storage of junk shall be completely
enclosed by an eight-foot solid screened fence.
(5) The outdoor area devoted to the storage of junk shall be set back a
minimum of 100 feet unless reduced by the Board of Supervisors.
In no case shall the minimum setback for an outdoor area devoted
to the storage of junk be less than 50 feet.
(6) No material may be stored or stacked so that it is visible from
adjoining properties and roads.
(7) All driveways onto the site shall be paved for a distance of at least
200 feet from the street right-of-way line.
(8) All uses shall provide stacking lanes into the facility so that vehicles
waiting to be weighed, unloaded or loaded will not back up onto
public roads.
(9) A contingency plan for the disposal of solid waste during a facility
shutdown shall be submitted to the Township.
(10) An incinerator shall be connected to public sewer. The applicant
shall submit documentation that the Water and Sewer Authority
will supply the needed sewage service to the site.
(11) If groundwater or surface water will be used to provide to the
development, a water feasibility study shall be provided to enable
the Township to evaluate the impact of the proposed development
on the groundwater or surface water supply and on existing wells.
The purpose of the study will be to determine if there is an
adequate supply of water for the proposed development and to
estimate the impact of the new development on existing wells in the
vicinity. The water feasibility study shall be reviewed and approved
by the Township Engineer.
(12) The applicant shall provide an analysis of the physical conditions of
the primary road system serving the proposed use. The analysis
shall include information on current traffic flows on this road
system and projections of traffic generated by the proposed use.
Improvements to the road shall be provided by the applicant to
ensure safe turning movements to and from the site and safe
through movement on the existing road.
B. The applicant shall provide evidence that the proposed use will not be
detrimental to adjoining properties with regard to the following:
(1) Noise.
(2) Light.
§ 195-166 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-166
144:784
§ 195-167. Junkyards in IE District. [Amended 9-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-14]
(3) Hours of operation.
(4) Litter.
(5) Waste disposal.
(6) Security.
(7) Adequate screening and/or buffering.
C. An operation and maintenance plan shall be furnished and implemented
by the applicant in accordance with Article XVIII, § 195-100.
A. The applicant shall provide evidence that the junkyard shall meet the
following standards:
(1) Minimum lot area shall be two acres.
(2) All fluid handling shall be contained.
(3) The outdoor area devoted to the storage of junk shall be completely
enclosed by an eight-foot solid screened fence.
(4) The outdoor area devoted to the storage of junk shall be set back a
minimum of 100 feet from any environmentally sensitive area and
at least two feet above the one-hundred-year floodplain elevation
unless reduced by the Board of Supervisors. In no case shall the
minimum setback for an outdoor area devoted to the storage of
junk be less than 50 feet from a property line.
(5) No material may be stored or stacked so that it is visible from
adjoining properties and roads. Level III screening shall be
required if the adjacent property has an occupied dwelling unit on
it.
(6) Hours of operation shall be limited to 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
(7) Any outdoor torch cutting shall be under permit of PADEP
(8) All requirements of Chapter 173, Subdivision and Land
Development, have been met.
(9) All additional state and federal laws dealing with storage, handling,
shipping, recycling and/or disposal of hazardous materials shall be
satisfied.
B. The applicant shall provide evidence that the proposed use will not be
detrimental to adjoining properties with regard to the following:
(1) Noise.
(2) Light.
§ 195-166 PLUMBING § 195-167
144:785
§ 195-168. Manufactured home parks in R-3 District.
Manufactured home parks in the R-3 District are regulated as follows:
(3) Hours of operation.
(4) Litter.
(5) Housekeeping, including vector control.
(6) Waste disposal.
(7) Loitering.
(8) Security.
(9) Adequate screening and/or buffering.
C. An operation and maintenance plan shall be furnished and implemented
by the applicant in accordance with Article XVII, § 195-100.
A. The applicant shall provide evidence that the manufactured home park
shall meet the following standards:
(1) Manufactured home parks shall provide a perimeter screen
treatment as approved by the Board of Supervisors, which may
include any combination of the following, except as required by
Chapter 173, Subdivision and Land Development, § 173-52A(5):
(a) A six-foot wall in accordance with Article XIX, § 195-124, Level
Three, Option A.
(b) A six-foot landscaped berm in accordance with Article XIX,
§ 195-124, Level Three, Option C.
(c) Man-made landscaped screening in accordance with Article
XIX, § 195-124, Level One or Level Two.
(d) Existing natural screening.
(2) Manufactured homes placed in the park must meet the Department
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) standards.
(3) Manufactured homes placed in the park must be installed in
accordance with the UCC (Uniform Construction Code of
Pennsylvania, Act 45, as amended). [Amended 10-16-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-09]
(4) Home occupations shall not be permitted.
(5) Manufactured home parks shall provide landscaping in accordance
with Article XIX, § 195-123.
§ 195-167 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-168
144:786
§ 195-169. Nursing or convalescent homes in R-3 or NC Districts.
[Amended 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
Nursing or convalescent homes located in the R-3 or NC Districts are
regulated as follows:
§ 195-170. Public libraries in RR or R-1 Districts.273
Public libraries located in the RR or R-1 Districts are regulated as follows:
(6) Manufactured home parks shall provide a twenty-five-foot buffer
between adjacent single-family or two-family residential uses or
districts.
A. The applicant shall provide evidence that the nursing or convalescent
homes shall meet the following standards:
(1) Minimum lot area shall be five acres.
(2) Nursing or convalescent homes shall be serviced by public sewer
and water.
(3) The property shall have vehicular access to local collector, minor
arterial or principal arterial roads.
(4) All buildings and structures shall be designed to be compatible to
the residential neighborhood. To the best extent possible, the
buildings and structures should be designed to have the exterior
appearance of a residence.
B. The applicant shall provide evidence that the proposed use will not be
detrimental to adjoining properties with regard to the following:
(1) Noise.
(2) Lighting.
(3) Waste disposal.
(4) Adequate screening and/or buffering.
A. The applicant shall provide evidence that public libraries shall meet the
following standards:
(1) The minimum lot area shall be two acres.
(2) The minimum lot width shall be 200 feet.
(3) A library shall have vehicular access to a local collector road.
(4) Accessory parking shall not be located on a separate lot.
273. Editor’s Note: Former § 195-170, Motels or hotels in V District, was repealed 8-15-2005 by
Ord. No. 2004-12. This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former §§ 195-171
and 195-172 as §§ 195-169 and 195-170, respectively.
§ 195-168 PLUMBING § 195-170
144:787
§ 195-171. Private recreation areas in RR, R-1, and R-3 Districts.
[Amended 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
Recreation areas, private, located in the RR, R-1 and R-3 Districts are
regulated as follows:
(5) Parking areas should be secured from vehicular access when not in
use.
B. The applicant shall provide evidence that the public library will not be
detrimental to adjoining properties with regard to the following:
(1) Light.
(2) Hours of operation.
(3) Adequate screening and/or buffering.
A. The applicant shall provide evidence that the private recreation area
shall meet the following standards:
(1) In addition to the parking required by Article XXI, the Board of
Supervisors may require an unimproved, grassed overflow area to
be provided for peak use periods. Such overflow parking areas shall
be accessible only from the interior driveways of the permanent
parking lot. Overflow parking areas shall be designed to prevent
vehicles from crossing adjoining property or directly accessing
adjoining roads.
(2) Any outside pedestrian waiting lines shall be provided with a means
of shade.
(3) The minimum lot area shall be two acres.
(4) The minimum lot width shall be 200 feet.
(5) Accessory parking shall not be located on a separate lot.
(6) Parking areas should be secured from vehicular access when not in
use.
(7) In the RR and R-1 Districts, all buildings and structures shall be
designed to be compatible to the residential neighborhood. To the
best extent possible, the buildings and structures should be
designed to have the exterior appearance of a residence.
B. The applicant shall provide evidence that the private recreation area
will not be detrimental to adjoining properties with regard to the
following:
(1) Noise.
(2) Light.
(3) Hours of operation.
§ 195-170 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-171
144:788
§ 195-172. Single-family dwellings on lots in C District. [Amended
6-19-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-7; 9-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-13]
Single-family dwellings on existing lots of record with specified accessory
uses located in the C District are regulated as follows:
§ 195-173. Storage self-service facilities in CH District.275 [Amended
12-15-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-21; 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
Storage self-service facilities located in the CH District are regulated as
follows:
(4) Waste disposal.
(5) Adequate screening and/or buffering.
A. The applicant shall provide evidence that the single-family detached
dwelling shall meet the following standards:
(1) All requirements of § 195-19 must be met.
(2) Permitted accessory uses shall be in accordance with Article XVIII.
(3) (Reserved)274
(4) The lot must abut a public street or have direct access to a public
street by means of a publicly recorded, perpetual easement.
(5) Two approved sites for on-lot septic shall be provided.
(6) Ninety percent of the total lot area shall remain undisturbed in its
natural state. The 90% undisturbed area shall meet the following
requirements:
(a) Building(s) or impervious coverage shall not be permitted
within the 90% undisturbed natural area.
(b) The undisturbed natural area shall be defined with metes and
bounds as an easement. The easement shall be shown on the
site plan or application for building permit.
(c) The undisturbed natural area shall include all environmental
protection overlay areas defined by Article XVI.
(d) Uses permitted in any defined undisturbed natural area shall
be in accordance with applicable Environmental Protection
Overlay District requirements.
274. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(3), concerning the keeping of farm animals, as
amended, was repealed 4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2008-07.
275. Editor’s Note: Former § 195-173, Commercial recreation in the V District, was repealed
8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12. This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of
former §§ 195-174 through 195-182.1 as §§ 195-171 through 195-180, respectively.
§ 195-171 PLUMBING § 195-173
144:789
A. The applicant shall provide evidence that the storage self-service
facility shall meet the following standards:
(1) Parking shall be provided by parking/driving lanes adjacent to the
buildings. These lanes shall be at least 26 feet wide when cubicles
open onto one side of the lane only and at least 30 feet wide when
cubicles open onto both sides of the lane.
(2) Required parking spaces shall not be rented as or used for
vehicular storage. However, additional external storage area may
be provided for the storage of privately-owned travel trailers and/or
boats, so long as such external storage is screened from adjoining
residential uses or districts and adjoining roads and is located
behind the minimum front yard setback line. This provision shall
not be interpreted to permit the storage of dismantled, partially
dismantled, wrecked or inoperative vehicles.
(3) All storage shall be kept within an enclosed building.
(4) Storage of flammable, highly combustible, explosive or hazardous
chemicals, or other flammable materials, shall be prohibited. Any
fuel tanks and/or machinery or other apparatuses relying upon
such fuels shall be stored only in an external storage area as
described above.
(5) Repair, construction or reconstruction of any boat, engine, motor
vehicle or furniture shall be prohibited.
(6) No door openings for any self-storage facility shall be constructed
facing any residential use or district.
(7) Prohibited uses; restrictions.
(a) Self-service facilities shall be used solely for the dead storage
of property. The following uses are expressly prohibited:
[1] Auctions.
[2] Commercial wholesale or retail sales, including garage
sales.
[3] The operation of power tools or spray-painting equipment.
[4] The establishment of a transfer business.
[5] Any use or storage that is noxious because of odors, dust,
fumes or vibration.
(b) The applicant shall provide evidence to the Board of
Supervisors that the above restrictions are included in the
rental contract.
B. The applicant shall provide evidence that the proposed use will not be
detrimental to adjoining properties with regard to the following:
§ 195-173 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-173
144:790
§ 195-174. Adult entertainment uses in I District. [Added 11-6-1995
by Ord. No. 1995-10; amended 6-16-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-9]
(1) Light.
(2) Litter.
(3) Waste disposal.
(4) Security.
(5) Adequate screening and/or buffering.
A. Supplemental conditional use application information. In addition to the
information required for a conditional use application under § 195-188,
the applicant shall provide the following information:
(1) If the applicant intends to operate the adult entertainment business
under a name other than that of the applicant, he or she must
provide evidence of the adult entertainment business's fictitious
name and submit copies of the required registration documents. If
the applicant intends to operate the adult entertainment business
as a partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name, and
provide the names of all partners, whether the partnership is
general or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if any.
If the applicant is operating the business as a corporation, the
corporation shall state its complete name, the date of its
incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing
under the laws of its state of corporation and qualified and
authorized to conduct business in Pennsylvania, the names and
capacity of all officers, directors and principal stockholders and the
name of the registered corporate agent and address of the
registered office for service of process.
(2) Proof as to whether the applicant or a person residing with the
applicant currently holds or operates other similar adult
entertainment business in another municipality or county and, if so,
the names and locations of such other licensed or unlicensed
sexually oriented businesses.
(3) The specific classification of adult entertainment use for which the
applicant is filing.
(4) A recent photograph (one year) of the applicant(s).
(5) A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises,
including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business.
The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it
must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked
dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or
minus six inches.
§ 195-173 PLUMBING § 195-174
144:791
B. Standards and criteria for adult entertainment uses. The applicant shall
provide evidence that the adult entertainment uses shall meet the
following specific standards and criteria:
(1) Location requirement. The applicant shall provide evidence that
the adult entertainment use shall meet the following location and
separation distance requirements. Measurement shall be in a
straight line without regard to intervening structures or objects
from the nearest property line or premises where an adult
entertainment business is conducted to the nearest property line.
The distance between any two adult entertainment businesses shall
be measured in a straight line, without regard to the intervening
structures or objects or political boundaries, from the closest
exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located.
Presence of a municipal, county or other political subdivision
boundary shall be irrelevant for purposes of calculating and
applying the distance requirements of this section.
(a) Any adult entertainment use shall be located at a distance
greater than 1,000 feet from the following:
[1] A church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is
used primarily for religious activities;
[2] A public or private educational facility including but not
limited to child day-care facilities, nursery schools,
preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, private
schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle
schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary
schools, continuation schools, special education schools,
junior colleges, and universities; school includes the
school grounds, but does not include the facilities used
primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a
school;
[3] A licensed premises, licensed pursuant to the alcoholic
beverage control regulations of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania; and
[4] Any other adult entertainment use.
(b) Any adult entertainment use shall be located at a distance
greater than 800 feet from the following: the boundary of a
property used for residential purposes.
(c) Any adult entertainment use shall be located at a distance
greater than 500 feet from the following: a public park or
recreational area which has been designated for park or
recreational activities, including but not limited to park,
playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic
field, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths,
wilderness areas, or other similar public land within the
§ 195-174 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-174
144:792
Township which is under the control, operation, or
management of the Township park and recreation authorities.
(d) If an applicant wishes to operate an adult entertainment
business, which shall exhibit on the premises, in a viewing
room or booth of less than 150 square feet of floor space, films,
videocassettes, other video reproductions, or live
entertainment which depict specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, then the applicant shall also
comply with the application requirements set forth above.
(2) Exhibition of sexually explicit films, video or live entertainment in
viewing rooms. Where a person who operates or causes to be
operated an adult entertainment business, which exhibits on the
premises in a viewing room or booth of less than 150 square feet of
floor space, a film, videocassette, live entertainment, or other video
reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, shall provide evidence that the adult
entertainment will comply with the following requirements:
(a) The conditional use application shall be accompanied by a
diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the
location of one or more manager's stations and the location of
all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of
the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A
manger's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. A
professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's
or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each
diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated
street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or
with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal
dimensions of all areas of interior of the premises to an
accuracy of plus or minus six inches.
(b) The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
(c) No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's
station may be made without the prior approval of the
Township.
(d) The applicant shall provide evidence that the interior of the
premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of
the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any
purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain
video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more
manager's stations designated, then the interior of the
premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any
patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of
§ 195-174 PLUMBING § 195-174
144:793
the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection
must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station.
(e) The applicant shall provide evidence that any view area
remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, partitions, walls,
merchandise, display racks or other materials and, at all time,
to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the
premises which has been designated as an area in which
patrons will not be permitted.
(f) No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at
any time.
(3) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are
permitted access at an illumination of not less than five footcandles
as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the licensees to
ensure that the illumination described above as maintained at all
times that any patron is present in the premises.
(4) Openings of any kind shall not exist between viewing rooms or
booths and the applicant shall agree to permit the Township to
inspect the walls between viewing booths for openings or holes.
(5) The applicant shall provide evidence that all floor coverings in
viewing booths to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no
rugs or carpeting.
(6) The applicant shall provide evidence that all wall surfaces and
ceiling surfaces in viewing booths be constructed of, or
permanently covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable material. No
wood, plywood, composition board or other porous material shall
be used within 48 inches of the floor. Each viewing booth, room or
cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles and public
areas of the adult entertainment establishment and shall be
unobstructed by any door, lock, curtain, partition, portal partition
or any other control-type devices.
(7) The applicant shall provide evidence and assurances that no person
knowingly and intentionally in the adult entertainment business
appears in a state of nudity or depicts specified sexual activities.
(8) The applicant shall provide evidence and assurance that no person
knowingly or intentionally in an adult entertainment business
appears in a seminude condition unless the person is an employee,
who while seminude, shall be at least 10 feet from any patron or
customer and on a stage at least two feet from the floor.
(9) The applicant shall provide evidence and assurance that no
employee of the adult entertainment business, while seminude in
an adult entertainment business, shall solicit any pay or gratuity
from any patron or customer or any patron or customer shall pay or
§ 195-174 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-174
144:794
§ 195-175. Motor vehicle washing in I District. [Added 11-6-1995 by
Ord. No. 1995-10]
Motor vehicle washing to be located in the Interchange (I) District is
regulated as follows:
give any gratuity to any employee, while said employee is seminude
in an adult entertainment business.
(10) The applicant shall provide evidence and assurance that the adult
entertainment business will not permit any person under the age of
18 years on the premises of an adult entertainment business.
(11)No merchandise, pictures of the products, or entertainment on the
premises shall be displayed in window areas or anywhere they can
be viewed from a sidewalk or public street.
(12)Written assurance shall be provided to the Board of Supervisors
that authorization is given to allow Township officials (fire
marshals, code and zoning officer, building code official, police) to
inspect the premises for the purpose of ensuring compliance with
this chapter or other laws, at any time that the adult entertainment
use is occupied or open for business.
(13) The applicant shall provide evidence that the proposed use will not
be detrimental to adjoining properties with regard to the following:
(a) Property lighting.
(b) Noise.
(c) Hours of operation.
(d) Litter control.
(e) Waste disposal.
(f) Loitering.
(g) Security.
(h) Adequate screening and/or buffers.
A. The applicant shall provide evidence that the motor vehicle washing
uses shall meet the following standards:
(1) Minimum lot size shall be:
(a) For self-service motor vehicle washing: 15,000 square feet.
(b) For exterior drive-through motor vehicle washing or fullservice
vehicle washing: 25,000 square feet of lot area.
§ 195-174 PLUMBING § 195-175
144:795
§ 195-176. Truckstops in I District. [Added 11-6-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-10]
Truckstops to be located in the Interchange (I) District are regulated as
follows:
(2) Adequate parking and stacking spaces for vehicles waiting in line
for service shall meet the following requirements, in addition to the
parking requirements of Article XXII:
Wash Stacking
Spaces for Each
Washing Module
Drying Stacking
Spaces for Each
Washing Module
Self-service 2 2
Exterior drivethrough
1 0
Full-service 4 4
(3) Specific area shall be provided for the manual waxing, polishing
and vacuuming of vehicles. These areas shall not conflict with onsite
circulation patterns.
(4) Adequate provisions shall be made for the control of odors, steam
and other by-products of the use not normally present in the
surrounding environment.
(5) The washing building shall be set back 60 feet from the front rightof-
way line or shall have exit lanes 60 feet in length to contain
water dripping from cars on the site and away from public streets.
This requirement is not applicable if the motor vehicle wash will
have automated dryers that vacuum water from vehicles.
B. The applicant shall provide evidence that the proposed use will not be
detrimental to adjoining properties with regard to the following:
(1) Noise.
(2) Light.
(3) Litter.
(4) Waste disposal.
(5) Adequate screening and/or buffering.
C. A Water Facilities Feasibility Study shall be provided in accordance with
Article VI, § 173-32, of Chapter 173, Subdivision and Land
Development.
D. Sewage authorization shall be provided in accordance with § 195-102 of
this chapter.
§ 195-175 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-176
144:796
§ 195-177. Sportsman clubs in FRA District. [Added 4-16-1996 by
Ord. No. 1996-2]
Sportsman clubs located in the FRA District are regulated as follows:
A. The applicant shall provide evidence that the truckstop shall meet the
following standards:
(1) Interior circulation shall be designed to eliminate conflicts between
truck, automobile and pedestrian traffic.
(2) Entrance and exits shall be clearly delineated and lighted.
(3) Automobile and truck traffic shall be separated by jersey barriers
or other measures found acceptable by the Township Engineer.
(4) Acceleration and deceleration lanes shall be required as necessary
to minimize conflicts between traffic entering and exiting the
roadway, through traffic and truck and automobile turning
movements.
(5) Curbing shall be required and constructed in accordance with
Chapter 173, Subdivision and Land Development.
(6) Distance between driveways located on the same lot shall be 100
feet on minor collector and collector roads. Distance between
driveways located on the same lot shall be 50 feet on other roads.
(7) Distance from a driveway to the property line shall be 20 feet.
(8) A traffic study shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 173,
Subdivision and Land Development.
B. The applicant shall provide evidence that the proposed use will not be
detrimental to adjoining properties with regard to the following:
(1) Noise.
(2) Light.
(3) Litter.
(4) Waste disposal.
(5) Loitering.
(6) Security.
(7) Adequate screening and/or buffering.
A. The applicant shall provide evidence that the sportsman club shall meet
the following standards:
(1) All buildings and structures shall be designed to be compatible to
the residential neighborhood. To the best extent possible, the
§ 195-176 PLUMBING § 195-177
144:797
buildings and structures should be designed to have the exterior
appearance of a residence.
(2) The perimeter boundary of the property shall be adequately
delineated with warning signs posted every 50 feet or fencing to
protect person(s) so that access to the site is controlled to ensure
the safety of patrons, spectators and the public at large.
(3) The minimum range area needed shall be as follows:
(a) Archery target range shall be based on the number of firing
lines in an archery target range measured at a distance of 300
feet by 15 feet. (Example: A fifteen-line archery target range
would require 1.5 acres. Calculation: 300 x 15 = 4,500 x 15 =
67,500 square feet.)
(b) Twenty acres for skeet and trap shooting. (Approximately
1,000 feet by 1,000 feet of shooting range area.)
(c) Forty acres for competition archery field course or hunter's
course with 48 stations at a total course or target length of
5,000 feet. Noncompetition archery field course or hunters
courses shall be 0.83 acres per station.
(d) Pistol or air gun target range shall be based on the number of
firing lines in a pistol or air gun target range measured at a
distance of 150 feet by 15 feet. (Example: A thirty-line pistol
range would require 1.5 acres. Calculation: 150 x 15 = 2,250 x
30 = 67,500 square feet.)
(e) Rifle range shall be based on the number of firing lines in a rifle
range measured at a distance of 350 feet by 15 feet. (Example:
A thirteen-line rifle range would require 1.6 acres. Calculation:
350 x 15 = 5,250 x 13 = 68,250 square feet.)
(f) Long-distance target shooting range shall be based on the
number of firing lines in a long-distance target shooting range
measured at a distance of 1,000 feet by 15 feet. (Example: A
four-line long-range target shooting range would require 1.4
acres. Calculation: 1,000 x 15 = 15,000 x 4 = 60,000 square
feet.)
(4) Archery-related activities shall meet the following:
(a) Each archery target shall be equipped with a wood backstop
filled to the top of the backstop structure with clean fill (no
stones) at a minimum of seven feet in height, or earth berm at a
minimum of seven feet in height or natural backstop, i.e., hill,
slope or a combination thereof.
(b) All firing lines for archery ranges shall have a twenty-five-yard
over-flight area.
§ 195-177 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-177
144:798
(c) Field courses and hunter courses shall provide safety barriers
to protect patrons, spectators and the public at large.
(d) Communication for emergency purposes shall be provided on
the course in large field courses and hunters courses 10 acres
or more.
(5) Firearm-related activities shall meet the following:
(a) Each firearm range shall be equipped with a backstop that
prevents bullets from leaving the range. Wood backstops shall
be filled to the top of the backstop structure with clean fill (no
stones) and should be a minimum of seven feet in height and
may include earth berms at a minimum of seven feet in height
or natural backstop, i.e., hill, slope or a combination thereof.
(b) Each firearm range shall be designed to provide for a safety
zone and ricochet zone to be located at either end of the firing
line. The safety zone shall be the area within a forty-five-degree
angle from either end of the firing line. The ricochet zone shall
be an area of approximately a forty-five-degree angle from the
firing line and extending to the end of the range.
(c) No structures or pedestrian areas shall be located within the
safety zone or ricochet zone.
(d) Communication for emergency purposes shall be accessible to
the firearm range.
(6) All ranges shall be oriented with a north-south axis as much as
possible. Competition archery field and hunters courses shall be
exempt from this requirement.
(7) All firearm ranges (pistol and rifle) shall be equipped with adequate
barriers to reduce noise. The barriers may be in the form of natural
hills or man-made berms behind the targets with a height adequate
to restrict noise from leaving the firearm range.
(8) Safety baffles shall be provided in the form of a structure or a
series of structures, barriers, side berms or orienting the firearm
range using the natural contours of the land to restrict bullets and
arrows to the range. Safety baffles shall be maintenance-free if
possible, i.e., earth berms on the ground and wood for overhead
structures. See illustration. Baffles should be constructed as part of
overhead shelters at the firing line. Side berms and backstops can
also be used as a baffle.
(9) Off-street parking required shall be 1.5 spaces for each shooting or
firing point, plus one off-street parking space for every 400 square
feet of building floor area. Off-street parking shall meet the
requirements of Article XXII.
§ 195-177 PLUMBING § 195-177
144:799
§ 195-178. Light industrial of low to moderate hazard in CH
District. [Added 3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-3; 10-16-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-09]
Light industrial of low to moderate hazard to be located in the Commercial
Highway (CH) District are regulated as follows:
(10) The applicant shall provide evidence that the proposed use will not
be detrimental to adjoining properties with regard to the following:
(a) Noise.
(b) Light.
(c) Hours of operation.
(d) Litter.
(e) Waste disposal.
(f) Loitering.
(g) Security.
(h) Adequate screening and buffering. A minimum of a onehundred-
foot buffer area shall be provided.
A. The applicant shall provide evidence that the light industrial use shall
meet the following standards:
(1) Floor area ratio (FAR) shall be 0.23. Calculation: total floor area
divided by lot area.
(2) Building size. No building shall have a gross floor area in excess of
50,000 square feet.
(3) Buffer yards and screening shall be in accordance with § 195-122C.
(4) Outside storage of any kind shall be prohibited.
(5) The light industrial use shall be conducted wholly within the
building.
(6) The use shall be served by public sewage.
(7) There shall be submitted a written report verifying that the use is in
compliance with the performance standards of Article XX.
(8) The site must have adequate truck parking and stacking lanes to
accommodate truck traffic.
B. The applicant shall provide evidence that the proposed use will not be
detrimental to adjoining properties with regard to the following:
(1) Noise.
§ 195-177 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-178
144:800
§ 195-179. Heavy industrial of low to moderate hazard in the CH
District. [Added 3-17-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-3; 10-16-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-09]
Heavy industrial of low to moderate hazard to be located in the Commercial
Highway (CH) District are regulated as follows:
(2) Light.
(3) Hours of operation.
(4) Litter.
(5) Waste disposal.
(6) Water usage.
C. An operation and maintenance plan shall be furnished and implemented
by the applicant in accordance with § 195-100.
A. The applicant shall provide evidence that the heavy industrial use shall
meet the following standards:
(1) Floor area ratio (FAR) shall be 0.23. Calculation: total floor area
divided by lot area.
(2) Building size. No building shall have a gross floor area in excess of
30,000 square feet.
(3) Buffer yards and screening. A buffer yard of 100 feet shall be
required between residential uses or districts and heavy industrial
of low to moderate hazard. Level Three screening shall be required
within the buffer yard. A buffer yard of 25 feet shall be required
between commercial uses or districts and industrial uses or
districts. Level Two screening shall be required within the buffer
yard.
(4) Outside storage of any kind shall be prohibited.
(5) The heavy industrial use shall be conducted wholly within the
building.
(6) The use shall be served by public sewage.
(7) There shall be submitted a written report verifying that the use is in
compliance with the performance standards of Article XX.
(8) The site must have adequate truck parking and stacking lanes to
accommodate truck traffic.
B. The applicant shall provide evidence that the proposed use will not be
detrimental to adjoining properties with regard to the following:
(1) Noise.
§ 195-178 PLUMBING § 195-179
144:801
§ 195-180. Radio and television towers in the C, FRA, RR or I
Districts. [Added 8-4-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-12]
(2) Light.
(3) Hours of operation.
(4) Litter.
(5) Waste disposal.
(6) Water usage.
C. An operation and maintenance plan shall be furnished and implemented
by the applicant in accordance with § 195-100.
A. The applicant shall provide evidence that the tower shall meet the
following standards:
(1) For guy wire towers, the minimum lot size shall be the minimum of
the zoning district for a single-family detached dwelling unit in the
C, FRA and RR Districts, and a minimum of one acre in the I
District. The bottom six feet of the guy wires shall be covered in a
bright identifying material.
(2) For freestanding towers, the minimum lot size shall be one acre in
all districts permitting radio and television towers.
(3) Setbacks for any communications tower shall be the distance of the
fall zone as determined by an engineering statement from a
licensed and registered professional engineer, plus 10 feet.
(4) Towers shall be constructed according to the International Building
Code 2000, Section 3108.276
(5) Tower construction shall be designed to meet wind loads in
accordance with the Electrical Industry Association/
Telecommunication Industry Association standard 222-E (EIA/TIA
222-E).
(6) Foundations shall be of sufficient mass and size to ensure proper
support of a fully equipped or loaded tower in the worst of weather
conditions.
(7) Towers shall be permanently and adequately grounded.
(8) Any electronic equipment and emergency generator equipment
shall be located on a concrete pad and enclosed within a six-foot
fence with level three screening provided.
(9) Access to the tower facilities shall meet all driveway standards in
accordance with § 195-138.
276. See Ch. 78, Building Construction.
§ 195-179 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-180
144:802
§ 195-181. Concentrated animal operations/concentrated animal
feeding operations. [Added 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2004-12]
Concentrated animal operations (CAOs) or concentrated animal feeding
operations (CAFOs) to be located in the Flexible Rural Agriculture (FRA)
District are regulated as follows:
(10)Off-street parking spaces shall be provided for two maintenance
vehicles.
(11) No permanent parking of vehicles shall be permitted on site.
(12) In order to reduce the number of towers in the Township, a
proposed tower shall be required to accommodate other uses (i.e.,
cellular phone companies, fire, police, ambulance of Township)
where technically feasible. Submission of a structural engineer's
report verifying specifications and strength of the tower shall be
provided if co-use is intended
(13) Licensing by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) in
accordance with all applicable FCC rules and regulations. The
applicant shall provide a copy of the FCC 301 construction permit.
(14) Lighting as required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
and the FCC.
(15) The tower shall be constructed of galvanized steel with a
nonreflective surface unless otherwise required by the FAA.
B. The applicant shall provide evidence that the proposed use will not be
detrimental to adjoining properties with regard to the foI1owing:
(1) Noise.
(2) Litter.
(3) Security.
(4) Adequate buffering and screening.
C. The applicant shall provide evidence of financial assurance
guaranteeing the removal of the tower upon abandonment, loss of
license, damage, or other conditions which reduce the safety of the
structure. Removal shall commence within 30 days of any of the above
situations.
D. The applicant shall notify the Township within 30 days of any change in
ownership, use, strength, licensing conditions, or other conditions
which may affect any provisions of this section.
E. The applicant shall provide the Township with the subject FCC license
with a five-year past history of complaints and resolutions to any
problems.
§ 195-180 PLUMBING § 195-181
144:803
A. State and federal regulations and permitting.
(1) Applications must develop and implement a nutrient management
plan in accordance with all regulations administered and enforced
by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
(PADEP) and the United States Environmental Protection Agency
(USEPA) as well as in accordance with the Pennsylvania Nutrient
Management Act (the act of May 20, 1993, P. L. 12, No. 6).
Applicants must submit a nutrient management plan to the
Township, and such operations must establish and maintain
compliance at all times.
(2) Applicants comply at all times and obtain a CAFO permit through
the PA CAFO program, a copy of which shall be supplied to the
Township.
(3) Applicants must comply at all times with the National Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit program, a copy of
required permit and any subsequent updated permits shall be
supplied to the Township.
(4) Applicants must comply at all times with the USEPA's CAFO
regulations.
(5) Applicants must comply with technology and performance
requirements established by USAPA in accordance with the
Effluent Limitations Guidelines (ELGs).
(6) Applicants must comply with any other applicable state and federal
regulations.
B. Minimum lot requirements. The parcel of land or contiguous lands in
common ownership of such operation must consist of at least 50 acres.
An operator/owner may not transfer land resulting in a reduction of
acreage to less than 50 acres. Leased land may not be considered to
meet the minimum required acreage.
C. Setback requirements.
(1) From any property line, at least a five-hundred-foot setback. The
500 feet will be measured from the operation building, grazing
fields or pens to the lot line.
(2) From any watercourse, floodplain, lake, pond or wetland, at least
500 feet.
(3) From any well use for human consumption, in any manner, at least
500 feet.
(4) From a park, wildlife refuge or wild land area, at least 500 feet.
D. Other plans. Applicants must submit a soil and water conservation plan,
a waste management plan and odor abatement or control plan.
§ 195-181 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-181
144:804
§ 195-182. Conditional uses in EPODS. [Added 9-5-2006 by Ord. No.
2005-8]
E. Vehicle motor access. The owner of an operation must establish and
maintain an access to the operation so that all motor vehicles making a
right turn (whether entering or exiting the property) can do so without
having to enter the lane of opposing traffic of any public right-of-way.
F. Floodplain Overlay District. Development located in affected floodplain
areas shall be in accordance with the requirements of the Floodplain
Overlay District of Article XV.
G. Environmental Protection Overlay District. Development shall meet the
requirements of the Environmental Protection Overlay District of
Article XVI.
H. Development Standards. Development shall meet the development
standards in accordance with Article XIX, with exception to those
standards herein modified.
I. Performance Standards. Development shall meet the requirements of
the performance standards in accordance with Article XX.
A. General.
(1) Any construction within any EPOD shall be minimally invasive and
utilize best management practices, as defined by PADEP and
USCOE.
(2) A detailed site plan shall accompany the conditional use hearing
application.
(3) All applicable federal and state permits shall be obtained prior to
any conditional use hearing.
(4) All applicable federal and state permit applications shall be
included in the conditional use hearing application.
(5) If no federal or state permits are required, a letter stating such
from the appropriate agency shall be provided prior to any
conditional use hearing.
(6) Other items of a reasonable and related nature for the protection of
the natural features of the EPOD, as required by the Board of
Supervisors.
B. Accessory commercial uses.
(1) Impervious areas shall be limited to a maximum of 1% of the EPOD
and buffer area on the lot.
(2) Maintenance of the accessory area shall be demonstrated to show
no pollution of the EPOD or buffer area.
§ 195-181 PLUMBING § 195-182
144:805
(3) No use or storage of hazardous chemicals is allowed.
C. Fences.
(1) Fences shall be prohibited in the defined environmentally protected
area, but may be located in the buffer area.
(2) Design shall be as unobtrusive as meets the fencing needs.
(3) All fencing shall be at least 75% open area.
(4) Fences shall be required to control movement of people within the
environmentally sensitive area.
D. Underground public utilities.
(1) All access and easement agreements shall be signed prior to the
conditional use hearing.
(2) The Township Engineer shall review all construction drawings and
procedures for approval of minimally invasive techniques.
(3) The land shall be restored to preconstruction conditions.
(4) The Township has the right to request provisions for future tie-ins.
E. Walking bridges and piers.
(1) Any span greater than 20 feet shall require an elevated structure
instead of a culvert and fill.
(2) Details of the structure shall be reviewed by the Township Engineer
for safety and for loading calculations.
(3) Provisions shall be made to prevent motorized vehicles from using
the bridges and piers.
(4) Adjacent land areas shall be restored to preconstruction condition.
(5) Materials for construction shall have a minimum twenty-five-year
life span.
F. Footpaths.
(1) Footpaths shall be designed for maximum visual and educational
benefit with minimal intrusion in environmentally sensitive areas.
(2) Details of construction shall be reviewed by the Township Engineer.
(3) Footpaths shall be of pervious construction and designed to
prevent ponding of water or washouts.
(4) Footpaths shall be a minimum of five feet in width.
(5) Footpaths shall be bordered with fencing near bridges or
hazardous fall areas.
§ 195-182 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-182
144:806
G. Driveway crossings.
(1) The Township Engineer shall review the site plan and construction
details.
(2) Adequate drainage underneath shall be provided so no additional
ponding occurs, or disruptions to the natural flow of water.
(3) All other ordinance specifications shall apply.
(4) The applicant shall provide evidence no other viable alternative
exists for the driveway.
H. Community improvements, such as stormwater facilities and roadways.
(1) Where practicable, crossings of EPODS shall be located in areas of
minimal width of EPOD.
(2) All roadway crossings of EPODS shall incorporate pedestrian
sidewalks and curbs into the design.
(3) All other roadway design requirements in Ch. 173, Subdivision and
Land Development, shall apply.
(4) Guide rails or fences shall be incorporated in the areas of actual
encroachment into the EPOD.
(5) Any areas of fill associated with a stormwater facility shall be
located outside of the EPOD.
(6) Stormwater outlet design shall be done in such a manner as to
minimize any impact on the EPOD.
(7) All community improvements shall be reviewed by the Township
Engineer for soundness of design and compliance with this section
of the chapter.
(8) Other relevant and related conditions the Board of Supervisors
set.277
I. Any other use requiring a federal or state encroachment permit.
[Added 3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-01]
(1) All improvements shall be reviewed by the Township Engineer for
soundness of design and compliance with this § 195-113 of the
chapter.
(2) A copy of the federal or state encroachment permit shall be
provided.
(3) The federal or state encroachment permit shall supersede any
WPOD requirement.
277. Editor's Note: Illustration 15A is inserted here by Ord. No 2005-08. Said illustration is
included at the end of this chapter.
§ 195-182 PLUMBING § 195-182.1
144:807
§ 195-182.1. Helipads in C, FRA, RR, BE, CH, I and IE Districts.
[Added 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-7]
A. Heliport/helipad requirements shall be as follows:
(1) Must provide copies of FAA and DOT Bureau of Aviation
applications.
(2) Only helicopters with a maximum gross weight of 5,000 pounds are
allowed.
(3) Helicopter engines may be reciprocating or turbine.
(4) Fueling station tanks limited to 1,500 gallons are permitted as long
as they meet Fire Marshal, PennDOT Bureau of Aviation, and PA
Storage Tank regulations.
(5) Must meet noise standards as set forth in § 195-133.
(6) Must have an isolation distance of 250 feet in all directions from
landing area to any adjacent residential property line.
(7) A fence 48 inches high must be located outside and surrounding
the isolation area.
(8) Minimum lot size is five acres.
(9) Landing area must have a visual screen from the public right-ofway
or be located more than 300 feet from the public right-of-way.
(10) Landing area must be paved.
(11) Landing area lighting must be in accordance with FAA and
PennDOT Bureau of Aviation regulations and meet the
requirements of § 195-125.
(12) Hours of helipad operation are limited from 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
only.
(13) A use permit is required from the Township at the same frequency
as the FAA and DOT Bureau of Aviation license reviews.
(14) All applicable spill prevention measures must be identified and
installed.
B. Heliports/helipads in the Conservation District must meet the following
additional requirements, as follows:
(1) The landing paid and isolation area must be in an existing open and
level area.
(2) Only minor grading shall be allowed for proper drainage and
swales around associated structures.
(3) Total grading is limited to 2,000 square feet.
§ 195-182.1 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-182.1
144:808
§ 195-182.2. Airports in the FRA, RR, and CH Districts. [Added
5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-1]
(4) Shall not be the sole principal use on the property.
A. Airport requirements shall be as follows:
(1) Copies of FAA and PENNDOT Bureau of Aviation applications shall
accompany the conditional use application.
(2) A detailed site plan, including all related accessory structures, shall
be submitted for review by the Planning Commission prior to the
conditional use hearing.
(3) Proposed operation plans shall be submitted, along with a full
disclosure statement of intended use.
(4) Only private use aircraft shall be permitted.
(5) Aircraft shall be single- or twin-engine propeller-driven only.
(6) Fueling station tanks limited to 1,500 gallons shall be permitted as
long as they meet Pennsylvania Fire Marshal, PENNDOT Bureau of
Aviation, and PA storage tank regulations.
(7) Safety zones shall be designated, as illustrated in Illustration 27,278
with proof of notification of all landowners affected by the safety
zones.
(8) A public right-of-way shall not be closer than, or within, Safety
Zone A.
(9) Emergency access shall be provided from the public right-of-way to
the runway.
(10) Runway lighting shall be in accordance with FAA and PENNDOT
Bureau of Aviation regulations and meet the requirements of
§ 195-125.
(11) A copy of the FAA and PENNDOT Bureau of Aviation license
renewal applications shall be presented annually within 15 days of
license renewal.
(12) Safety Zone A shall extend 500 feet from the end of the runway, at
an angle of 22.5° from centerline and along the runway at a
distance of 125 feet from centerline, in which no structures are
permitted and no vegetation shall be allowed to grow higher than
six feet above the elevation of the closest end of the runway, as per
Illustration 27.
(13) Safety Zone B shall extend an additional 1,000 feet beyond Safety
Zone A in a forty-five-degree arc from the end of the runway, but
278. Editor's Note: Illustration 27 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 195-182.1 PLUMBING § 195-182.2
144:809
not parallel to the runway, as per Illustration 27, in which structure
and vegetation height shall be limited to 18 feet above the elevation
of the closest end of the runway, and increasing at a rate of one
foot per 20 feet horizontal distance further from the runway, to a
maximum height of 35 feet as allowed by the zoning district. No
places of assembly shall be allowed, nor densities of residences
greater than one dwelling unit per acre on average.
(14) Safety Zone C shall extend an additional 3,000 feet beyond Safety
Zone B, in the same forty-five-degree arc from the end of the
runway, as per Illustration 27, in which structure height shall be
limited to 35 feet above the elevation of the closest end of the
runway.
§ 195-182.2 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-182.2
144:810
ARTICLE XXVI
Administration and Enforcement
§ 195-183. Appointment and powers of Zoning Officer.
§ 195-184. Zoning permit requirements.
A. The Zoning Officer shall be designated by the Board of Supervisors,
shall administrate and enforce this chapter and shall not hold any
elective office in the Township. The Zoning Officer may be provided
with assistance of such other persons as the Board of Supervisors
directs.
B. The Zoning Officer shall administer this chapter in accordance with its
literal terms, and shall not have the power to permit any construction or
any use or change of use which does not conform to this chapter.
C. The Zoning Officer shall examine all applications for permits, issue
permits for construction and uses which are in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter, record and file all applications for permits
with accompanying plans and documents and make such reports as the
Board of Supervisors may require. Permits for construction and uses
which are a variance to requirements of this chapter shall be issued
only upon approval of the Zoning Hearing Board. Permits for
construction and uses which are a conditional use shall be issued only
upon approval of such conditional use by the Board of Supervisors.
D. Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to enforce the
provisions of this chapter and such power and authority as is necessary
for enforcement is hereby conferred upon the Zoning Officer. If the
Zoning Officer finds that any of the provisions of this chapter are being
violated, he/she shall notify the person responsible for such violations in
accordance with the procedure outlined in Article XXVI, § 195-187.
E. Records. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to keep a record of all
applications for zoning permits, a record of all permits issued and a
record of all certificates of use which he/she authorized, together with a
notation of all special conditions involved. He/she shall file and safely
keep copies of all plans submitted and the same shall be available for
the use of the Board of Supervisors.
F. Reports. The Zoning Officer shall prepare a monthly report for the
Board of Supervisors summarizing for the period since his/her last
previous report all zoning permits issued and certificates of use
authorized by him/her and all complaints or violations and the action
taken by him/her consequent thereon.
A. Requirement of permits. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
person to commence work for the erection or alteration of any building
or structure, or to change any land use, until a zoning permit has been
duly issued. No such permit shall be required in case of normal
§ 195-183 PLUMBING § 195-184
144:811
maintenance activities, minor repairs or alterations which do not alter
the structure of the building. A zoning permit shall be required prior to
any of the following activities:
(1) The erection, alteration, enlargement or relocation of any building,
structure, land or portion thereof;
(2) The use or change in the use of a building, structure or land;
(3) The alteration or expansion of a nonconforming use;
(4) The issuance of a building permit, if required;
(5) Earth disturbances in accordance with Article XVIII, §§ 195-97 and
195-101.
(6) The erection, placement, installation, alteration, relocation or
replacement of a sign as specified in Article XXIII hereof;
(7) Driveways or parking areas; or
(8) Temporary construction or office trailers.
B. Application for permits. All applications for zoning permits shall be
accompanied by two sets of plans, drawn to scale, showing the actual
shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact size and
location of any buildings existing on the lot, the lines within which the
proposed building or structure shall be erected or altered, the existing
and intended use of each building or structure or part thereof, the
number of families or dwelling units the building is designed to
accommodate, and such information as may be necessary to determine
compliance with this chapter and all other ordinances. One set of plans
shall be returned to the owner when such plans have been reviewed
and acted upon by the Zoning Officer. All applications for zoning
permits for signs shall be submitted in accordance with the
requirements of Article XXIII hereof.
C. Issuance of permits.
(1) No permit shall be issued until the Zoning Officer has certified that
the application complies with all of the provisions of this article, as
well as the provisions of all other applicable ordinances. A permit
issued hereunder shall be valid for 12 months after issuance, and
all improvements or uses authorized by the permit shall be
completed or commenced, respectively, within that time period,
unless a request for extension has been submitted to and approved
by the Zoning Officer. Such request shall be filed with the Zoning
Officer at least 30 days prior to the permit's expiration date.
(2) If the work or use described in any zoning permit has not been
substantially completed or an extension of time has not been
granted, such permit shall expire and be canceled. Written notice
thereof shall be given to the person affected, together with notice
§ 195-184 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-184
144:812
§ 195-185. Certificate of use.
§ 195-186. Fees.
that further work as described in the canceled permit shall not
proceed unless and until a new zoning permit has been obtained.
D. Construction and use to be as provided in permits and certificates of
use. Zoning permits or certificates of use issued on the basis of plans
and applications approved by the administrative official authorize only
the use, arrangement and construction set forth in such approved plans
and applications, and no other use, arrangement or construction. Use,
arrangement or construction at variance with that authorized shall be
deemed in violation of this chapter and punishable as provided by
Article XXVI, § 195-187B.
A. A certificate of use shall be issued by the Zoning Officer setting forth
either that a building, structure, parcel or use of land complies with the
provisions of this chapter.
B. No vacant land shall be occupied or used and no structure or part of a
structure hereafter erected, substantially altered or changed in use
shall be occupied or used until a certificate of use shall have been
issued by the Zoning Officer.
C. A certificate of use for the use or occupancy of vacant land or for a
change in the use or land or for a change in the use of an existing
building, either for a whole or part of a new building, or for the
alteration of an existing building, shall be applied for coincident with
the applications for a building or zoning permit and shall be issued or
denied within 15 days after a final inspection of the Zoning Officer.
D. A certificate of use for changing or extending a nonconforming use,
existing at the effective date of this chapter or of an amendment
thereto, shall be authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board prior to the
issuance of a certificate of use. A certificate of use for changing or
extending a nonconforming use shall be applied for and issued before
any such nonconforming use shall be changed or extended. The
application for a certificate of use for changing or extending a
nonconforming use shall be accompanied with a decision, signed and
dated by the Zoning Hearing Board. Such certificate shall be issued
within 15 days after a final inspection and approval by the Zoning
Officer.
E. A record of all certificates of use shall be kept on file in the office of the
Zoning Officer.
A. The Board of Supervisors shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and
expenses, as well as a collection procedure for zoning permits,
certificates of use, appeals, variances, conditional uses, special
exceptions, amendments, bonds and other matters pertaining to this
§ 195-184 PLUMBING § 195-186
144:813
§ 195-187. Violations and penalties.
Failure to comply with any provision of this chapter shall constitute a
violation.
chapter. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the Zoning
Officer and may be altered or amended only by the Board of
Supervisors.
B. Such fees shall be payable to the Township, and until all applicable fees,
charges and expenses have been paid in full, the applications shall be
considered incomplete and no action shall be taken on any application
or appeal.
A. Notice of violation. If it appears that a violation of this chapter has
occurred, the Zoning Officer shall initiate enforcement proceedings by
sending an enforcement notice. Such notice shall be sent to the owner
of record of the parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any
person who has filed a written request to receive enforcement notices
regarding that parcel, and to any other person requested, in writing, by
the owner of record. The enforcement notice shall state:
(1) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the Township intends to take action.
(2) The location of the property in violation.
(3) The specific violation, with a description of the requirements which
have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions
of this chapter.
(4) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(5) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within a prescribed period of time in
accordance with the procedures set forth herein.
(6) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly described.
B. Penalties. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has
violated or permitted the violation of this article, upon being found
liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by a
municipality, shall pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus all court
costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Township as a
result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or
payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the District
Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable
§ 195-186 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-187
144:814
§ 195-188. Conditional uses.
rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation, unless the District Justice determining
that there has been a violation further determines that there was a
good faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating
this chapter to have believed that there was no such violation, in which
event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until
the fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation by the
District Justice, and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable
attorney fees collected for the violation of zoning ordinances shall be
paid over to the Township whose ordinance has been violated.
A. Filing of a conditional use. For any use permitted as a conditional use,
approval of such conditional use must be obtained from the Board of
Supervisors. In addition to the information required for the building
permit application, the conditional use must show the following:
(1) Ground floor plans and elevations of proposed structures.
(2) Names and addresses of adjoining property owners, including
property owners directly across a public right-of-way.
(3) A site plan drawn to scale of the subject property, with sufficient
detail and accuracy to demonstrate compliance with all applicable
provisions of this chapter.
(4) A written narrative of the proposed use, in sufficient detail to
demonstrate compliance with all applicable provisions of this
chapter.
B. Unless the form provided by the Township and information requested is
complete at the time of submission, the application will be returned to
the applicant.
C. Unless otherwise specified or extended by the Board of Supervisors, a
conditional use authorized by the Board of Supervisors will expire if the
applicant fails to obtain, where required to do so, a building permit or
certificate of use and occupancy within six months of the date of the
authorization of the conditional use.
D. Referral to the Planning Commission. All conditional use applications
shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission prior to the conduct of
the public hearing before the Board of Supervisors.
E. Conditions. The Board of Supervisors may attach additional conditions
to the approval of a conditional use. Such conditions shall be necessary
to protect the public welfare and preserve the integrity of the
Comprehensive Plan. Additionally, these conditions can impose
additional restrictions imposed within the zoning district and/or
specified for the use. Such conditions shall be enforceable by the
§ 195-187 PLUMBING § 195-188
144:815
Zoning Officer, and failure to comply with the conditions shall
constitute a violation of this chapter.
F. General standards. A conditional use may be granted when the
applicant demonstrates compliance with the following standards. The
applicant for conditional use shall have the burden of proof, which shall
include the burden of going forward with the evidence, and the burden
of persuasion on all questions of fact which are to be determined by the
Board of Supervisors.
(1) The proposed use, including its nature, intensity and location, is in
harmony with the orderly and appropriate development of the
zoning district.
(2) That adequate water supply, sewage disposal, storm drainage and
fire and police protection are or can be provided for the use.
(3) That the use of adjacent land and buildings will not be discouraged
and the value of adjacent land and buildings will not be impaired by
the location, nature and height of buildings, walls and fences.
(4) That the use will have proper location with respect to existing or
future streets, and will not create traffic congestion or cause
nonresidential traffic on local residential streets.
(5) That the specific standards set forth for each particular use for
which a conditional use may be granted have been met.
G. Specific standards. In addition to the general standards for all
conditional uses as contained in Subsection F, the specific standards for
particular uses as listed in Article XXIV must be met prior to the
granting of a conditional use.
H. Site plan approval.
(1) Any site plan presented in support of the conditional use pursuant
to Subsection A(3), shall become an official part of the record for
said conditional use. Approval of any conditional use shall also bind
the use in accordance with the site plan; therefore, should a change
in the site plan be required as part of the approval of the use, the
applicant shall revise the site plan prior to the issuance of a
building permit or use certificate.
(2) Any subsequent change to the use on the subject property shall not
reflect on the originally approved site plan, and shall require the
obtainment of another conditional use approval.
I. Hearing procedures.
(1) Before voting on the enactment of a conditional use, the Board of
Supervisors shall hold a public hearing thereon, pursuant to public
notice. The Board of Supervisors shall submit each such application
to the Planning Commission at least 30 days prior to the hearing on
§ 195-188 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-188
144:816
§ 195-189. Amendments.
such application to provide the Planning Commission an
opportunity to submit recommendations. If, after any public
hearing held upon an application, the proposed conditional use is
revised, the Board of Supervisors shall hold another public hearing,
pursuant to public notice, before proceeding to vote on the
amendment.
(2) All public hearings shall be conducted in accordance with the
requirements outlined in § 195-196 of this article, except that any
reference to the "Zoning Hearing Board" shall be replaced with the
"Board of Supervisors" and any reference to "special exception"
shall be replaced with "conditional use."
J. Applicability of ordinance amendments. When an application for a
conditional use has been filed with either the Zoning Hearing Board or
governing body, as relevant, and the subject matter of such application
would ultimately constitute either a land development as defined in
§195-10 or a subdivision as defined in §195-10, no change or
amendment of the zoning, subdivision or other governing ordinance or
plans shall affect the decision on such application adversely to the
applicant and the applicant shall be entitled to a decision in accordance
with the provisions of the governing ordinances or plans as they stood
at the time the application was duly filed; provided, further, should such
an application be approved by either the Zoning Hearing Board or
governing body, as relevant, the applicant shall be entitled to proceed
with the submission of either land development or subdivision plans
within a period of six months or longer as may be approved by either
the Zoning Hearing Board or the governing body following the date of
such approval in accordance with the provisions of the governing
ordinances or plans as they stood at the time the application was duly
filed before either the Zoning Hearing Board or governing body, as
relevant. If either a land development or subdivision plan is so filed
within said period, such plan shall be subject to the provisions of
Section 508(1) through (4) (MPC, Act 247),279 and specifically to the
time limitations of Section 508(4) (MPC, Act 247),280 which shall
commence as of the date of filing such land development or subdivision
plan in accordance with Section 917 of the MPC, Act 247.281 [Added
11-4-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-8A]
A. Power of amendment. The Board of Supervisors may from time to time
amend, supplement, change or repeal this chapter, including the
Official Zoning Map. Any amendment, supplement, change or repeal
may be initiated by the Planning Commission, the Board of Supervisors
or by a petition to the Board of Supervisors by an interested party. The
279. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10508.
280. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10508.
281. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10917.
§ 195-188 PLUMBING § 195-189
144:817
Zoning Ordinance shall be generally consistent with the West Hanover
Township Comprehensive Plan and the Dauphin County Comprehensive
Plan. If a Zoning Ordinance amendment is proposed in a manner not
generally consistent with the West Hanover Township Comprehensive
Plan, the Township shall concurrently amend the Comprehensive Plan
in accordance with Article 3 of the MPC, Act 247.282 [Amended
11-4-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-8A]
B. Hearing and enactment procedures for zoning amendments.
(1) Public hearing. Before hearing and enacting Zoning Ordinance
and/or Zoning Map amendments, the Board of Supervisors shall
conduct a public hearing to inform the general public of the nature
of the amendment and to obtain public comment. Such public
hearing shall be conducted after public notice has been given.
(2) Public notice. Before conducting a public hearing, the Board of
Supervisors shall provide public notice as follows:
(a) Notice shall be published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality. Such notice shall state the time and place of the
hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be
considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be
more than 30 days, and the second publication shall not be less
than seven days, from the date of the hearing. Publication of
the proposed amendment shall include either the full text
thereof or the title and brief summary setting forth all the
provisions in reasonable detail. If the full text is not included, a
copy of the full text shall be supplied to a newspaper of general
circulation in the municipality at the time the public notice is
published; and an attested copy of the proposed ordinance
shall be filed in the county law library or other county office
designated by the County Commissioners, who may impose a
fee no greater than that necessary to cover the actual costs of
storing said ordinance.
(b) For Zoning Map amendments, notice of the public hearing shall
also be conspicuously posted by the Township at points
deemed sufficient by the Township along the perimeter of the
tract facing a public right-of-way to notify potentially
interested citizens. The affected tract or tax parcels shall be
posted at least one week prior to the date of the hearing, in a
type size and style easily identifiable from the public right-ofway,
and to the maximum allowable on standard paper. If the
posting is a for a rezoning request, the posting shall contain, at
a minimum, the tax parcel number, street address, if
applicable, the current zoning classification, the proposed
282. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10301 et seq.
§ 195-189 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-189
144:818
zoning classification, and the time, date and place of the public
hearing.
(c) In addition to the requirements that notice be posted under
Subsection B(2)(b), where the proposed amendment involves a
Zoning Map change, notice of the public hearing shall be
mailed by the municipality at least 30 days prior to date of the
hearing by first-class mail to the addresses to which real estate
tax bills are sent for all real property located adjacent to and
including the parcel(s) being rezoned, as evidenced by tax
records within the possession of the municipality. The notice
shall include the location, date and time of the public hearing.
A good faith and substantial compliance shall satisfy the
requirements of this subsection.
(d) Subsection B(2)(b) and (c) shall not apply when the rezoning
constitutes a Township-wide, or comprehensive, rezoning.
(e) For curative amendments, public notice shall also indicate that
the validity of the ordinance and/or map is in question, and
shall give the place where and the times when a copy of the
request, including any plans, explanatory material or proposed
amendments, may be examined by the public.
(3) Enactment notice. In addition to the public notice requirements
defined herein, the Board of Supervisors must publish a reference
to the time and place of the meeting at which passage of the
ordinance or amendment will be considered, and a reference to a
place within the municipality where copies of the proposed
ordinance or amendment may be examined without charge or
obtained for a charge not greater than the cost thereof. Enactment
notice shall be published at least once in one newspaper of general
circulation in the Township not more than 60 days nor less than
seven days prior to passage. The published content of the
enactment notice shall be the same as that required for public
notice described in Subsection B(2).
(4) Township Planning Commission referrals.
(a) For amendments proposed by parties other than the Planning
Commission, the Board of Supervisors shall submit each
amendment to the Planning Commission at least 30 days prior
to the public hearing on such amendment.
(b) A report of the review by the Planning Commission, together
with any recommendations, may be given to the Board of
Supervisors within 30 days from the date of said referral. The
recommendation of the Township Planning Commission may
include a specific statement as to whether or not the proposed
action is in accordance with the intent of this chapter and the
officially adopted Comprehensive Plan.
§ 195-189 PLUMBING § 195-189
144:819
§ 195-190. Curative amendment by landowner.
(5) Dauphin County Planning Commission referrals. All proposed
amendments shall be submitted to the Dauphin County Planning
Commission at least 30 days prior to the public hearing on such
amendments. The Commission may submit recommendations to the
Board of Supervisors; however, if the Dauphin County Planning
Commission fails to act within 30 days, the Board of Supervisors
may proceed without its recommendation.
(6) Adjournment of public hearing. If during the public hearing process
the Board of Supervisors needs additional time to understand the
proposal, inform the public, receive public comment and/or render
a decision, it may adjourn the public hearing to another certain
time and place.
(7) Within 30 days after enactment, a copy of the amendment to this
chapter shall be forwarded to the Dauphin County Planning
Commission.
C. Amendments initiated by the Planning Commission. When an
amendment, supplement, change or repeal is initiated by the Planning
Commission, the proposal shall be presented to the Board of
Supervisors, which shall then proceed in the same manner as with a
petition to the Board of Supervisors which has already been reviewed
by the Planning Commission.
D. Amendment initiated by the Board of Supervisors. When an
amendment, supplement, change or repeal is initiated by the Board of
Supervisors, such amendment, supplement, change or repeal shall
follow the procedure prescribed for a petition under Subsection B.
E. Amendment initiated by a petition from an interested party. A petition
for amendment, supplement, change or repeal for a portion of this
chapter shall include an accurate legal description and surveyed plan of
any land to be rezoned, and a narrative describing all of the reasons
supporting the petition to be considered. The petition shall also be
signed by at least one record owner of the property in question, whose
signature shall be notarized, attesting to the truth and correctness of all
the facts and information presented in the petition. A fee to be
established by the Board of Supervisors shall be paid upon the filing of
such petition for change and for the purpose of defraying the costs of
the proceedings prescribed herein. The Board of Supervisors may
require duplicate sets of petition materials.
A. A landowner who desires to challenge on substantive grounds the
validity of this chapter or the Official Zoning Map or any provision
thereof which prohibits or restricts the use or development of land in
which he has an interest may submit a curative amendment to the
Board of Supervisors with a written request that his challenge and
proposed amendment be heard and decided as provided in MPC
§ 195-189 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-190
144:820
§ 916.1.283 The Board of Supervisors shall commence a hearing thereon
within 60 days of the request as provided in MPC § 916.1. The curative
amendment and challenge shall be referred to the Planning
Commission and Dauphin County Planning Commission as provided for
in Article XXVI, § 195-189B, and public notice of the hearing shall be
given as provided in Article XXVI, § 195-189B, and MPC § 916.1.
B. In reviewing the curative amendment, the Board of Supervisors may
deny the request, accept the request as submitted or may adopt an
alternative amendment which will cure the challenged defects. The
Board of Supervisors shall consider the curative amendments, plans
and explanatory material submitted by the landowner, and shall
consider the following:
(1) The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water
supplies, schools and other public service facilities.
(2) If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the proposal
upon regional housing needs and the effectiveness of the proposal
in providing housing units of a type actually available to and
affordable by classes of persons otherwise unlawfully excluded by
the challenged provisions of the ordinance or map.
(3) The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by the
site's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, floodplain, aquifers,
natural resources and other natural features.
(4) The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplain, natural resources and natural
features, the degree to which these are protected or destroyed, the
tolerance of the resources to development and any adverse
environmental impacts.
(5) The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture and
other land uses which are essential to public health and welfare.
C. The Board of Supervisors shall render its decision within 45 days after
the conclusion of the last hearing.
D. If the Board of Supervisors fails to act on the landowner's request
within the time limit referred to in Subsection C, a denial of the request
is deemed to have occurred on the 46th day after the close of the last
hearing.
E. Public notice of the hearing shall include notice that the validity of the
ordinance or Official Zoning Map is in question and shall give the place
and times when a copy of the request, including any plans, explanatory
material or proposed amendments may be examined by the public.
F. The challenge shall be deemed denied when:
283. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.1.
§ 195-190 PLUMBING § 195-190
144:821
§ 195-191. Curative amendments by Board of Supervisors.
If the Township determines that this chapter or any portion thereof is
substantially invalid, it shall take the following actions:
(1) The Board of Supervisors fails to commence the hearing within 60
days.
(2) The Board of Supervisors notifies the landowner that it will not
adopt the curative amendment.
(3) The Board of Supervisors adopts another curative amendment
which is unacceptable to the landowner.
(4) The Board of Supervisors fails to act on the request 45 days after
the close of the last hearing on the request, unless the time is
extended by mutual consent by the landowner and the Township.
G. Where, after the effective date of the MPC,284 a curative amendment
proposal is approved by the grant of a curative amendment application
by the Board of Supervisors pursuant to this section or a validity
challenge is sustained by the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to
§ 195-188A, or the court acts finally on appeal from denial of a curative
amendment proposal or a validity challenge, and the proposal or
challenge so approved requires a further application for subdivision or
land development, the developer shall have two years from the date of
such approval to file an application for preliminary or tentative
approval for a subdivision or land development. Within the two-year
period, no subsequent change or amendment in the zoning, subdivision
or other governing ordinance or plan shall be applied in any manner
which adversely affects the rights of the applicant as granted in the
curative amendment or the sustained validity challenge. Upon the filing
of the preliminary or tentative plan, the provisions of MPC § 508.4285
shall apply.
A. The Board of Supervisors shall declare by formal action this chapter or
portions thereof substantively invalid and propose to prepare a curative
amendment to overcome such invalidity. Within 30 days following such
declaration and proposal, the Board of Supervisors shall:
(1) By resolution, make specific findings setting forth the declared
invalidity of this chapter, which may include:
(a) References to specific uses which are either not permitted or
not permitted in sufficient quantity.
(b) Reference to a class of use or uses which require revision.
(c) Reference to the entire ordinance which requires revisions.
284. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
285. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 195-190 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-191
144:822
(2) Begin to prepare and consider a curative amendment to this
chapter to correct the declared invalidity.
B. Within 180 days from the date of the declaration and proposal, the
Board of Supervisors shall enact a curative amendment to validate or
reaffirm the validity of this chapter pursuant to the provisions required
by this section in order to cure the declared invalidity of this chapter.
C. Upon the initiation of the procedures, as set forth in Subsection A, the
Board of Supervisors shall not be required to entertain or consider any
landowner's curative amendment filed under § 195-190 nor shall the
Zoning Hearing Board be required to give a report requested under
MPC § 909.1 or 916.1286 subsequent to the declaration and proposal
based upon the grounds identical to or substantially similar to those
specified in the resolution required by Subsection A(1). Upon
completion of the procedures as set forth in Subsection A and B, no
rights to a cure pursuant to the provisions of § 195-190 and MPC 916.1
shall, from the date of declaration and proposal, accrue to any
landowner on the basis of the substantive invalidity of the unamended
zoning ordinance for which there has been a curative amendment
pursuant to this section.
D. The Board of Supervisors, having utilized the procedures set forth in
Subsections A and B, may not again utilize said procedure for a thirtysix-
month period following the date of the enactment of a curative
amendment or reaffirmation of the validity of this chapter, pursuant to
Subsection B; provided, however, that if after the date of declaration
and proposal there is a substantially new duty or obligation imposed
upon the Township by virtue of a change in statute or by virtue of a
Pennsylvania Appellate Court decision, the Township may utilize the
provisions of this section to prepare a curative amendment to this
chapter to fulfill said duty or obligation.
E. Authentication of Official Zoning Map. Whenever there has been a
change in the boundary of a zoning district or a reclassification of the
zoning district adopted in accordance with the above, the change on the
Official Zoning Map shall be amended, and shall be duly certified by the
Township Secretary and shall thereafter be refiled as part of the
permanent records of the Township.
286. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10909.1 and 10916.1, respectively.
§ 195-191 PLUMBING § 195-191
144:823

ARTICLE XXVII
Zoning Hearing Board
§ 195-192. Appointment of members; terms; vacancies.
The membership of the Zoning Hearing Board shall consist of five residents
of West Hanover Township appointed by the Board of Supervisors by
resolution. Their terms of office shall be five years and shall be so fixed that
the term of office of no more than one member shall expire each year. The
Zoning Hearing Board shall promptly notify the Board of Supervisors of any
vacancies which occur. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the
unexpired portion of the term. Members of the Zoning Hearing Board shall
hold no other office in the Township.
§ 195-193. Removal of members.
Any Zoning Hearing Board member may be removed for malfeasance,
misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a majority
vote of the governing body which appointed the member, taken after the
member has received 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take such a
vote. A hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if the member shall
request it in writing.
§ 195-194. Organization of Board; quorum; designation of
alternates; procedures.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board shall elect from its own membership its
officers, who shall serve annual terms as such and may succeed
themselves. For the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action,
a quorum shall be not less than a majority of all the members of the
Board, but the Zoning Hearing Board may appoint a Hearing Officer
from its own membership to conduct any hearing on its behalf and the
parties may waive further action by the Board as provided in Article
XXVII, § 195-196.
B. If, by reason of absence or disqualification of a member, a quorum is not
reached, the Chairman of the Zoning Hearing Board shall designate as
many alternate members of the Board to sit on the Zoning Hearing
Board as may be needed to provide a quorum. Any alternate member of
the Zoning Hearing Board shall continue to serve on the Board in all
proceedings involving the matter or case for which the alternate was
initially appointed until the Zoning Hearing Board has made a final
determination of the matter or case. Designation of an alternate
pursuant to this section shall be made on a case-by-case basis in
rotation according to declining seniority among all alternates.
C. The Zoning Hearing Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms
for its procedure, consistent with ordinances of the Township and laws
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The Zoning Hearing Board shall
keep public records of its business, which records shall be the property
§ 195-192 PLUMBING § 195-194
144:825
§ 195-195. Expenditures for services; compensation.
Within the limits of funds appropriated by the Board of Supervisors, the
Zoning Hearing Board may employ or contract for secretaries, clerks, legal
counsel, consultants and other technical and clerical services. Members of
the Zoning Hearing Board may receive compensation for the performance
of their duties, as may be fixed by the Board of Supervisors, but in no
case shall it exceed the rate of compensation authorized to be paid to the
members of the Board of Supervisors. Alternate members of the Zoning
Hearing Board may receive compensation, as may be fixed by the Board
of Supervisors, for the performance of their duties when designated as
alternate members pursuant to Article XXVII, § 195-194, but in no case shall
such compensation exceed the rate of compensation authorized to be paid
to the members of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 195-196. Conduct of hearings.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in
accordance with the following requirements:
of the municipality, and shall submit a report of its activities to the
Board of Supervisors as requested by the Board of Supervisors.
A. Public notice shall be given and written notice shall be given to the
applicant, the Zoning Officer, such other persons as the Board of
Supervisors shall designate by ordinance and to any person who has
made timely request for the same. Written notices shall be given at such
time and in such manner as shall be prescribed by ordinance or, in the
absence of ordinance provision, by rules of the Zoning Hearing Board.
In addition to the written notice provided herein, written notice of said
hearing shall be conspicuously posted on the affected tract of land at
least one week prior to the hearing.
B. The Board of Supervisors may prescribe reasonable fees with respect to
hearings before the Zoning Hearing Board. Fees for said hearings may
include compensation for the Secretary and members of the Zoning
Hearing Board, notice and advertising costs and necessary
administrative overhead connected with the hearing. The costs,
however, shall not include legal expenses of the Zoning Hearing Board,
expenses for engineering, architectural or other technical consultants
or expert witness costs.
C. The hearing shall be held within 60 days from the date of the applicant's
request, unless the applicant has agreed, in writing, to an extension of
time.
D. The hearings shall be conducted by the Zoning Hearing Board, or the
Zoning Hearing Board may appoint any member as a Hearing Officer.
The decision or, where no decision is called for, the finding shall be
made by the Board; however, the appellant or the applicant, as the case
may be, in addition to the Township, may, prior to the decision of the
§ 195-194 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-196
144:826
hearing, waive decision or findings by the Zoning Hearing Board and
accept the decision or findings of the Hearing Officer as final.
E. The parties to the hearing shall be the Township, any person affected by
the application who has made timely appearance of record before the
Zoning Hearing Board, and any other person including civic or
community organizations permitted to appear by the Zoning Hearing
Board. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have power to require that all
persons who wish to be considered parties enter appearances, in
writing, on forms provided by the Board for that purpose.
F. The Chairman or Acting Chairman of the Zoning Hearing Board or the
Hearing Officer presiding shall have power to administer oaths and
issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant documents and papers, including witnesses and
documents requested by the parties.
G. The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall
be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and
argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
H. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial or
unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
I. The Zoning Hearing Board or the Hearing Officer, as the case may be,
shall keep a stenographic record of the proceedings. The appearance
fee for a stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant and the
Zoning Hearing Board. The cost of the original transcript shall be paid
by the Zoning Hearing Board if the transcript is ordered by the Zoning
Hearing Board or Hearing Officer, or shall be paid by the person
appealing from the decision of the Board if such appeal is made, and in
either event the cost of additional copies shall be paid by the person
requesting such copy or copies. In other cases, the party requesting the
original transcript shall bear the cost thereof.
J. The Zoning Hearing Board or the Hearing Officer shall not
communicate, directly or indirectly, with any party or his
representatives in connection with any issue involved except upon
notice and opportunity for all parties to participate, shall not take
notice of any communication, reports, staff memoranda or other
materials, except advice from their solicitor, unless the parties are
afforded an opportunity to contest the material so noticed, and shall not
inspect the site or its surroundings after the commencement of hearing
with any party or his representative unless all parties are given an
opportunity to be present.
K. The Zoning Hearing Board or the Hearing Officer, as the case may be,
shall render a written decision or, when no decision is called for, make
written findings on the application within 45 days after the last hearing
before the Board or Hearing Officer. Where the application is contested
or denied, each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact and
conclusions based thereon, together with the reasons therefor.
§ 195-196 PLUMBING § 195-196
144:827
§ 195-197. Jurisdiction.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudications in the following matters:
Conclusions based on any provisions of this act or of any ordinance,
rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the provision relied on
and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light
of the facts found. If the hearing is conducted by a Hearing Officer,
and there has been no stipulation that his decision or findings are final,
the Zoning Hearing Board shall make his report and recommendation
available to the parties within 45 days and the parties shall be entitled
to make written representations thereon to the Board prior to final
decision or entry of findings, and the Zoning Hearing Board's decision
shall be entered no later than 30 days after the report of the Hearing
Officer. Where the Zoning Hearing Board fails to render the decision
within the period required by this subsection, or fails to hold the
required hearing within 60 days of the applicant's request for a hearing,
the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the
applicant unless the applicant has agreed, in writing or on the record,
to an extension of time. When a decision has been rendered in favor
of the applicant because of the failure of the Zoning Hearing Board
to meet or render a decision as hereinabove provided, the Board shall
give public notice of said decision within 10 days from the last day it
could have met to render a decision in the same manner as provided
in § 195-191B. If the Zoning Hearing Board shall fail to provide such
notice, the applicant may do so. Nothing in this subsection shall
prejudice the right of any party opposing the application to appeal the
decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.
L. A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the
findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him
not later than the day following its date. To all other persons who have
filed their name and address with the Zoning Hearing Board not later
than the last day of the hearing, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
provide, by mail or otherwise, brief notice of the decision or findings
and a statement of the place at which the full decision or findings may
be examined.
A. Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance, except
those brought before the Zoning Hearing Board Board of Supervisors as
a curative amendment in accordance with Article XXVI, § 195-191.
(1) If a challenge heard by a Zoning Hearing Board is found to have
merit, the decision of the Zoning Hearing Board shall include
recommended amendments to the challenged ordinance which will
cure the challenged defects. In reaching its decision, the Board
shall consider the amendments, plans and explanatory material
submitted by the landowner, and shall consider the following:
§ 195-196 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-197
144:828
(a) The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water
supplies, schools and other public service facilities.
(b) If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the
proposal upon regional housing needs and the effectiveness of
the proposal in providing housing units of a type actually
available to and affordable by classes of persons otherwise
unlawfully excluded by the challenged provisions of the
ordinance or map.
(c) The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by
the site's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, floodplain,
aquifers, natural resources and other natural features.
(d) The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplain, natural resources and natural
features, the degree to which these are protected or destroyed,
the tolerance of the resources to development and any adverse
environmental impacts.
(e) The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture
and other land uses which are essential to public health and
welfare.
(2) The Board shall render its decision within 45 days after the
conclusion of the last hearing. If the Board fails to act on the
landowner's request within the time limit referred to in Article
XXVI, § 195-190A, a denial of the request is deemed to have
occurred on the 46th day after the close of the last hearing.
(3) The Board shall commence its hearing within 60 days after the
request is filed unless the landowner requests or consents to an
extension of time.
(4) Public notice of hearing shall be provided as specified in § 195-190.
B. Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance raising procedural
questions or alleged defects in the process of enactment or adoption,
which challenges shall be raised by an appeal taken within 30 days after
the effective date of said ordinance.
C. Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including but not
limited to the granting or denial of any permit, or failure to act on the
application therefor, the issuance of any cease-and-desist order or the
registration or refusal to register any nonconforming use, structure or
lot.
D. Appeals from a determination by a Township Engineer or the Zoning
Officer with reference to the administration of any floodplain or flood
hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance.
§ 195-197 PLUMBING § 195-197
144:829
§ 195-198. Applicability of judicial remedies.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to deny the appellant
the right to proceed directly to court, where appropriate, pursuant to
the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure No. 1091 (relating to action in
mandamus).
§ 195-199. Variances.
E. Applications for variances from the terms of this chapter and the flood
hazard ordinance287 or such provisions within a land use ordinance,
pursuant to Article XXVI, § 195-190.
F. Appeals from the determination of any officer or agency charged with
the administration of performance density provisions of this chapter.
G. Appeals from the Zoning Officer's determination under Article XXVII,
§ 195-204. [Amended 7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-7]
H. Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Township
Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance or provision
thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion control and
stormwater management insofar as the same relate to development not
involving subdivision or land development applications.
A. Filing of variance. An application may be made to the Zoning Hearing
Board for a variance where it is alleged that the provisions of this
chapter inflict unnecessary hardship upon the applicant. The
application must be on a form provided for that purpose by the Zoning
Officer. Unless the form and information requested is complete at the
time of submission, the application will be returned to the applicant.
The Board may grant a variance, provided that all of the following
findings are made where relevant in a given case:
(1) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or
shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions
peculiar to the particular property and that the unnecessary
hardship is due to such conditions and not the circumstances or
conditions generally created by the provisions of this chapter in the
neighborhood or district in which the property is located.
(2) That, because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there
is no possibility that the property can be developed in strict
conformity with the provisions of this chapter and that the
authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the
reasonable use of the property.
(3) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant.
287. Editor's Note: See Ch. 108, Floodplain Management.
§ 195-197 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-199
144:830
§ 195-200. Special exceptions.
(4) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is
located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate
use or development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the
public welfare.
(5) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible for the regulation in issue.
B. In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the
purposes of this chapter. These conditions shall be enforceable by the
Zoning Officer and failure to comply with such conditions shall
constitute a violation of this chapter and be subject to the penalties
described in Article XXV, § 195-187B.
A. Filing of special exception. For any use permitted by special exception,
a special exception must be obtained from the Zoning Hearing Board.
In addition to the information required on the zoning permit
application, the special exception application must show the following:
(1) Ground floor plans and elevations of proposed structures.
(2) Names and addresses of adjoining property owners, including
properties directly across a public right-of-way.
(3) A site plan, drawn to scale, of the site with sufficient detail and
accuracy to demonstrate compliance with all applicable provisions
of this chapter.
(4) A written description of the proposed use in sufficient detail to
demonstrate compliance with all applicable provisions of this
chapter.
B. Conditions. The Zoning Hearing Board, in approving special exception
applications, may attach conditions considered necessary to protect the
public welfare and the Comprehensive Plan, including conditions which
are more restrictive than those established for other uses in the same
zone. These conditions shall be enforceable by the Zoning Officer, and
failure to comply with such conditions shall constitute a violation of this
chapter and be subject to the penalties described in Article XXV,
§ 195-187B.
C. General standards. A special exception may be granted when the
Zoning Hearing Board finds from a preponderance of the evidence
produced at the hearing that:
§ 195-199 PLUMBING § 195-200
144:831
(1) The proposed use, including its nature, intensity and location, is in
harmony with the orderly and appropriate development of the
zoning district.
(2) Adequate water supply, sewage disposal, storm drainage and fire
and police protection are or can be provided for the use.
(3) The use of adjacent land and buildings will not be discouraged and
the value of adjacent land and buildings will not be impaired by the
location, nature and height of buildings, walls and fences.
(4) The use will have proper location with respect to existing or future
streets, and will not create traffic congestion or cause
nonresidential traffic on local residential streets.
D. Specific standards. In addition to the general standards for all special
exceptions as contained in Subsection C, the specific standards for
particular uses must be met prior to the granting of a special exception.
E. Site plan approval.
(1) Any site plan presented in support of the special exception
pursuant to Subsection A(3) shall become an official part of the
record for said special exception. Approval of any special exception
shall also bind the use in accordance with the site plan; therefore,
should a change in the site plan be required as part of the approval
of the use, the applicant shall revise the site plan prior to the
issuance of a building permit or use certificate.
(2) Any subsequent change to the use on the subject property shall not
reflect on the originally approved site plan, and shall require the
obtainment of another special exception approval.
F. Applicability of ordinance amendments. When an application for a
special exception has been filed with either the Zoning Hearing Board
or governing body, as relevant, and the subject matter of such
application would ultimately constitute either a land development as
defined in § 195-10 or a subdivision as defined in § 195-10, no change or
amendment of the zoning, subdivision or other governing ordinance or
plans shall affect the decision on such application adversely to the
applicant and the applicant shall be entitled to a decision in accordance
with the provisions of the governing ordinances or plans as they stood
at the time the application was duly filed; provided, further, should such
an application be approved by either the Zoning Hearing Board or
governing body, as relevant, the applicant shall be entitled to proceed
with the submission of either land development or subdivision plans
within a period of six months or longer as may be approved by either
the Zoning Hearing Board or the governing body following the date of
such approval in accordance with the provisions of the governing
ordinances or plans as they stood at the time the application was duly
filed before either the Zoning Hearing Board or governing body, as
relevant. If either a land development or subdivision plan is so filed
§ 195-200 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-200
144:832
§ 195-201. Parties appellant before Board. [Amended 7-17-2000 by
Ord. No. 2000-7]
Appeals under Article XXVII, § 195-197A, B, C, D, F, G and H, may be filed
with the Zoning Hearing Board, in writing, by the landowner affected, any
officer or agency of the Township or any person aggrieved. Requests for a
variance under § 195-199 may be filed with the Zoning Hearing Board by
any landowner or any tenant with the permission of such landowner. Any
appeal shall state the following:
§ 195-202. Time limitations.
within said period, such plan shall be subject to the provisions of
Section 508(1) through (4) (MPC, Act 247),288 and specifically to the
time limitations of Section 508(4) (MPC, Act 247),289 which shall
commence as of the date of filing such land development or subdivision
plan in accordance with Section 917 of the MPC, Act 247.290 [Added
11-4-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-8A]
A. The name and address of the appellant and applicant.
B. The name and address of the landowner of the real estate to be
affected.
C. A brief description and location of the real estate to be affected by such
proposed change, together with a plot plan drawn to scale with
sufficient clarity to show the nature and character of the request.
D. A statement of the present zoning classification of the real estate in
question, the improvements thereon and the present use thereof.
E. A statement of the section of this chapter under which the request may
be allowed, and reasons why it should or should not be granted.
A. No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the Zoning
Hearing Board later than 30 days after an application for development,
preliminary or final, has been approved by an appropriate Zoning
Officer or Board of Supervisors if such proceeding is designed to secure
reversal or to limit the approval in any manner unless such person
alleges and proves that he had no notice, knowledge or reason to
believe that such approval had been given. If such person has
succeeded to his interest after such approval, he shall be bound by the
knowledge of his predecessor in interest.
B. The failure of anyone other than the landowner to appeal from an
adverse decision or from an adverse decision by a Zoning Officer on a
challenge to the validity of an ordinance or map pursuant to Article
XXVII, § 195-197, shall preclude an appeal from a final approval except
288. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10508.
289. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10508.
290. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10917.
§ 195-200 PLUMBING § 195-202
144:833
§ 195-203. Stay of proceedings.
in the case where the final submission substantially deviates from
the approved tentative approval. [Amended 7-17-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-7]
C. All appeals from determinations adverse to the landowners shall be
filed by the landowner within 30 days after notice of the determination
is issued.
A. Upon filing of any proceeding referred to in Article XXVII, § 195-197,
and during its pendency before the Zoning Hearing Board, all land
development pursuant to any challenged ordinance, order or approval
of the Zoning Officer or of any agency or body, and all official action
thereunder, shall be stayed unless the Zoning Officer or any other
appropriate agency or body certifies to the Board facts indicating that
such stay would cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case
the development or official action shall not be stayed otherwise than by
a restraining order, which may be granted by the Board or by the court
having jurisdiction of zoning appeals, on petition, after notice to the
Zoning Officer or other appropriate agency or body. When an
application for development, preliminary or final, has been duly
approved and proceedings designed to reverse or limit the approval are
filed with the Zoning Hearing Board by persons other than the
applicant, the applicant may petition the court having jurisdiction of
zoning appeals to order such persons to post bond as a condition to
continuing the proceedings before the Zoning Hearing Board.
[Amended 7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-7]
B. After the petition is presented, the court shall hold a hearing to
determine if the filing of the appeal is frivolous. At the hearing,
evidence may be presented on the merits of the case. It shall be the
burden of the applicant for a bond to prove the appeal is frivolous. After
condition of all evidence presented, if the court determines that the
appeal is frivolous, it shall grant the petition for a bond. The right to
petition the court to order the appellants to post bond may be waived by
the appellee, but such waiver may be revoked by him if an appeal is
taken from a final decision of the court.
C. The question whether or not such petition should be granted and the
amount of the bond shall be within the sound discretion of the court. An
order denying a petition for bond shall be interlocutory. An order
directing the responding party to post a bond shall be interlocutory.
D. If an appeal is taken by a respondent to the petition for a bond from an
order of the court dismissing a zoning appeal for refusal to post a bond
and the appellate court sustains the order of the court below to post a
bond, the respondent to the petition for a bond, upon motion of the
petitioner and after hearing in the court having jurisdiction of zoning
appeals, shall be liable for all reasonable costs, expenses and attorney
fees incurred by the petitioner.
§ 195-202 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-204
144:834
§ 195-204. Procedure to obtain preliminary opinion. [Amended
7-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-7]
In order not to unreasonably delay the time when a landowner may secure
assurance that the ordinance or map under which he proposed to build
is free from challenge, and recognizing the procedure for preliminary
approval of his development may be too cumbersome or may be unavailable,
the landowner may advance the date from which time for any challenge
to the ordinance or map will run under Article XXVII, § 195-202, by the
following procedure:
§ 195-205. Application for appeal; fee.
A. The landowner may submit plans and other materials describing his
proposed use or development to the Zoning Officer for a preliminary
opinion as to their compliance with the applicable ordinances and
maps. Such plans and other materials shall not be required to meet the
standards prescribed for preliminary, tentative or final approval or for
the issuance of a building permit so long as they provide reasonable
notice of the proposed use or development and a sufficient basis for a
preliminary opinion as to its compliance.
B. If the Zoning Officer's preliminary opinion is that the use or
development complies with the ordinance or map, notice thereof shall
be published once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper
of general circulation in the Township. Such notice shall include a
general description of the proposed use or development and its
location, by some readily identifiable directive, and the place and times
where the plans and other materials may be examined by the public.
The favorable preliminary approval under Article XXVII, § 195-202, and
the time therein specified for commencing a proceeding with the
Zoning Hearing Board shall run from the time when the second notice
thereof has been published.
A. An appeal from the terms of this chapter shall be filed with the Zoning
Officer on forms provided by the Township and shall contain the
following information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant filing the appeal.
(2) The name and address of the owner of the real estate to be affected
by such appeal.
(3) A brief description and location of the real estate to be affected by
such appeal.
(4) A statement of the present zoning classification of the real estate in
question and the present use thereof.
(5) A statement of the section of this chapter under which the appeal is
filed.
§ 195-204 PLUMBING § 195-205
144:835
§ 195-206. Appeals to Court of Common Pleas.
Any person, taxpayer or the Township aggrieved by any decision of the
Zoning Hearing Board may within 30 days after such decision of the Zoning
Hearing Board seek review by the Court of Common Pleas of such decision
in the manner provided by the law of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
and Article X-A of the Act, as amended.
(6) A narrative shall be submitted as an attachment to the application
stating the reasons why the appeal should be granted; or a
narrative describing the situation in which the alleged erroneous
decision is being appealed.
(7) An accurate description of the present improvements and the
additions intended to be made under the application, indicating the
size and use of such proposed improvements and general
construction thereof. In addition, a site plan shall be submitted as
an attachment to the application of the real estate to be affected, as
required to accompany applications for permits, indicating the
location and size of the lot and locations of improvements now
erected and proposed to be erected thereon.
(8) The signature of the applicant and the owner; and the date the
application was signed by the applicant and the owner.
B. A filing fee, established by the Board of Supervisors by resolution, shall
accompany the application. The application shall not be processed until
the filing fee has been paid in full.
§ 195-205 WEST HANOVER CODE § 195-206
144:836
ARTICLE XXVIII
Conflicts; Municipal Exemption
§ 195-207. Conflicts and inconsistencies with other ordinances.
In the event that any ordinance or part of any ordinance is in conflict
with this chapter or is inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, the
ordinance or part thereof which establishes the more stringent standards
shall control.
§ 195-208. Municipality exempt from regulations.
All uses, structures, buildings and activities owned and/or operated by West
Hanover Township are exempt from the regulations contained within this
chapter.291
291. Editor's Note: The bibliography to this chapter, which immediately followed this section, is
on file in the Township offices.
§ 195-207 PLUMBING § 195-208
144:837
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2000-1 3-20-2000 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2000-2 4-17-2000 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2000-3 4-17-2000 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 173
2000-4 6-5-2000 Building Code amendment Ch. 78, Art. I
2000-5 6-19-2000 Building Code amendment Ch. 78, Art. I
2000-6 7-17-2000 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2000-7 7-17-2000 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
2000-8 8-7-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2000-9 8-21-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2000-10 9-5-2000 Street excavations
amendment
Ch. 170, Art. I
2000-11 10-2-2000 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 173
2000-12 12-4-2000 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2001-1 3-5-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2001-2 4-16-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2001-3 3-5-2001 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 173
2001-4 4-16-2001 On-lot sewage disposal
amendment
Ch. 158, Art. I
2001-5 11-19-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2001-6 6-4-2001 Open burning amendment Ch. 85
2001-7 7-16-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2002-1 2-19-2002 Taxation: delinquent tax
collector
Ch. 178, Art. IV
2002-2 4-15-2002 Building construction Ch. 78
2002-3 4-15-2002 Fire prevention Ch. 103
2002-4 4-15-2002 Property maintenance Ch 148
2002-5 5-20-2002 Plumbing amendment Ch. 144
§ 195-208 WEST HANOVER CODE § DL-1
144:838
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2002-6 7-1-2002 Building Code Board of
Appeals
Ch. 8
2002-7 Street vacation NCM
2002-8 9-16-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2002-8A 11-4-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2002-9 11-4-2002 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 173
2003-1 3-3-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
2003-2 2-18-2003 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2003-3 6-2-2003 Key lock boxes Ch. 126
2003-4 8-4-2003 Livestock at large
amendment; animals and
domestic pets amendment
Ch. 67, Arts. I and
II
2003-5 5-19-2003 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 173
2003-6 7-7-2003 Solid waste amendment Ch. 165
2003-7 Adoption pending
2003-8 6-16-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2003-9 6-16-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2003-10 8-4-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2003-11 7-21-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2003-12 8-4-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2003-13 8-18-2003 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 148
2003-14 10-20-2003 Fire Marshal amendment Ch. 22
2003-15 12-1-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
2003-16 10-6-2003 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2003-17 10-6-2003 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2003-18 Pending
2003-19 Pending
2003-20 12-15-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2003-21 12-15-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2004-1 2-17-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
2004-2 4-5-2004 Property maintenance Ch. 148
§ DL-1 PLUMBING § DL-1
144:839
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2004-3 4-5-2004 Uniform construction codes Superseded by Ord.
No. 2004-19
2004-4 5-3-2004 Street excavations
amendment
Ch. 170, Art. I
2004-5 Pending
2004-6 5-3-2004 Building construction
repealer
Ch. 78
2004-7 5-17-2004 Fire Protection District No.
1 amendment
Ch. 105, Art. I
2004-8 5-3-2004 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 173
2004-9 7-19-2004 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2004-19
2004-10 7-19-2004 Building Code Board of
Appeals amendment
Ch. 8
2004-11 7-19-2003 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2004-19
2004-12 8-15-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2004-13 10-4-2004 Street repairs Ch. 170, Art. III
2004-14 12-20-2004 Fire Company amendment Ch. 19
2004-15 11-15-2004 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2004-19
2004-16 12-6-2004 Subdivision and land
development
Ch. 173
2004-17 5-16-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2004-18 12-20-2004 Emergency and municipal
services tax
Ch. 178, Art. I
2004-19 12-20-2004 Uniform construction codes Ch. 88
2005-1 3-21-2005 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 88
2005-2 4-4-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2005-3 3-21-2005 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 173
2005-4 4-4-2005 Stormwater management Superseded by Ord.
No. 2010-17
2005-5 4-4-2005 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 148
2005-6 8-1-2005 Open burning amendment Ch. 85
§ DL-1 WEST HANOVER CODE § DL-1
144:840
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2005-7 8-1-2005 Use of recreational
facilities amendment
Ch. 139, Art. I
2005-8 9-5-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2005-9 11-7-2005 Key lock boxes amendment Ch. 126
2005-10 12-19-2005 Streets and sidewalks:
snow removal
Ch. 170, Art. IV
2005-11 11-7-2005 Emergency and municipal
services tax amendment
Ch. 178, Art. I
2006-1 2-6-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2006-2 11-20-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
2006-3 2-6-2006 Environmental Advisory
Council amendment
Ch. 15
2006-4 1-16-2007 Stormwater management
amendment
2006-5 10-2-2006 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 148
2006-6 5-1-2006 Fire Company amendment Ch. 19
2006-7 11-6-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2006-8 6-19-2006 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2006-9 Number not used
2006-10 12-18-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
2007-1 5-7-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2007-2 2-5-2007 Building Code Board of
Appeals amendment
Ch. 8
2007-3 2-20-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
2007-4 3-5-2007 Park and Recreation Board
amendment
Ch. 48
2007-5 6-4-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2007-6 5-7-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2007-7 4-2-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
2007-8 6-4-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2007-9 Tabled
2007-10 9-4-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
§ DL-1 PLUMBING § DL-1
144:841
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2007-11 8-6-2007 Vehicles and traffic: snow
and ice emergencies
amendment
Ch. 187
2007-12 7-2-2007` Zoning Map amendment NCM
2007-13 9-4-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2007-14 9-4-2007 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 173
2007-15 8-6-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
2007-16 Rezoning Denied
2007-17 10-1-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2007-18 9-17-2007 Animals amendment Ch. 67
2007-19 10-1-2007 Emergency services cost
recovery: reimbursement
for response costs
Ch. 97, Art. I
2007-20 10-15-2007 Taxation: local services tax Ch. 178, Art. I
2007-21 11-5-2007 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 103
2007-22 Number not used
2007-23 Number not used
2007-24 Number not used
2007-25 12-3-2007 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2007-26 12-3-2007 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2008-01 3-3-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2008-02 3-17-2008 Exit 77 borrowing NCM
2008-03 Void
2008-04 9-2-2008 Solid waste amendment Ch. 165
2008-05 5-19-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
2008-06 9-2-2008 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 173
2008-07 4-6-2009 Animals and domesticated
pets amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 67, Art. II; 195
2008-08 Denied
2008-09 6-16-2008 Acquisition of ROW NCM
§ DL-1 WEST HANOVER CODE § DL-1
144:842
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2008-10 7-21-2008 Stormwater management
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2010-17
2008-11 7-7-2008 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2008-12 8-18-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2008-13 9-15-2008 Street repairs amendment;
snow removal on streets,
sidewalks and fire hydrants
amendment
Ch. 170
2008-14 10-20-2008 Cable franchise agreement NCM
2008-15 Zoning Map amendment Denied
2008-16 11-17-2008 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2008-17 12-1-2008 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 173
2008-18 2-17-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2009-01 4-6-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
2009-02 4-6-2009 Stormwater management
amendment; zoning
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2010-17; Ch.
195
2009-03 4-6-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2009-04 4-6-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2009-05 12-7-2009 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 173
2009-06 Shopping cart storage Denied
2009-07 5-4-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2009-08 Outdoor furnaces Denied
2009-09 5-4-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2009-10 Denied
2009-11 5-18-2009 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 148
2009-12 6-1-2009 Street excavations
amendment
Ch. 170, Art. I
2009-13 9-8-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2009-14 9-8-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2009-15 8-3-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
2009-16 9-8-2009 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 173
§ DL-1 PLUMBING § DL-1
144:843
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2009-17 9-8-2009 Emergency services cost
recovery: reimbursement
for response costs
amendment
Ch. 97, Art. I
2009-18 12-21-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
2009-19 12-7-2009 Transient retail businesses
amendment
Ch. 182
2010-01 2-1-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
2010-02 4-5-2010 Open burning amendment Ch. 85
2010-03 5-3-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2010-04 2-7-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2010-05 5-3-2010 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 173
2010-06 7-6-2010 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 173
2010-07 7-6-2010 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 173
2010-08 7-6-2010 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 173
2010-09 7-6-2010 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 173
2010-10 5-3-2010 Fire protection amendment Ch. 105
2010-11 5-3-2010 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 103
2010-12 7-6-2010 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 173
2010-13 Denied
2010-14 10-18-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
2010-15 Cable franchise agreement NCM
2010-16 Denied
2010-17 12-20-2010 Stormwater management Ch. 168
2011-01 Denied
2011-02 2-22-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
2011-03 No action
§ DL-1 WEST HANOVER CODE § DL-1
144:844
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2011-04 3-7-2011 Street usage Ch. 170, Art. V
2011-05 4-4-2011 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 103
2011-06 Zoning amendment Denied
2011-07 6-6-2011 Transient retail and mobile
merchant businesses
amendment
Ch. 182
2011-08 6-6-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
2011-09 Zoning amendment Denied
2011-10 11-7-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2011-11 Void
2011-12 Bond NCM
2011-13 12-5-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
2012-01 1-17-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
2012-02 4-2-2012 Fire Marshal amendment Ch. 22
2012-03 4-16-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
2012-04 6-4-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2012-05 6-4-2012 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 173
2012-06 6-4-2012 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 173
2012-07 6-4-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2012-08 6-4-2012 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 173
2012-09 6-4-2012 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 173
2012-10 6-4-2012 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 173
2012-11 6-4-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2012-12 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Denied
2012-13 6-4-2012 Stormwater management
amendment
Ch. 168
§ DL-1 PLUMBING § DL-1
144:845
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2012-14 8-6-2012 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 173
2012-15 10-15-2012 Transient retail and mobile
merchant businesses
amendment
Ch. 182
2012-16 Not adopted
2012-17 9-4-2012 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 173
2012-18 9-4-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2012-19 8-1-2012 Floodplain management
amendment
Ch. 108
2012-20 10-15-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
2012-21 11-5-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
2013-01 Not adopted
2013-02 7-15-2013 Open burning amendment Ch. 85
2013-03 1-22-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
2013-04 4-15-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
2013-05 5-6-2013 Use of recreational
facilities amendment
Ch. 139, Art. I
2013-06 Zoning Map amendment Denied
2013-07 9-16-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 187
2013-08 11-4-2013 Officers and employees:
compensation of Board of
Supervisors amendment
Ch. 44, Art. I
2014-01 1-6-2014 Tax Collector fees Ch. 178, Art. V
2014-02 3-3-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2014-03 5-5-2014 Stormwater management
amendment
Ch. 168
2016-01 12-19-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2016-02 12-19-2016 Parks and recreation areas:
use of recreational facilities
amendment
Ch. 139, Art. I
2016-03 12-19-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
§ DL-1 WEST HANOVER CODE § DL-1
144:846
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2016-04 12-19-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2016-05 12-19-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2016-06 Tabled
2016-07 12-19-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2016-08 12-19-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2016-09 12-19-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2016-10 12-19-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2017-01 4-3-2017 Sewers: on-lot sewage
disposal amendment
Ch. 158, Art. I
2017-02 4-3-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2017-03 4-3-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
2017-04 5-15-2017 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 103
2017-05 10-16-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 187
2017-06 10-16-2018 Animals: Livestock at Large
Amendment; Animals and
Domesticated Pets
Amendment
Ch. 67, Art. I; Ch.
67, Art. II
2017-07 10-16-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 195
2017-08 Number not used
2017-09 10-16-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 195
2018-01 3-19-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 195
2018-02 3-19-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 195
2018-03 3-19-2018 Fireworks Ch. 106
2018-04 5-7-2018 Special Events Ch. 183
2018-05 5-21-2018 Transient Retail and Mobile
Merchant Businesses
Amendment
Ch. 182
2018-06 5-21-2018 Subdivision and Land
Development Amendment
Ch. 173
2018-07 8-20-2018 Subdivision and Land
Development Amendment
Ch. 173
2018-08 8-20-2018 Subdivision and Land
Development Amendment
Ch. 173
2018-09 7-31-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 195
§ DL-1 PLUMBING § DL-1
144:847
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2018-10 8-20-2018 Transient Retail and Mobile
Merchant Businesses
Amendment
Ch. 182
§ DL-1 WEST HANOVER CODE § DL-1
144:848