REVISED ORDINANCES CITY OF CENTRAL FALLS, RHODE ISLAND 
____________ 
Published in 2010 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: May 10, 2010 
____________ 

CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
CENTRAL FALLS, RHODE ISLAND 
____________ 
James A. Diossa 
Mayor 
____________ 
Ann D. Racquier (Ward I) 
Robert A. Ferri (Ward II) (City Council President) 
Hugo Figueroa (Ward III) 
Stephanie Gonzalez (Ward IV)(Council President Pro Tempore) 
Tammi D. Johnson (Ward V) 
Shelby Maldonado (At Large) 
Tia Ristaino-Siegel (At Large) 
City Council 
____________ 
Matthew Jerzyk 
City Solicitor 
____________ 
Sonia Grace 
City Clerk 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
CENTRAL FALLS, RHODE ISLAND 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Charles D. Moreau 
Mayor 
____________ 
Eunice DeLaHoz (Ward I) (President Pro Tempore) 
Richard Aubin, Jr. (Ward II) 
Patrick J. Szlastha (Ward III) 
Jeremiah A. O'Connor (Ward IV) 
William Benson, Jr. (Ward V) (City Council President) 
City Council 
____________ 
John T. Gannon 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Marie A. Twohey 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Central Falls, Rhode Island. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1994 Code, as supplemented through September 12, 2005, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1994 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Jack Renfroe, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to former City Clerk Elizabeth A. Crowley, current City Clerk Marie A. Twohey, former City Solicitor Raymond P. Cooney, and City Solicitor John T. Gannon for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Central Falls, Rhode Island. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Central Falls, Rhode Island. 
(c)  Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Central Falls, Rhode Island. 2010. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF CENTRAL FALLS, RHODE ISLAND; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Revised Ordinances, City of Central Falls, Rhode Island," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 38, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before August 24, 2009, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00, or imprisonment not exceeding 30 days in some jail or house of correction, or by hard labor for a period not exceeding six months, and/or the person shall be required to pay restitution in cases involving property damage or personal injury in an amount up to $2,500.00, and/or be required to provide voluntary community service for the city or its agencies for not more than ten days for any one offense, Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, with respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense and with respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each act constitutes a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Coe section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate an intention to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after August 24, 2009, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Introduction: March 8, 2010 
First Passage: April 12, 2010, 
Public Hearing Final Passage: May 10, 2010. 
/s/ _____ /s/ _____  Marie A. Twohey, CMC  Charles D. Moreau  City Clerk  Mayor  
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of these Revised Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Date 
Adopted Include/ 
Omit Supp. No. Supp. No. 1  3-15-2010(Ord.) Omit 1  4-12-2010(1)(Ord.) Include 1  4-12-2010(2)(Ord.) Include 1  4-12-2010(3)(Ord.) Include 1  5-10-2010(Ord.) Include 1 Supp. No. 2  3-21-2011(Ord.) Include 2  4-18-2011(1)(Ord.) Include 2  4-18-2011(2)(Ord.) Include 2  4-18-2011(3)(Ord.) Include 2  4-18-2011(4)(Ord.) Include 2  4-18-2011(5)(Ord.) Include 2  5- 9-2011(1)(Ord.) Omit 2  5-16-2011(1)(Ord.) Omit 2  5-16-2011(2)(Ord.) Include 2  6- 2-2011(Ord.) Omit 2 11- 6-2012(Elect.) Include 2 Supp. No. 3  2- 5-2014(Res.) Omit 3  2-10-2014(1)(Ord.) Omit 3  2-10-2014(2)(Ord.) Omit 3  2-10-2014(3)(Res.) Omit 3  3-10-2014(1)(Ord.) Include 3  3-10-2014(2)(Ord.) Include 3  3-10-2014(3)(Ord.) Omit 3  3-12-2014(Res.) Omit 3  3-24-2014(Res.) Omit 3  4-14-2014(Ord.) Include 3  4-23-2014(1)(Ord.) Include 3  4-23-2014(2)(Ord.) Include 3  4-30-2014(1)(Res.) Omit 3  4-30-2014(2)(Res.) Omit 3  6- 9-2014(Ord.) Include 3  8-13-2014(Ord.) Include 3  8-25-2014(Ord.) Include 3  9- 8-2014(1)(Ord.) Include 3  9- 8-2014(2)(Res.) Omit 3  9-29-2014(1)(Ord.) Include 3  9-29-2014(2)(Res.) Omit 3  3-23-2015(1)(Ord.) Include 3  3-23-2015(2)(Ord.) Include 3  4-13-2015(Ord.) Include 3  5-19-2014(Res.) Omit 3 Supp. No. 4 12-19-2011(1) (Ord.) Include 4 12-19-2011(2) (Ord.) Include 4 12-19-2011(3) (Ord.) Include 4 12-19-2011(4) (Ord.) Include 4 12-19-2011(5) (Ord.) Omit 4 12-19-2011(6) (Ord.) Include 4   4-11-2012 (Ord.) Include 4   5- 9-2012 (Ord.) Omit 4   6-12-2012(1) (Ord.) Omit 4   6-12-2012(2) (Ord.) Omit 4   6-12-2012(3) (Ord.) Omit 4   6-12-2012(4) (Ord.) Omit 4   6-12-2012(5) (Ord.) Omit 4 10-10-2012 (Ord.) Include 4   2-13-2013 (Ord.) Include 4   3-20-2013(1) (Ord.) Include 4   3-20-2013(2) (Ord.) Omit 4   3-20-2013(3) (Ord.) Omit 4   3-20-2013(4) (Ord.) Omit 4   4-12-2013 (Ord.) Include 4   4-20-2013 (Ord.) Include 4 12- 9-2013 (Ord.) Omit 4   5-11-2015 (Ord.) Include 4   9-14-2015(1) (Ord.) Include 4   9-14-2015(2) (Ord.) Include 4   9-14-2015(3) (Ord.) Include 4   9-28-2015 (Ord.) Include 4 10-14-2015 (Ord.) Include 4 Supp. No. 5 12-14-2015 (Ord.) Include 5   1-11-2016 (Ord.) Omit 5   2-10-2016 (Ord.) Include 5 Supp. No. 6 11- 9-2015(1) (Ord.) Include 6   3-14-2016(1) (Ord.) Include 6 Supp. No. 7   8-10-2016(1) (Ord.) Include 7 11-28-2016(1) (Ord.) Include 7   2-13-2017(1) (Ord.) Omit 7   2-13-2017(2) (Ord.) Include 7   2-27-2017(1) (Ord.) Include 7   3-13-2017(1) (Ord.) Include 7   5- 8-2017(1) (Ord.) Include 7   6-12-2017(1) (Ord.) Include 7   6-12-2017(2) (Ord.) Include 7   6-19-2017(1) (Ord.) Include 7 Supp. No. 8  7-10-2017(1) (Ord.) Include 8  9-18-2017(1) (Ord.) Include 8  9-18-2017(2) (Ord.) Include 8 12-11-2017(1) (Ord.) Include 8  1- 8-2018(1) (Ord.) Include 8  1- 8-2018(2)(Ord.) Include 8  
PART I - CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS 
Subpart A - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Published in part I, subpart A is the Charter of the City of Central Falls, Rhode Island, adopted November 4, 1952, and revised on August 3, 2006. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision derives unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - POWERS OF THE CITY 

Sec. 1-100. - The city's power defined. 
    Pursuant to article XXVIII of the constitution of the State of Rhode Island, (hereinafter in this Charter called "the state") and every other power it thereunto enabling, the City of Central Falls (hereinafter in this Charter called "the city") shall have and may exercise all powers and authority of local self-government and shall have complete powers of legislation and administration in relation to its municipal functions, including any additional powers and authority which may hereafter be granted to it. The city shall have the power to enact ordinances and to make rules and regulations necessary and proper for carrying into execution its powers; and such ordinances, rules and regulations may be made enforceable by the imposition of fines, forfeitures and penalties not exceeding $500.00 and by imprisonment for a period not exceeding one year for any one offense. 
Sec. 1-101. - Legislative power. 
    The legislative power of the city shall be exclusively vested in and exercised by a council, except as limited by the provisions of this Charter. 
Sec. 1-102. - Executive and administrative power. 
    The executive and administrative power of the city shall be exclusively vested in and exercised by a mayor and such other officers, departments, boards and commissions as are designated and authorized in this Charter. 
ARTICLE II. - LEGISLATIVE BRANCH 
CHAPTER 1. - THE COUNCIL 

Sec. 2-100. - Number, terms and salaries of the city council. 
    Effective January 6, 2014, the council shall consist of seven members, two to be elected by the electors at-large to be known as councilors-at large and one to be elected from each of the five wards of the city to be known as ward councilors. Effective January 6, 2014, the terms of all councilors shall be two years from the first Monday of January following the year in which they were elected except that a councilor elected to fill a vacancy shall serve only for the balance of the unexpired term. In order to accommodate the city's transition to even-year elections, members of the city council elected in 2013 shall serve for a three year term. Effective January 6, 2014, no person shall hold the office of city councilor for more than eight consecutive years. Each council member shall receive a salary as determined by ordinance. No ordinance increasing the salaries of members of the council shall become effective during the current term of office of the members of the council enacting such ordinance. Councilors shall not be eligible for heath insurance, dental insurance and retirement benefits paid for by the city. 
(12-8-1969, § 1; 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 2-101. - The election of council. 
    One council member shall be elected from each ward. Each elector shall have the right to vote for one councilman duly nominated from the ward in which he shall be a qualified elector. Effective January 6, 2014, all electors shall have the right to vote for two councilors-at-large duly nominated. 
(11-6-2012) 
Sec. 2-102. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-103. - Qualifications of councilors. 
    Councilors-at-large, at the time of their election, shall be qualified electors and residents of the city, ward councilors shall, at the time of their election, shall be qualified electors and residents of the respective wards from which they are elected. All councilors standing for election shall have been residents of the city for at least two years. Any councilor who removes their residence from the city shall thereby vacate their office. 
(11-6-2012) 
Sec. 2-104. - Organization of the council; officers; rules. 
    The council shall meet for organization on the first Monday of January following its election, at which time it shall elect a president from among its members. The council shall further elect a president pro tempore from among its members to act in the event of the absence or disability of the president. The council shall adopt rules not inconsistent with this Charter providing for committees, defining the duties of its president, and otherwise providing for its organization and procedure; provided, however, that each committee of the council shall contain at least one councilman from each ward. For the purpose of organizing, the council shall meet at the city council chamber, and the temporary presiding officer shall be the city clerk if present. If said council chamber shall not be available, the city clerk shall designate any other suitable place in the city for such meeting. 
Sec. 2-105. - Engagement of mayor and council members. 
    The mayor and members of the city council, before entering upon the duties of their office, shall first be severally sworn or affirmed to the faithful discharge of the same, and to the support of the constitution and laws of the state, and of the Constitution of the United States, in the form and manner provided for by law. The oath shall be administered by such individual competent to administer oaths, as shall have been invited to do so by the mayor-elect. 
Sec. 2-106. - Employment of counsel. 
    In the event the law department declines or fails to advise or render legal services to the council in any matter, and whenever the council is conducting an investigation relating to the executive and administrative branch of the city government, the council may employ and fix the compensation of council of its own selection to handle such matters or to assist in conducting such investigation. In all other cases it shall obtain legal advice and services exclusively from the law department. 
Sec. 2-107. - Commitments between election and inauguration. 
    During the period between the date of the municipal election and the date set for the swearing in of the newly elected mayor and council members pursuant to section 2-105 of this chapter, neither the mayor nor the council nor any appointed official of the city shall initiate or approve any appointment to office or hiring of city personnel, nor initiate any purchase of commitment of city funds which was not authorized in the annual budget, in the amount of $5,000.00 or more, nor enter into any contract on behalf of the city that will be binding beyond the period of time specified in this section, nor initiate actions on any ordinance or amendment thereto, provided however, that this section shall not be deemed to prohibit emergency expenditures as defined in section 2-302(1) of this Charter. 
CHAPTER 2. - COUNCIL PROCEDURES 

Sec. 2-200. - Legislation to be by ordinance. 
    Except as hereinafter otherwise provided, every ordinance of the council shall begin with the words: "Be it ordained by the City of Central Falls." 
Sec. 2-201. - Manner of introduction. 
    Consideration and passage of ordinances and resolutions. 
(1)  Every ordinance shall be introduced only in written or printed form. 
(2)  Every ordinance, except annual budget ordinances and general codifications and revisions of city ordinances, shall contain not more than one subject which shall be clearly and adequately expressed in its title. 
(3)  Ordinances making annual or supplemental appropriations shall be confined to the subject of appropriations. 
(4)  No ordinance shall be so amended on its passage as to change its original purpose. 
(5)  No ordinance, other than an emergency ordinance, shall be acted upon at the meeting at which it shall be introduced, but may be referred to a committee for study and recommendations. Every ordinance referred to the committee shall be reported back to the council for action thereon, with or without recommendations, not later than the regular or special meeting of the council occurring next after 14 days, from the date of such reference. The council may order such ordinance referred back to committee for further study and investigation upon the affirmative vote of three of the members of the council, but said ordinance shall again be reported back to the council for action at the next regular city council meeting. 
(6)  No ordinance shall be passed until it has been read on two separate days, nor until at least 72 hours have elapsed between such two readings, provided, however, that the above requirements may be dispensed with in the case of emergency ordinances by a vote of not less than four members of the council. 
(7)  The second reading of each ordinance shall be in full, unless a copy thereof shall have been furnished to each member of the council at least 48 hours prior to such reading. 
(8)  No ordinance or resolution shall be passed until after it is read unless a majority of the council members present votes to dispense with the reading in which case only the title need be read along with a statement as to its contents. 
(9)  Written or printed copies of every ordinance shall be furnished by the city clerk to each member of the council at least 48 hours before the second reading. 
(10)  After the introduction of any ordinance the city clerk shall keep available a copy of such proposed ordinance together with all amendments thereto, which copy shall be available for public inspection at all reasonable times. 
(11)  The council shall hold at least one public hearing on all budget ordinances and all general and supplemental budget ordinances, before final passage, which hearings shall be held in accordance with rules established by the council. After the introduction of any budget ordinance, the city clerk shall cause a copy thereof to be published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the city. 
(12)  The council, or a committee thereof, shall hold at least one public hearing on all ordinances, except emergency ordinances, if a petition shall be presented to the city clerk at least 72 hours before the final passage thereof, but not later than seven days after the first passage thereof, signed by at least 100 qualified electors of the city requesting such hearing. Such hearings shall be held in accordance with the rules established by the council or its designated committee. 
(13)  Except as herein otherwise provided for the passage of emergency ordinances and ordinances returned to the council with the disapproval of the mayor, every ordinance shall be passed or adopted at each reading by a majority of all the members of the council. 
(14)  Resolutions may be passed at the time of introduction. 
(12-8-1969, § 1) 
Sec. 2-202. - Emergency ordinances. 
    An emergency ordinance is an ordinance to provide for the immediate preservation of public peace, property, health or safety in which the emergency claimed is set forth and defined in the preamble thereto. No situation shall be declared an emergency by the council except as defined in this section, and it is hereby declared to be the policy of this Charter that such definition shall be strictly construed by the courts. 
Sec. 2-203. - Submission of ordinances to the mayor. 
    Every ordinance shall, before it takes effect, be certified by the city clerk to the mayor for his/her approval. The mayor shall sign the ordinance if he/she approves it, whereupon it shall become law. If he/she disapproves it, he/she shall return it to the city clerk with the reasons for his/her disapproval not later than ten days after he/she receives it. If the council shall pass the ordinance by an affirmative vote of four (six effective January 6, 2014) of its members at or before the next regular meeting after the ordinance has been returned with the mayor's disapproval, it shall become law without his/her approval. 
    If for any reason the mayor fails to sign or return an ordinance to the city clerk within ten days after receiving it, it shall become law on the expiration of said ten days. The mayor may disapprove or reduce any item or items of any ordinance making appropriations, and the approved part or parts of any ordinance making an appropriation shall become law, and the part or parts disapproved shall not become law unless passed by the council over the mayor's veto as provided herein. 
(12-8-1969, § 1; 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 2-204. - Mayor and others may appear before council. 
    The heads of departments or divisions thereof and members of boards and commissions, in matters relating to the functions of their offices, and the mayor and any other elected officials may request the right to appear before the council or any of its committees for the purpose of expressing their views on matters pending before it. 
Sec. 2-205. - Council meetings to be public. 
    The meetings of the council shall at all times be open and accessible to the public with only the exceptions provided in the state open meetings law. 
Sec. 2-206. - Regular meetings. 
    Regular meetings of the council shall be held at least once in each calendar month, and there shall be an interval of at least seven days between successive regular meetings. The council shall establish the time at which regular meetings shall be held, and shall schedule and notice all meetings in conformity with the state open meetings law. 
Sec. 2-207. - Special meetings. 
(a)  Special meetings may be held at any time upon the call of the president of the council, or two of the members of the council, provided, however, that no business shall be transacted at special meetings, except upon the unanimous consent of all of the members of the council present and voting, unless notice thereof shall have been included in the call of the meeting. 
(b)  Emergency meetings may be held at any time upon the call of the mayor. 
(c)  Special meetings and emergency meetings shall be scheduled and notice shall be made in conformity with the state open meetings law. 
(12-8-69, § 1) 
Sec. 2-208. - Quorum; votes to adjourn meetings. 
    A quorum shall consist of three (four effective January 6, 2014) members of the council, provided, however, that a majority of the members of the council present and voting, whether or not a quorum shall be present, may vote to adjourn a meeting to any other definite time. 
(12-8-69, § 1; 11-6-2012; Memo of 5-12-2015) 
CHAPTER 3. - LEGISLATION 

Sec. 2-300. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the city shall be the 12 months commencing each July 1, unless changed by ordinance. 
Sec. 2-301. - The annual operating budget ordinance. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of the council, at least five days before the end of the fiscal year, to adopt the annual operating budget ordinance for the next fiscal year. The consideration of the operating budget ordinance shall begin forthwith upon the receipt from the mayor of his annual operating budget message and the proposed annual operating budget ordinance, both of which shall be submitted in written or printed form. The city clerk shall reproduce sufficient copies to supply reasonable requests. The proposed budget ordinance shall be regarded as having been introduced immediately upon its receipt. 
(2)  The annual operating budget ordinance shall provide for funding any previously incurred deficit(s) reported in the city's governmental fund(s) and shall provide appropriations for the city council, the mayor, and all departments, boards and commissions which form a part of the executive or administrative branch of the city government, and for all other items which are to be met out of the general revenues of the city. Expenditures for the repair of any property, for the re-grading, repaving or repairing of streets, and for the acquisition of any property or for any work or project which does not have an estimated useful life to the city of at least five years following the time the expenditure is made for it shall be deemed to be ordinary expenses and shall be provided for in the annual operating budget ordinance. 
(3)  The mayor's estimates of receipts for the ensuing fiscal year and of surplus or deficit, if any, for the current fiscal year may not be altered by the council. 
(4)  In every annual operating budget ordinance, provision shall be made for: 
(a)  Debt service requirements and the sums necessary to meet any other outstanding legal obligations. 
(b)  An annual independent audit of the financial statements of the city. 
(5)  The annual operating budget ordinance may be amended at any time after its passage. Aggregate appropriations may be increased only upon the realization of additional unrestricted revenue in the current year. The operating budget shall not be increased by an appropriation from fund balance, except upon the request of the mayor and subsequent approval by the council. 
(6)  Inter-departmental transfers of budget items may not be made except during the last three months of any fiscal year, and only upon the recommendation of the mayor, unless the council shall amend the budget ordinance by vote of not less than four (six effective January 6, 2014) of the members of the council. Intra-departmental transfers may be made at any time upon the request, of the department head, recommendation of the finance director and approval by the mayor. 
(7)  At any time during the fiscal year, if it is indicated that actual revenue receipts will not equal the original estimates upon which appropriations were based, the council shall by ordinance, upon the recommendation of the mayor, make such reductions or suspensions in the appropriations for any and all departments as will prevent the occurrence of a deficit. 
(12-8-1969, § 1; 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 2-302. - Other appropriations. 
    The council may, make operating appropriations in addition to those included in the annual operating budget ordinance: 
(1)  To meet emergencies which could not be anticipated when the operating budget ordinance was passed. 
(2)  To pay the expenses of holding elections, special elections and elections on proposals to amend this Charter. 
(3)  To pay the costs of council investigations and inquiries and the compensation of attorneys retained by the council as authorized by this Charter. 
Sec. 2-303. - Balancing the budget. 
    The council shall ordain such revenue measures as will, in the opinion of the mayor, yield sufficient revenue to balance the budget. For this purpose new sources of revenue or increased rates from existing sources of revenue proposed by the council shall be deemed to yield such amounts as the mayor shall determine. 
Sec. 2-304. - The capital program and capital budget. 
(1)  Prior to the beginning of the fiscal year, the council shall adopt a capital program and a capital budget. 
(2)  The capital improvement program (CIP) shall embrace all physical public improvements and any preliminary studies and surveys relative thereto, the acquisition of property of a permanent nature, and the purchase of equipment for any public improvements when first erected or acquired that are to be financed in whole or in part from bond funds subject to control or appropriation by the council. It shall show the capital expenditures which are planned for each of the five ensuing fiscal years. For each separate purpose, project, facility, or other property, there shall be shown the amount, if any, and the source of the money that has been spent, encumbered, or is intended to be spent or encumbered prior to the beginning of the ensuing fiscal year and also the amounts and the sources of the money that are intended to be spent during each of the ensuing five years. The council may delete projects from the capital improvement program as submitted to it, but it shall not otherwise amend the capital improvement program, without the approval of the mayor. 
(3)  The capital budget ordinance shall show in detail the capital expenditures intended to be made or incurred in the ensuing fiscal year that are to be financed from lease/purchase, note and/or bond proceeds subject to control or appropriation by the council, and shall be in full conformity with that part of the capital improvement program applicable to the year which it covers. Amounts specified as intended to be spent out of new appropriations shall, upon enactment of the capital budget ordinance, constitute appropriations of such amounts. The council may amend the capital budget ordinance but no amendment shall be valid which does not conform to the capital improvement program. 
Sec. 2-305. - Failure to pass appropriation. 
    In an emergency created by the failure of the council to pass the annual appropriation ordinance prior to ten days from the beginning of the new fiscal year, the same amounts appropriated in the fiscal year immediately preceding shall be available for each department, board, commission, and other agency of the city government, subject to monthly or quarterly allotments, in accordance with seasonal requirements as determined by the director of finance and approved by the mayor; provided, however, that expenditures for payment of any indebtedness of the city on bonds or notes and interest thereon shall be in such amounts as may be required, regardless of whether or not an annual appropriation ordinance is passed by the council. 
Sec. 2-306. - Code of Ordinances. 
    As promptly as possible after the submission to it by the law department, as required by this Charter, of a proposed codification and revision of the effective general ordinances of the city, or of a new Code of Ordinances, the council shall consider and act upon the same, and after the Code has been adopted all measures of general application shall be ordained as amendments of or additions to it. The council shall cause the Code to be published by and distributed through the department of records as other publications of the city are published and distributed. Periodically thereafter, at intervals of not more than ten years, the council shall cause new and up-to-date editions of the Code to be similarly published and distributed. 
Sec. 2-307. - Legislation affecting powers and duties of the executive and administrative branch. 
    The council may by ordinance add new powers and new duties, not inconsistent with this Charter, to the powers and duties of the offices, departments, boards and commissions which are herein designated as the agencies of the executive and administrative branch of the city government, and may create new divisions or consolidate divisions of departments, but it shall not, except as herein provided, increase the number of such departments, independent boards or commissions. The council may abolish any department, board or commission by a unanimous vote of the entire council. 
Sec. 2-308. - Council to fix salaries of officers and employees. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the council shall fix the salaries of all officers and employees of the city. 
Sec. 2-309. - Licensing authority. 
    The council shall be the licensing authority of the city, unless otherwise provided by this Charter or by ordinance. 
Sec. 2-310. - Annual audit. 
    An annual independent audit of all accounts, books, records and financial transactions of every department of the city government, shall be made each year by an independent certified public accountant. The audit shall be conducted in accordance with governmental auditing standards. The auditor shall provide the council with a written opinion, as to the city's overall compliance with generally accepted accounting principles, material accuracy of the financial statements and internal control. The procedure for selecting the auditor shall be that as prescribed in accordance with Rhode Island General Laws. The audit report shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be a public record. 
CHAPTER 4. - COUNCIL INQUIRIES AND INVESTIGATIONS 

Sec. 2-400. - Inquiries and investigations. 
    The council shall have power by resolution to authorize inquiries and investigations of city affairs to be conducted by the entire body or by any of its committees, in aid of its legislative powers and functions. 
Sec. 2-401. - Witnesses. 
    The council shall have power to issue subpoena to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents and other evidence at any meeting of the body or any of its committees. It shall have power to punish for contempt. 
Sec. 2-402. - Oaths of witnesses. 
    The presiding officer of the council or of any of its committees shall have power to administer oaths to witnesses. 
Sec. 2-403. - Investigation to be public. 
    All inquiries and investigations conducted by the council or any of its committees shall be open to the public, except when in the opinion of the investigating body executive sessions are deemed necessary. 
Sec. 2-404. - Rights of witnesses and others. 
    Any witness appearing before the council or any of its committees may be represented by counsel. Any person whose character shall have been impugned in the course of any inquiry or investigation by the council or any of its committees shall be given the opportunity to appear with or without counsel, to present evidence, to cross-examine any person who may have impugned his character, and to call witnesses of his own, and the council shall, upon application being made, exercise its subpoena power to compel the attendance of such persons and witnesses as it shall deem necessary and desirable. 
CHAPTER 5. - COUNCIL APPOINTMENTS 

Sec. 2-500. - Probate judge. 
    At the first regular meeting of the council in January after its organization, or as soon as may be thereafter, the council by a majority of its members shall elect a judge of the probate court of the city to serve until his successor shall be duly elected as aforesaid by the succeeding council. The judge of the probate court shall be a lawyer admitted to practice before the supreme court of the state, and shall have had at least two years' experience in the actual practice of law. In case of the sickness, absence from the city or other disability or ineligibility of the judge of the probate court to serve, the city solicitor or the assistant solicitor shall perform the duties of said judge during the sickness, absence or other inability or ineligibility of the judge. The acts of said acting judge in the performance of said duties shall have the same effect as if performed by said judge. 
Sec. 2-501. - Other appointments. 
    The council by a majority of its members may elect such other officials not inconsistent with this Charter as they shall deem necessary. 
ARTICLE III. - EXECUTIVE AND ADMINISTRATIVE BRANCH-ORGANIZATION 
CHAPTER 1. - OFFICERS, DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND OTHER AGENCIES 

Sec. 3-100. - Executive and administrative officers, departments, boards, commissions and agencies designated. 
    The executive and administrative work of the city shall be performed by: 
(a)  The following elected or appointed officers: 
Mayor; 
City clerk; 
City solicitor; 
Director of finance; 
Director of planning 
Director of public works; 
Director of community services 
Director of public safety; 
Director of recreation 
Director of human resources 
(b)  The following departments and their divisions which are hereby created: 
Department of records; 
Law department; 
Community services/community center 
Finance department: 
(1)  Tax assessing division; 
(2)  Division of collections and disbursements; 
(3)  Accounting division; 
Department of public works: 
(1)  Division of engineering; 
Department of public safety: 
(1)  Police division; 
(2)  Fire division; 
(3)  Code enforcement 
(4)  Division of emergency management 
Department of recreation 
Department of human resources 
(c)  The following independent boards and commissions which are hereby created: 
Purchasing board; 
Personnel board; 
Board of appeals 
Zoning board 
Detention facility board 
Planning board 
Board of canvassers and registration; 
Trustees of the public library 
Board of recreation; 
Board of retirement. 
(d)  Such additional advisory boards as the mayor may appoint. 
(e)  Such additional divisions of departments as the council are authorized by Charter to create. 
Sec. 3-101. - Department heads. 
    Each department set up in subsection (b) of section 3-100 shall have as its head one of the officers designated in subsection (a) of section 3-100 who either personally, or by a duly authorized agent or employee of the department, subject at all times to the provisions of this Charter, shall exercise the powers and perform the duties vested in and imposed upon the department. The following officers shall be the heads of the departments following their respective titles: 
    City clerk, of the department of records; 
    City solicitor, of the law department; 
    Director of finance, of the finance department; 
    Director of public works, of the department of public works; 
    Director of public safety, of the department of public safety; 
    Director of planning, planning department 
    Director of community services, community center. 
    Director of recreation 
    Director of human resources 
Sec. 3-102. - Officers of boards and commissions. 
    Except as expressly otherwise provided in this Charter, each board and commission shall have a chairman and a secretary from its membership. 
CHAPTER 2. - ELECTION OR APPOINTMENT 

Sec. 3-200. - Mayor. 
    At the municipal election in the year 2016 and in every fourth year thereafter, a mayor shall be elected. 
(11-6-2012) 
Sec. 3-201. - Heads of departments. 
    The mayor, with the approval of a majority of members of the council, shall appoint all department heads; except that the mayor, himself, shall be the director of public safety. If the council shall refuse to approve the appointment of any department head, the mayor, within two weeks thereafter, shall submit to the council another appointee to be head of said department, and shall continue so to do until an appointment shall be approved, provided, however, that the mayor shall not resubmit any appointee whose approval has been refused more than once. Pending the approval of the appointment of any department head, the mayor may designate any employee of said department to be acting head of said department until the appointment and approval of a department head. 
(11-5-1957) 
Sec. 3-202. - Members of boards and commissions. 
    Except as expressly otherwise provided and subject to the limitations of this Charter, the mayor, with the approval of a majority of the members of the council, shall appoint the members of all boards and commissions. 
Sec. 3-203. - Officers of boards and commissions. 
    Except as expressly otherwise provided in this Charter, the members of boards and commissions shall elect their officers. 
CHAPTER 3. - QUALIFICATIONS 

Sec. 3-300. - Mayor. 
    The mayor shall be at least 25 years of age, a legal resident of the city for at least two years and a qualified elector of the city. If the mayor removes his or her residence from the city, the mayor shall thereby vacate his or her office. 
(11-6-2012) 
Sec. 3-301. - City solicitor. 
    The city solicitor shall be a lawyer admitted to practice before the Supreme Court of the state and shall have had at least two years' experience in active practice of the law. 
Sec. 3-302. - Reserved. 
Sec. 3-303. - Director of finance. 
    The director of finance shall have had such experience for at least five years as an executive or the controller of a business, or in public finance, as shall qualify him for the duties of his office. 
Sec. 3-304. - Other department heads, members of boards and commissions, officers and employees. 
    All other department heads, members of boards and commissions, and all other employees not under the merit system hereinafter set up, shall be persons especially qualified for their positions by training and experience. 
Sec. 3-305. - Reserved. 
Sec. 3-306. - Members of boards and commissions to hold no other office. 
    Members of independent boards or commissions, except ex officio members, shall hold no other elective or appointive office in the city. 
CHAPTER 4. - TERMS OF OFFICE 

Sec. 3-400. - Mayor. 
    In order to accommodate the city's transition to even-year elections, the mayor elected in 2013 shall serve for a three-year term. Thereafter, the mayor shall serve for a term of four years beginning on the first Monday of January following his election, and until his successor is elected and qualified. No person shall hold the office of mayor for more than two consecutive terms. 
(11-6-2012) 
Sec. 3-401. - All other officers. 
    Except as expressly otherwise provided in this Charter, all officers appointed by the mayor, including those approved by the council, shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. All members of boards and commissions and all council appointees shall serve for the terms for which they were appointed or elected and until their successors are qualified, unless sooner removed for cause. 
(9-12-1957, § 1) 
CHAPTER 5. - VACANCIES 

Sec. 3-500. - Mayor. 
    If a vacancy occurs in the office of mayor more than 180 days before the time of holding the next succeeding regular city election, the council shall call a special election for the purpose of filling such vacancy for the remainder of the term, such special election to be held not more than 50 days after the date of the occurrence of such vacancy. If any such vacancy occurs 180 days, or less, before the time of holding the next succeeding regular city election, the president of the council shall perform the duties of the mayor for the remainder of the unexpired term. If by the 30th day after the vacancy occurs the council shall fail or refuse to call an election as hereinbefore required, then the board of canvassers shall call an election for the purpose of filling said vacancy within said period of 50 days. Until the vacancy is filled, or in case of the mayor's temporary disability, the president of the council shall act as mayor, and if the president of the council should resign or be unable to act, then the council shall elect by a majority of its members one of its members to serve as acting mayor. 
Sec. 3-501. - Appointive offices. 
    A vacancy in an appointive office for a term and in the office of a department head, shall be filled by appointment for the balance of the unexpired term within three months after such vacancy occurs. Such an appointment shall be made in the same manner as an original appointment. 
(9-12-1957, § 1) 
Sec. 3-502. - Council vacancies. 
    If a vacancy occurs in the office of city councilor, whether by failure to elect or otherwise, the remaining councilors shall, within thirty days following the date of such vacancy, act to fill said vacancy. The city council shall fill the vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term by choosing the defeated candidate for said seat from the last regular city election; provided, however, that the defeated candidate shall have received at least 30 percent of the total ballots cast for the particular seat being vacated. For the purpose of this section, the 30 percent minimum threshold shall be calculated as a ratio of ballots cast for the particular office being vacated to votes obtained by the defeated candidate. If there was no other candidate for said office or the defeated candidate shall not have received at least 30 percent of the total ballots cast and more that 180 days remain before the next succeeding regular city election the board of canvassers shall call a special election for the purpose of filling such vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term, such special election to be held in accordance with state elections law and the provisions of this Charter. In the event that any state general or special election, or any city election for any other purpose shall be held within the said period the board of canvassers may in its discretion order any special city election required by the provisions of this section to be held at the same time as such other city or state general or special election. 
(11-6-2012) 
CHAPTER 6. - INDEPENDENT BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 

Sec. 3-600. - Appointments and compensation. 
A)  Compensation of members of independent boards and commissions may be established by the council by ordinance. 
B)  On the first Monday of January in each succeeding year, or as soon as may be thereafter, there shall be appointed by the mayor, with the approval of a majority of the members of the council, one member of the following boards to succeed the member whose term is expiring, and to hold office until the first Monday of January three years thereafter, and until his/her successor shall be appointed and qualified. Alternate members of any board shall be appointed in the same manner as other members of said board. Board appointments are made by the mayor with the approval of a majority of the members of the council. 
Sec. 3-601. - Purchasing board. 
    The purchasing board shall consist of the mayor and the director of finance, ex officio. and three other members The purchasing agent shall serve ex officio without voting privileges 
Sec. 3-602. - Personnel board. 
    The board shall consist of three members and shall be appointed in a manner as prescribed in section 3-600. 
Sec. 3-603. - Board of appeals. 
    The board of appeals shall consist of three members provided, however, that there shall be a fourth member of said board who shall serve as an alternate and shall serve as a member of said board only upon the absence from any meeting of said board of a regular member thereof and shall be appointed in a manner as prescribed in section 3-600. 
Sec. 3-604. - Board of canvassers and registration. 
    The canvassing authority of the city shall be the board of canvassers and registration and shall consist of three members who shall be appointed in a manner as prescribed by state law. 
Sec. 3-605. - Trustees of public libraries. 
    The trustees of public libraries shall consist of three members, who shall be appointed in a manner as prescribed in section 3-600. 
Sec. 3-606. - Board of recreation. 
    The board of recreation shall consist of three members who shall be appointed in a manner as prescribed in section 3-600 and a council member The mayor shall appoint the council member to serve on said board for a period of two years as an ex officio member without the right to vote. 
Sec. 3-607. - Board of pensions and retirement. 
    The board of pensions and retirement shall consist of three members, who shall be appointed in a manner as prescribed in section 3-600. 
Sec. 3-608. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXECUTIVE AND ADMINISTRATIVE BRANCH-POWERS AND DUTIES 
CHAPTER 1. - THE MAYOR 

Sec. 4-100. - Chief executive officer. 
    The mayor shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the city. He shall supervise, direct and control, and shall be responsible for the conduct of the executive and administrative work of the city, and shall be at all times vigilant and active in causing the laws of the state and ordinances of the city to be executed and enforced. 
Sec. 4-101. - Reserved. 
Sec. 4-102. - Powers and duties. 
    Subject to the other provisions of this Charter, and except as otherwise provided therein, the powers and duties of the mayor shall be as follows: 
(1)  Communicate to the council at least once a year a statement of the financial and general conditions of the affairs of the city and also such information on financial matters as the council may from time to time request. 
(2)  Submit to the council not later than 45 days before the end of the fiscal year his operating budget message and a proposed annual operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. In the operating budget message the mayor shall furnish to the council the estimated surplus or deficit, if any, of the current fiscal year and the estimated actual receipts of the city from all sources for the ensuing fiscal year which shall be available for meeting ordinary expenses and all other information pertinent to an operating budget, shall state the known liabilities of every kind which must be met during the year, and shall recommend appropriations included in the proposed annual operating budget ordinance. 
(3)  In connection with his submission of the operating budget, recommend to the council measures which he believes necessary to balance the budget. 
(4)  At the same time that he submits [to] the council the proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year; also submit to the council a recommended capital program and a recommended capital budget. 
(5)  See to it [that] the city does not, except in case of unforeseeable emergency, incur a deficit in any fiscal year. To this end, he shall have the power to reduce the allocations of any department to avoid a deficit. 
(6)  The mayor shall recommend to the council all such measures connected with the affairs of the city, the protection and improvement of its government and finances, and the promotion of the welfare of its people as he shall deem desirable. 
(7)  The mayor shall have the power to call special meetings of the council and to approve and disapprove ordinances in whole or in part as provided in this Charter. 
(8)  The mayor shall at least once a year obtain from each department head and shall submit to the council a detailed report of the operation and work of the department since the submission of the last annual report. 
(9)  Have and exercise all powers and duties vested in the office of the mayor by resolution or ordinance, not inconsistent with this Charter. 
Sec. 4-103. - Mayor to be head of department of public safety. 
    The mayor shall be head of the department of public safety. 
Sec. 4-104. - Salary. 
    The salary of the mayor shall be fixed by the city council. 
Sec. 4-105. - Recall. 
(a)  Application. A mayor with more than six months remaining in the term of office for which the mayor was elected, may be recalled therefrom by the electors of the city in the manner provided in this section. No recall petition shall be filed against a mayor who has served less than six months of a first term of office. 
(b)  Recall petition. A recall petition may be initiated by the filing of an affidavit containing the name of the mayor sought to be recalled and a statement of the grounds for recall, provided that the affidavit is signed by at least 500 electors and at least 50 such signatures shall come from the electors of each ward. The city clerk shall thereupon deliver to said electors making the affidavit copies of petition blanks demanding such recall, copies of which printed forms the city clerk shall keep available. Such blanks shall be issued by the city clerk, with signature and official seal attached thereto. They shall be dated, shall be addressed to the city council and shall contain the names of all the persons to whom they are issued, the number of blanks so issued, the name of the person whose recall is sought, and the grounds of recall as stated in the affidavit. A copy of the petition shall be entered in a record book to be kept in the office of the city clerk. Said recall petition shall be returned and filed with the city clerk within 28 days after the filing of the affidavit, and shall have been signed by at least 20 percent of the electors eligible to vote. The city clerk shall forthwith submit the petition to the board of canvassers, and the board of canvassers shall, within five working days, certify thereon the number of signatures which are names of electors. 
(c)  Recall election. If the petition shall be found and certified by the city clerk to be sufficient, the city clerk shall submit the same with such certificate to the city council within five working days, and the city council shall forthwith give written notice of the receipt of the certificate to the mayor sought to be recalled and shall, if the mayor does not resign within five days thereafter, order an election to be held on a date fixed by them not less than 64 days and not more than 90 days after the date of the city clerk's certificate that a sufficient petition has been filed; provided, however, that if any other city or state election is to occur within 150 days after the date of the certificate, the city council shall postpone the holding of the recall election to the date of such other city or state election. If a vacancy occurs in said office after a recall election has been ordered, the election shall not proceed as provided in this section. 
(d)  Office holder. The incumbent shall continue to perform the duties of the office until the recall election. If said incumbent is not recalled, the incumbent shall continue in office for the remainder of the unexpired term subject to recall as before. If recalled, the mayor shall be deemed removed and the office vacant. The vacancy created thereby shall be filled in accordance with the provisions of this Charter for filling vacancies in the office of mayor. A person chosen to fill the vacancy caused by such recall shall hold office until the election. Should the person be a candidate in the subsequent election, he or she will not be allowed to have "candidate for re-election" appear on the ballot at such election. 
(e)  Ballot proposition. The form of the question to be voted upon shall be substantially as follows: "Shall [here insert the name], mayor of the city of Central Falls, be recalled?"  Yes  No 
    If a majority of the votes cast upon the question of recall is in the affirmative, the mayor shall be recalled. 
(f)  Repeat of recall. In the case of a mayor subjected to a recall election and not recalled thereby, no recall petition shall be filed against such mayor until at least 270 days after the election at which the mayor's recall was submitted to the electors of the city. 
(g)  Office holder recalled. No person who has been recalled from the office of mayor or who has resigned from office while recall proceedings were pending against such person, shall be appointed to any city office or position of employment within two years after such recall or such resignation. 
(11-6-2012) 
CHAPTER 2. - DEPARTMENT OF RECORDS 

Sec. 4-200. - City clerk. 
    The city clerk shall be ex officio the recorder of deeds, registrar of vital records, clerk of the council, and purchasing agent. 
Sec. 4-201. - Records. 
    The department of records shall keep and maintain: 
(1)  All land evidence records of every kind whatsoever now or shall hereafter be required or permitted to be recorded in a public place in charge of or under the control, custody, or supervision of any officer of the city; as provided by state law. 
[(2)  Reserved;] 
(3)  All records of licenses issued by the city or by any officer or employee thereof, unless otherwise provided by ordinance; 
(4)  All records of births, marriages and deaths; 
[(5)  Reserved;] 
(6)  All records of trade names; 
(7)  All records of proceedings in the city council; 
(8)  A complete copy of the Code of Ordinances of the city with all amendments thereto properly indexed; 
(9)  Such other records as shall by ordinance be required to be kept by the department of records or the city clerk. 
Sec. 4-202. - Licensing authority. 
    The city clerk shall issue all licenses, and permits, as by state law or city ordinance shall be required to be issued by the city clerk or the department of records. 
CHAPTER 3. - LAW DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 4-300. - Functions. 
    The law department shall have the power and its duty shall be to perform the following functions: 
(1)  It shall furnish legal advice to the mayor, to the council and to all officers, departments, boards and commissions concerning any matter or thing arising in connection with the exercise of their official duties and except as otherwise expressly provided, shall supervise, direct and control all of the law work of the city. 
(2)  The department shall collect by suit or otherwise all debts, taxes and accounts due the city which shall be placed with it for collection by any officer, department, board or commission, and it shall represent the city and the city's interests in all litigation by or against the city and every officer, department, board or commission. 
(3)  The department shall prepare or approve all contracts, bonds, and other instruments in writing in which the city is concerned, and shall approve all surety bonds required to be given for protection of the city. 
(4)  It shall prosecute any violation or alleged violation within the city of the statutes of the state or the ordinances of the city at the instance and request of the division of police. 
(5)  Upon request of the council or of any councilman, or of the mayor, the department shall prepare or assist in preparing any ordinance for introduction into the council, and shall prepare for the consideration of the council comprehensive revisions and codifications of all general ordinances of the city which are then in effect as required by this Charter or by the council. 
Sec. 4-301. - Codification. 
    The law department, with the assistance of the city clerk's department, shall prepare and submit to the council for its consideration, a comprehensive revision and codification of all the general ordinances of the city which are still in effect. For this purpose, it may employ the assistance of experts in the field of revision and codification as required by state law. 
CHAPTER 4. - FINANCE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 4-400. - Director of finance. 
    The director of finance shall be the chief financial, accounting and budget officer of the city. He shall be ex officio the city treasurer and collector of taxes, with all the powers and duties imposed upon said officers. He shall be the head of the division of collections and disbursements and shall supervise the other divisions of the finance department. 
Sec. 4-401. - Annual operating budget, capital program and capital budget. 
    The director of finance shall: 
(1)  Provide estimates of any and all unrestricted revenues to be received in the current and proposed [budget] for the upcoming fiscal year. 
(2)  Obtain from all officers, departments, boards and commissions and other agencies receiving appropriations from the city, such information as shall be necessary to enable him to compile for the mayor the information necessary for the preparation and submission to the council of the annual operating budget; 
(3)  At such times as he may require, obtain from the heads of each department, and from each board, commission or agency of the city, an itemized estimate of the anticipated revenue and the proposed expenditures necessary to meet their financial needs, detailed by organization units and the character and object of expenditures, accompanied by an inventory of all equipment, materials and supplies on hand and a statement in writing of the work to be done for such proposed appropriation; 
(4)  Make inquiries and investigations as to the financial needs, expenditures, estimates of revenues of the officers, departments, boards, commissions or other agencies of the city requesting appropriations from the city; 
(5)  Obtain from all officers, departments, boards and commissions and other agencies requesting funds from the city for capital improvements, such information as the mayor shall require to enable him to prepare the capital program and capital budget; 
(6)  Prepare and supply to the mayor, city council and department heads, such information as will enable the mayor to keep currently acquainted with the financial conditions and prospective receipts and expenditures of the city during the current fiscal year in order to control expenditures in such a manner as to avoid deficits; 
(7)  Arrange for the sale of all bonds of the city or for any borrowing by the city. 
Sec. 4-402. - Reserved. 
Sec. 4-403. - Divisions. 
    The director of finance shall be head of the division of collections and disbursements, and shall have general supervision over the other divisions of the department, but he shall not interfere in the duties of the other divisions specifically granted to the other divisions in this Charter. 
Sec. 4-404. - Tax assessing division. 
    The head of the tax assessing division shall be the tax assessor, who shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the council, and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. The tax assessor shall have knowledge of and experience in the appraisal of real and personal property and, while serving as assessor, shall be bound by a code of ethics established by state law. The tax assessor shall be responsible for the fixing of an assessed valuation on all property liable to taxation and for the preparation of an assessment roll and a tax roll for the city in the manner provided by law and ordinance. 
Sec. 4-405. - Division of collections and disbursements. 
    The director of finance shall be the head of the division of collections and disbursements. The division of collections and disbursements shall: 
(1)  Collect all real estate and personal property taxes, penalties and interest due the city. 
(2)  Collect any other taxes which now are or may hereafter be imposed by the council in such manner as shall be prescribed by ordinance. 
(3)  Collect all fees or charges imposed by or pursuant to statute or ordinance for the issuance by the city of any licenses or permits. 
(4)  Collect all other assessments made by the city, and all charges for the recording of instruments, probate fees, copies of instruments or documents, and all other sums due the city, except as may in this Charter otherwise be provided. 
(5)  Prepare such bills for taxes, assessments and other charges as the director of finance shall prescribe. 
(6)  Receive timely deposits from all departments and agencies of the city for any amounts collected, and it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies of the city to submit along with their deposits, any invoices, statements or financial, reports prepared by these departments. 
(7)  Submit to the accounting division regular reports of monies received, indicating the official receipt or license numbers whenever such numbers are required to be used by the accounting division. 
(8)  Permit, within its discretion, other departments, divisions, boards or commissions to receive directly monies due the city for charges made by such other agencies, provided that regular reports of monies received shall be submitted to the division of collections and disbursements and to the accounting division, indicating the official receipt or license numbers whenever such numbers are required to be used by the accounting division, and all monies collected shall be transmitted to the division of collections and disbursements daily. 
(9)  Make daily deposits of all monies received by it in such banks as may be designated by the director of finance, and make daily reports to the accounting division of all sums so deposited together with proof thereof. 
(10)  Make payments of money only pursuant to authorization contained in ordinances and on the basis of a duly verified voucher certified by the city's purchasing agent and the head of the appropriate department, board or commission. All checks for the payment of money shall be prepared by the accounting division, signed by the head of the accounting division, or his duly designated representative and cosigned by the director of finance or his designated representative. No payments shall be made and no obligation shall be incurred against any fund, allotment, or appropriation, unless the head of the accounting division shall first certify that there is a sufficient unencumbered balance in such fund, allotment, or appropriation, after taking into consideration all previous expenditures and outstanding obligations, to meet the same. 
Sec. 4-406. - Accounting division. 
    The accounting division shall: 
(1)  Keep and supervise all accounts which may be required by ordinance or by the mayor for the purposes of administrative direction and financial control, and shall maintain such accounts as will reflect, in detail or in summary, all assets, liabilities, reserves, surpluses, revenues and receipts, appropriations, allotments, expenditures and encumbrances. Such accounting records shall be such as will provide complete fiscal control over all agencies and activities of the city. 
(2)  Prescribe the form of receipts, vouchers, bills, claims and systems of control for accounting and financial transactions to be used by each department, division, board, commission or other agency of the city. 
(3)  Examine all contracts, purchase orders, and other documents by which the city incurs financial obligations, to ascertain that monies have been duly appropriated and allotted to meet such obligations; that there is sufficient unencumbered balance available in the appropriation applicable thereto; and that there will be such balance available when such obligations become due and payable. All such obligations shall be recorded as encumbrances on the respective appropriations from which such obligations are to be paid. 
(4)  Audit all bills, invoices, payrolls, and other evidences of claims, demands or charges against the city, to determine the regularity and correctness of the same. 
(5)  Prepare monthly reports of all receipts and expenditures of the city and all appropriations and the charges and encumbrances thereto, and submit the same to the mayor, the council, and the head of each department, board, commission or agency directly concerned. Copies of all such reports shall be filed with the department of records for each month not later than the 15th day of the succeeding month, and shall be public records. 
(6)  Keep and maintain all records pertaining to budgetary matters for the director of finance, and assist him in the preparation of the budget and capital budget. 
CHAPTER 5. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS 

Sec. 4-500. - Duties of department. 
    There shall be a department of public works which shall have supervision and control of the planning, surveying, construction and reconstructing, altering, paving, repairing, maintenance and inspecting of highways, sidewalks, curbs, storm and sewer drains. It shall have supervision and maintenance of all property, material, apparatus and equipment under its control. It shall be responsible for the maintenance of all parks and shall maintain recreational fields and playgrounds as directed by the department of recreation. 
    Furnish engineering advice to the mayor, to the council and to all officers, departments, boards and commissions concerning any matter or thing arising in connection with the exercise of their official powers or performance of their official duties. Prepare, keep and maintain proper maps and records pertaining to the location of all streets, sewers, curbing and similar matters. 
Sec. 4-501. - Traffic and safety. 
    The department of public works shall make street crossings and maintain traffic signs as directed by the chief of police. 
CHAPTER 6. - DEPARTMENT OF RECREATION 

Sec. 4-600. - Duties of department. 
    There shall be a department of recreation which shall have supervision and control of planning recreational programs for all city residents; It shall have supervision and maintenance of all property, materials and equipment under its control. It shall be responsible to report any maintenance issues of all parks, recreational fields and playgrounds to the director of public works. 
    There shall be a director of recreation who shall exercise and perform such duties as may be authorized by ordinance not inconsistent with this Charter. The director under the supervision of the department of human resources shall hire personnel as may be necessary to maintain the department. 
CHAPTER 7. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY 

Sec. 4-700. - Director of public safety. 
    The director of public safety shall be the mayor. He shall have general supervision over the various divisions of the department, and shall exercise such supervision in accordance with the provisions of this Charter specifying the duties and responsibilities of these divisions. He shall, subject to the provisions of article VII of this Charter, have the power to demote, dismiss or suspend the heads of the fire and police divisions. He shall recommend to the board of personnel his choice for the position of police or fire chief from the names certified to him in accordance with the personnel system regulations whenever there is a vacancy. 
Sec. 4-701. - Police division. 
    The police division shall consist of colonel/chief of police and such other subordinate officers and personnel as the council shall by ordinance ordain. The police division shall be responsible for the preservation of the public peace, prevention of crime, apprehension of criminals, protection of the rights of persons and property and enforcement of the laws of the state and the ordinances of the city and all rules and regulations made in accordance therewith. All members of the division shall have the same powers and duties with respect to the service of criminal process and enforcement of criminal laws as are vested in police officers by the statutes and laws of the state or by city ordinance. The police division shall operate and maintain, either independently or in conjunction with other cities an efficient police communication system. It shall see that proper traffic signs and signals are erected and properly maintained. The colonel/chief of police shall be in direct command of the division. Subject to the approval of the director of public safety, he/she shall make rules and regulations in conformity with the ordinances of the city, concerning the operation of the division and the conduct of all officers and employees thereof. He/she shall assign all members of the division to their respective posts, shifts, details and duties. He/she shall be responsible for the efficiency, discipline and good conduct of the division and for care and custody of all property used by the division. The uniforms of the members of the police division shall be of such material and style as the chief shall designate. The major/deputy chief of police shall assist the colonel/chief of police and perform such duties as may be assigned to him/her by the colonel/chief of police. In the absence of the colonel/chief of police, he/she shall have all the powers and perform all duties of the colonel/chief. No person shall be appointed a member of the police division who is less than 21 years old. 
(10-14-1969, § 1; Ord. of 9-25-1975, § 1) 
Sec. 4-702. - Fire division. 
    The fire division shall consist of the fire chief, who shall be the fire marshal, and such other subordinate officers and personnel as may be prescribed by ordinance of the city. 
    No person shall be appointed a member of the fire division who is less than 21 years of age 
    The fire division shall be responsible for the protection of life and property within the city from fire and for the enforcement of all laws, ordinances and regulations relating to fire prevention and fire safety. The fire chief shall be in direct command of the fire division. He shall assign all members of the division to their respective posts, shifts, details and duties. With the approval of the director of public safety, he shall make all rules and regulations in conformity with the ordinances of the city concerning the operation of the division and the conduct of all officers and employees thereof. He shall be responsible for the efficiency, discipline and good conduct of the division and for the care and custody of all property used by the division. 
    The deputy fire chief shall assist the chief and perform such duties as may be assigned to him by the chief. In the absence of the chief, he shall have all the powers and perform all duties of the chief. 
(9-12-1957, § 1; 5-11-1964, § 1) 
Sec. 4-703. - Code enforcement division. 
    There shall be in the division of code enforcement a chief enforcing officer and such other subordinate officers and personnel as may be prescribed by ordinances of the city and state law. 
    Emergency management division. 
    There shall be in the division of emergency management a chief officer as may be prescribed by ordinances of the city and federal and state law. 
    The appointment and duties of the emergency management director shall be established by Ordinance not inconsistent with this Charter. 
CHAPTER 8. - DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY SERVICES 

Sec. 4-800. - Duties of department. 
    There shall be a department of community services. The appointment and duties of the director of community services shall include the supervision and control of Channel One and shall be established by ordinance not inconsistent with this Charter. 
CHAPTER 9. - PURCHASING BOARD 

Sec. 4-900. - Purchasing agent. 
    The city clerk shall serve as purchasing agent and shall be ex officio nonvoting member of the purchasing board. He/she shall give bond for the faithful performance of his/her duties in the amount fixed by ordinance. 
Sec. 4-901. - Functions of the purchasing agent. 
    The purchasing agent shall purchase or contract for all supplies, materials, equipment and contractual service, required by any and all departments offices, boards and other agencies of the city government. The purchasing agent shall sell all supplies, materials and equipment, and real property, (as authorized by the mayor with approval of the city council[)], not needed for public use, and shall have authority to transfer between departments, offices, boards and other agencies of the city government any supplies, materials and equipment not needed by one but necessary to the operation of another or others. He/she shall be responsible to see that all department heads make necessary provisions for the storage of materials and equipment for use in their departments. He/she shall provide for the inspection of all deliveries of supplies, materials and equipment, to determine quantity and quality and conformance with specifications. He/she shall cause to be made and kept current an inventory of all equipment belonging to the city. 
Sec. 4-902. - Competitive bids. 
    The purchasing agent shall be required to secure competitive bids as required by the state municipal purchasing act. Except in an emergency, the purchasing agent shall not make any contract or open market purchase until the accounting division certifies that the department or other agency of the city concerned has, to defray the amount of such order, a sufficient unencumbered appropriation balance and a sufficient unencumbered allotment. 
Sec. 4-903. - Contract/small purchase procedures. 
    All expenditures for supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services, shall be made on written contracts. All such contracts shall be awarded to the lowest evaluated or responsive bidder, after public advertisement, and receipt of sealed bids, in accordance with the procedure adopted by the purchasing agent and approved by the purchasing board and in accordance with the municipal purchasing act. 
    Small purchases shall be made by regulations established by the purchasing agent and in accordance with state municipal purchasing act. The amounts that constitute small purchases shall be increased or decreased annually at the same rate as the Boston Regional Consumer Price Index. Procurement requirements shall not be artificially divided so as to constitute a small purchase under this section. 
Sec. 4-904. - Preference to local bidders. 
    Bids, specifications and all other factors being equal, preference shall be given to the bidder whose place of business is in the city. 
Sec. 4-905. - Standards. 
    The purchasing agent shall, with the assistance of department heads, classify, standardize, and prepare written specifications and general instructions to bidders required for all bids. The purchasing agent with the approval of the purchasing board shall prepare written standards for all supplies, materials and equipment purchased by city departments. 
Sec. 4-906. - Purchases and orders contrary to this Charter void. 
    Whenever any department or agency of the city government shall purchase or contract for any supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services, contrary to the provisions of this Charter or the rules or regulations made thereon, such order or contract shall be void and of no effect. 
Sec. 4-907. - Exceptions. 
    The trustees of public libraries shall not be subject to the provisions of this chapter in contracting for, or open market purchasing of books, reading materials, or scientific apparatus. 
Sec. 4-908. - Duties of the purchasing board. 
    It shall be the duty of the purchasing board to: 
(1)  Approve or reject all bids except that the purchasing agent shall have no vote on the award or rejection of any bid, and to establish all policies pertaining to purchases to be implemented by the purchasing agent. 
(2)  Have all bids opened in a public meeting in its presence. 
Sec. 4-909. - Contracts for privatization of municipal services. 
    All contracts or awards of bids for the privatization of any public or municipal service for the duration of more than 11 months or in excess of $5,000.00 require the approval of the city council. State statute 45-55-9 [G.L. 1956, § 45-55-9] 
(11-7-2000) 
Editor's note- An amendment to the Charter adding § 4-909, which pertained to contracts for privatization of municipal services, was approved by the voters Nov. 7, 2000. 
Sec. 4-910. - Appeal of purchasing board decision & awards. 
    The city council shall hear complaints and appeals from bidders who shall claim unfair discrimination against them in any awards, and sustain or overrule the purchasing board in the awarding of any contract. 
CHAPTER 10. - PERSONNEL BOARD 

Sec. 4-1000. - Powers and duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the personnel board to: 
(1)  To prepare with the aid of such experts as it deems necessary, personnel regulations for submission to the council. 
(2)  Make any investigations concerning personnel administration which it considers desirable, and to submit recommendations to the council. 
(3)  To certify the persons appointed to positions in the classified service. 
CHAPTER 11. - BOARD OF APPEALS 

Sec. 4-1100. - Appeals. 
    The board of appeals shall hear and consider the appeal of any property owner concerning the amount of his assessed valuation as determined by the tax assessor. The procedure before the board shall be informal and of a nature calculated to effect justice in as simple a manner as possible. 
Sec. 4-1101. - Corrections. 
    If it shall appear that the valuation of any property has been incorrectly or inequitably assessed, the board shall determine the correct valuation of such property. The board shall submit its findings to the council and the council may cancel, in whole or in part, the tax based upon such valuation, in order to effect a correction. It shall be the duty of the director of finance to make payment of any refund based upon the action of the council. 
Sec. 4-1102. - Judicial relief. 
    The taking of an appeal to the board of appeals or any action thereon shall not be construed to limit the right of any taxpayer to apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for relief from any assessed valuation or tax originally determined by the tax assessor. 
Sec. 4-1103. - Board meeting. 
    The board shall meet on the first business day of the month after the expiration of 20 days subsequent to the date on which taxes become due and payable, and at such times thereafter as may be necessary to hear appeals. No appeal shall be considered unless it is made in writing and is received by the board not later than the time of its first meeting or an adjourned meeting thereof. 
Sec. 4-1104. - Restriction. 
    No appeal shall be considered by the board of appeals unless the tax levied on the valuation appealed or such portion of the tax as is due and payable has been paid under protest. 
CHAPTER 12. - BOARD OF CANVASSERS AND REGISTRATION 

Sec. 4-1200. - Powers and duties. 
    The powers and duties of the board of canvassers and registration shall be those now or hereafter vested in the canvassing authority of the city by this Charter, by the laws of the state, and any ordinances of the city not in conflict with the provisions of this Charter or state law. 
CHAPTER 13. - TRUSTEES OF PUBLIC LIBRARIES 

Sec. 4-1300. - Powers and duties. 
    The trustees shall take possession of the library, and shall be the legal guardians and custodians of the library. They shall provide suitable rooms for the library, arrange for the proper care of the library, choose one or more competent persons as librarians pursuant to article VII of this Charter and make all needed rules and regulations for the government of the library and the use of the books; provided, that no fee for the use of the books shall ever be exacted. RIGL 29-4-6; appropriations, gift and other funds shall be established as prescribed in title 29 entitled Libraries. 
CHAPTER 15. - BOARD OF RECREATION 

Sec. 4-1500. - Powers and duties. 
    The board of recreation shall: 
(1)  Formulate and carry on a comprehensive and coordinated program of active recreation in the parks, playfields, playgrounds and public buildings of the city. 
(2)  Cooperate with the school department in coordinating its activities with the recreation program conducted by the school department. 
(3)  Cooperate with public and private agencies concerned with recreation. 
(4)  Be responsible for the maintenance, improvements and development of the playgrounds, playfields, and other recreational facilities of the city. 
CHAPTER 16. - BOARD OF RETIREMENT 

Sec. 4-1600. - Submission of recommendations. 
    The board of retirement shall from time to time submit to the council its recommendations concerning retirements. 
Sec. 4-1601. - Administration of retirement benefits. 
    The board shall administer the retirement system of the city, including those in effect on the effective date of this Charter. No person shall be retired or pensioned without the approval of said board. 
ARTICLE V. - CITY BORROWING 
CHAPTER 1. - SHORT TERM BORROWING 

Sec. 5-100. - Tax anticipation borrowing. 
    The council may, insofar as permitted by law, authorize the borrowing of money in anticipation of the collection of taxes, the funds to be used for the general operating budget of the city; provided, however, that: 
(1)  The aggregate indebtedness of the city on such borrowings shall not exceed 80 percent of the anticipated sums to be collected from taxes levied by the city during the fiscal year. 
(2)  For the purposes hereof it shall be assumed that the sums to be collected from taxes levied by the city during the fiscal year shall be no greater than the average percentage of such collections during the three prior fiscal years. 
(3)  All sums borrowed in anticipation of taxes shall be repaid before the close of the fiscal year in which said sums shall be borrowed. 
(7-25-1955, § 1; 5-22-1964, § 1) 
Sec. 5-101. - Signing bonds and notes. 
    All bonds issued by the city and all notes of the city shall be signed by the mayor and director of finance. 
ARTICLE VI. - MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Article VI of the original Home Rule Charter was declared unconstitutional in State ex rel. Messier v. Turrow et al., 99 A. (2d) 484. Subsequently, the Legislature, in a Special November Session, 1953, enacted chapter 3239 entitled as follows: "An Act pertaining to municipal primaries and elections in the City of Central Falls, and validating certain provisions in the City of Central Falls Home Rule Charter. This Act is set out herein, in place of the original Article VI, for the benefit of the user of this volume. The section numbers appearing at the beginning of each section of this article are unofficial. The official numbers are carried at the end of each section in the form of historical citations. 

Sec. 6-100. - Applicability of act. 
    This act shall apply specifically to the City of Central Falls in the state of Rhode Island. 
(C. 3239, § 1) 
Sec. 6-101. - Definitions. 
    Whenever used in this act, the following words and phrases shall, unless the context otherwise requires, be construed to mean as follows: 
    "City"-to mean the City of Central Falls. 
    "Council"-to mean the City Council of the City of Central Falls. 
    "Charter"-to mean the Home Rule Charter adopted November 4, 1952. 
(C. 3239, § 2) 
Sec. 6-102. - Time of holding municipal elections. 
    At the municipal election held on the first Tuesday following the first Monday in November in even numbered years there shall be elected such city officers as shall be required or provided by the terms of the Charter or any duly adopted amendments thereto. 
(C. 3239, § 3; 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-103. - Terms of office of elected city officers. 
    The terms of office of such elected city officers shall be those provided by the Charter or any duly adopted amendment thereto; provided, however, that the city officers elected on January 19, 1954, shall serve from February 1, 1954, until the first Monday of January 1956, or until their respective successors shall be duly elected and qualified. 
(C. 3239, § 4) 
Sec. 6-104. - Special elections for filling vacancies in offices of mayor and councilmen. 
    If a vacancy occurs in the office of mayor and/or councilman more than 180 days before the time of holding the next succeeding regular city election, the board of canvassers shall call a special election for the purpose of filling such vacancy for the remainder of the term, such special election to be held not less than 30 nor more than 50 days after the date of the occurrence of such vacancy. In the event that any state election, regular or special, or any city election for any other purpose shall be held within the said period, the board of canvassers may in its discretion order any special election required by the provisions of this section to be held at the same time as such other city or state election. 
(C. 3239, § 5) 
Sec. 6-105. - Terms of appointed officers and members of boards and commissions. 
    Except as expressly otherwise provided, all appointed officers shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing power and until their successors are qualified and all members of boards and commissions shall serve for the terms for which they were appointed or elected and until their successors are qualified, unless sooner removed for cause. 
(C. 3239, § 6) 
Sec. 6-106. - Vacancies in appointive offices. 
    A vacancy in an appointive office for a term shall be filled by appointment for the balance of the unexpired term. Such an appointment shall be made in the same manner as an original appointment. 
(C. 3239, § 7) 
Sec. 6-107. - Election of members of school committee. 
    The school committee shall consist of five members, one of whom shall be elected from each of the five wards as the same are now constituted. The terms of members of the school committee shall begin on the first Monday of January following the year in which they were elected, except that at the election held on January 19, 1954, a member from the first ward shall be elected to serve from February 1, 1954, until the first Monday of January 1956, a member from the second ward and a member from the third ward to serve from February 1, 1954, until the first Monday of January 1958, and a member from the fourth ward and a member from the fifth ward to serve from February 1, 1954, until the first Monday of January 1960 and until their successors are elected and qualified. A member elected to fill a vacancy shall serve for the balance of the unexpired term. At each municipal election to be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November 1955 and in every odd year thereafter, there shall be elected for a term of six years commencing with the first Monday in January then next succeeding a member of the school committee to replace the one whose term shall be expiring. 
(C. 3239, § 8) 
Sec. 6-108. - Vacancies in membership of school committee. 
    In case of death, resignation, or inability to serve, or removal from the ward from which he was elected, of any member of the school committee, or if for any other cause there shall be a vacancy in the membership of the committee, a majority of the members of the school committee may appoint, as a member of said committee, a person who at the time of his appointment shall be a qualified elector in the ward where such vacancy occurs. Such person shall hold office as a member of the school committee until the first Monday in January, succeeding the municipal election next following his appointment, at which election the unexpired term shall be filled by the electors of the ward so affected. 
(C. 3239, § 9) 
Sec. 6-109. - Time of holding general elections. 
    The general election for the choice of city shall be held the first Tuesday following the first Monday in November in even numbered years. 
(C. 3239, § 10; 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-110. - Signatures on nominating petitions. 
    Nominating petitions for city officers to be elected at large shall require the signatures of not less than 200 qualified electors of the city. Nominating petitions for city officers, including members of the school committee, to be elected from districts shall require the signatures of not less than 50 qualified electors of the city eligible at the time of signing said petitions to vote in the councilmanic district for which the said officer is being nominated. No elector shall sign more nominating petitions for any office than the number of candidates for said office for which he would be eligible to vote in the municipal election. Should an elector sign more nominating petitions for any office than the number of candidates for said office for which he would be eligible to vote in the municipal election, his signature shall be void except as to the said number of petitions for said office signed by him first filed. With each signature shall be stated the place of residence of the signer, giving the street and number or other description sufficient to identify it. The signatures on the nominating petition need not be subscribed to one paper, but to each separate paper there shall be attached a signed statement of the circulator thereof, under oath, stating the number of signers of such paper and that each signature appended thereto was made in his presence and is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be. 
(C. 3239, § 11) 
Sec. 6-111. - Time of filing nominating petitions. 
    All nominating papers comprising a petition shall be filed as one instrument with the board of canvassers not earlier than 90 days nor later than 60 days preceding a general election, nor earlier than 30 days nor later than 20 days preceding a special election to fill a vacancy. Any signature made earlier than 90 days next preceding a regular election, or earlier than 30 days preceding a special election to fill a vacancy, shall be void. For the election to be held on January 19, 1954, all such nomination papers shall be filed not earlier than November 20, 1953, nor later than 5:00 p.m. on November 27, 1953. 
(C. 3239, § 12) 
Sec. 6-112. - Candidate's statement. 
    No nominating petition shall be accepted by the board of canvassers unless prior thereto, or simultaneous therewith, the candidate shall file with the board of canvassers a statement indicating his intention to become a candidate. 
(C. 3239, § 13) 
Sec. 6-113. - Checking of signatures on nominating petitions; filing of additional petitions; validity of signatures. 
    Within five days after the filing of a nominating petition, the board of canvassers shall check all signatures so filed with the list of electors who will have become qualified as such on the date of the election as last canvassed or published according to law, and shall notify each candidate as to the sufficiency of the nominating petition. If the petition shall be valid except that it shall contain an inadequate number of valid signatures, there may be filed by the candidate or on his behalf, an additional petition containing additional signatures; provided, however, that said additional petitions shall be filed on or before the last day for filing nominating petitions and time of filing the original petition shall be deemed to be the time of filing the additional petition. 
    If any candidate questions the validity or authenticity of any signature on any such nomination paper, the board of canvassers shall forthwith and summarily decide the question, and for this purpose, shall have the same powers as are conferred by the provisions of section 14 of chapter 1886 of the public laws, 1947, as amended. 
(C. 3239, § 14) 
Sec. 6-114. - Withdrawal of candidates. 
    Any person duly nominated for any public office in the city shall be permitted to withdraw as a candidate provided said withdrawal shall be made in writing and shall be delivered to the board of canvassers not later than 17 days before the date set for the primary election before the general election or the general election to be held on January 19, 1954, and ten days before the date set for the primary election before a special election to fill a vacancy. 
(C. 3239, § 15)(Act of General Assembly 1993) 
Sec. 6-115. - Primary elections to eliminate excess candidates. 
    If more than twice the number of candidates to be elected to any office shall be nominated, there shall be a primary election to eliminate all candidates in excess of twice the number to be elected to said office. The primary election shall be held in the manner hereinafter provided on the first Tuesday following the first Monday in October before a regular municipal election, and not more than 15 nor less than ten days before the date set for a special election to fill a vacancy; provided, that in the case of the election to be held on January 19, 1954, the primary election shall be held on January 4, 1954. 
(C. 3239, § 16) 
Sec. 6-116. - Time of filing of certified lists of candidates. 
    All certified lists of candidates shall be filed in the office of the secretary of state by the local board not later than 20 days before the election and/or the primary, as the case may be nor later than 12 days preceding a special election and/or the primary preceding the same. All such lists shall be filed in said office not later than 5:00 p.m. of the last day fixed therefor. For the election to be held on January 19, 1954, such filing shall be not later than 5:00 p.m. of the14th day before such election and/or primary. 
(C. 3239, § 17) 
Sec. 6-117. - Filing of objections to nomination papers. 
    When nomination papers have been duly filed, and are in apparent conformity with sec. 14[6-113] of this act, they shall be conclusively presumed to be valid, unless written objections thereto are made as to the eligibility of the candidate or the sufficiency of the nomination papers or the signatures thereon. All such objections shall be filed with the board of canvassers, by 5:00 p.m. on the next business day after the last day fixed for filing such nomination papers as heretofore provided. 
(C. 3239, § 18) 
Sec. 6-118. - Hearings on objections to nomination papers. 
    All objections to nomination papers shall be considered by the board. The board may at the hearing on such objections summon witnesses, administer oaths, and require the production of books, papers and documents. Such witnesses shall be summoned in the same manner, be paid the same fees, and be subject to the same penalties for default as witnesses before the superior court. A summons may be sworn to and an oath may be administered by the said board. When such objection has been filed, notice thereof shall be forthwith given by registered mail, or by personal service, by the board, to the candidates, addressed to the residence of the candidate as given in the nomination papers, to which objection is made. 
    Additional notice may also be given by the board if it sees fit to do so. The decision of said board shall be rendered within five days after filing of objections and shall forthwith be certified by the board to the secretary of state. 
    Following the determination of objection, if any, to the nomination papers, the board shall forthwith certify to the secretary of state, the names and addresses of all candidates who have filed valid nomination papers. 
(C. 3239, § 19) 
Sec. 6-119. - Number of votes allowed electors. 
    At all elections, each qualified elector shall be entitled to cast one vote for each officer to be elected at large, and one vote for each officer including a member of the school committee to be elected in the district in which he shall reside and be qualified to vote. At all primaries, each qualified elector shall be entitled to vote for the same number of candidates for each office for which he would be entitled to vote at the election following said primary. 
(C. 3239, § 20) 
Sec. 6-120. - Election officials-Appointment, eligibility requirements, etc. 
    At least 15 days before any general municipal election and the primary election preceding any general municipal election, and at least five days before any special election to fill a vacancy and the primary election preceding such a special election, and, in the case of the election to be held on January 19, 1954, at least seven days before said election and the primary preceding said election, the board of canvassers shall appoint for each polling place a warden, a clerk and not less than six supervisors. Said election officials shall be selected from lists of qualified persons presented to the board of canvassers by the candidates for office, and the board of canvassers shall designate the number of names to be contained on said lists, but it shall not require any candidate to submit more names than twice the number of election officials to be designated by said candidate. All election officials shall be qualified electors in the voting districts in which they shall be designated to serve; provided, however, that if any candidate shall certify that he has been unable to obtain a sufficient number of available election officials for any voting district who are qualified electors of the district, he may include in his list furnished to the board of canvassers qualified electors of the city who are not qualified electors of the voting district, and such persons shall be eligible to serve in said voting district; and wherever herein it shall be provided that any candidate shall be entitled to designate an election official, it shall be construed to mean that the board of canvassers shall appoint such official from a list submitted by the candidate. 
(C. 3239, § 21) 
Sec. 6-121. - Same-Equal representation. 
    Wardens, clerks and supervisors for the various polling places shall be designated by the board of canvassers so that there shall be equal representation for all candidates; provided, that no candidate shall be represented by both a warden and clerk at the same polling place. 
(C. 3239, § 22) 
Sec. 6-122. - Same-Powers, duties and obligations. 
    The election officials so appointed shall be sworn and shall have all of the powers, perform all of the duties and be subject to all of the obligations as are conferred upon and required of them by law. 
(C. 3239, § 23) 
Sec. 6-123. - Nomination of candidates by primary elections. 
    The number of persons, being twice the number to be elected to the particular office, receiving individually the highest number of votes cast in the primary election for individual candidates shall be declared to be candidates to be voted upon at the election. 
(C. 3239, § 24) 
Sec. 6-124. - Selection of candidates for municipal elections. 
    The candidates for election at all municipal elections shall be the persons nominated where no primary was required, and the persons receiving the highest number of votes in the primary election as provided in section 24[6-123] hereof. 
(C. 3239, § 25) 
Sec. 6-125. - Participation in previous partisan election not to bar eligibility to sign nominating petitions. 
    No person shall be ineligible to sign a nominating petition, or to participate in any manner in a primary election preceding an election without party designation as provided in this act because said person has signed a nominating petition or nominating papers or has participated in a partisan primary election, whether with or without a party designation. No person shall be ineligible to sign nomination papers, or to participate in a partisan primary election by reason of having signed a nominating petitioner having participated in a primary election preceding an election without party designation as provided in this act. Except as aforesaid, eligibility to participate in partisan primaries shall continue as now provided by law unless or until modified by statute. 
(C. 3239, § 26) 
Sec. 6-126. - Use of voting machines. 
    Voting machines which shall have been approved by the state board of elections shall be used at all elections and primary elections unless the number of candidates shall be such as to make the use of voting machines impracticable or impossible. 
(C. 3239, § 27) 
Sec. 6-127. - Use of paper ballots. 
    If voting machines cannot be used at any election, then paper ballots shall be prepared by the board of canvassers and shall be used in said elections or primary elections. 
(C. 3239, § 28) 
Sec. 6-128. - Arrangement of names on ballots. 
    The names of all candidates, whether at primary elections, and whether voting machines or paper ballots shall be used, shall be arranged in the following manner: candidates for different offices shall appear in different horizontal columns, and shall be arranged horizontally in alphabetical order opposite the office designation. If all names of candidates for the same office cannot be placed on voting machines in the same column, then as few columns as necessary shall be used, and as nearly as possible an equal number of candidates shall appear in each column. 
(C. 3239, § 29) 
Sec. 6-129. - Political designations prohibited on ballots. 
    There shall be no party or political designation placed upon any voting machine or paper ballot used in any primary election or election, and all candidates for office in the city, except as herein otherwise specifically provided, shall be deemed to be candidates without party or political designation. 
(C. 3239, § 30) 
Sec. 6-130. - Applicability of state laws. 
    The provisions of the laws of the State of Rhode Island pertaining to elections and related matters, including the rights and qualifications of voters; the registration of voters; the board of canvassers and registration, and the registering, listing, and returning lists of voters, and proof of their qualifications to vote; canvassing the rights and correcting the list of voters; elective meetings; the hours of opening and closing the polls; voting machines; absentee voting, and crimes, penalties and forfeitures under the election laws, and any and all other provisions of the laws of the State of Rhode Island relating to the qualifications of electors, registration, the manner of voting, the duties of election officials and all other particulars in respect to preparation for, conducting and management of elections, shall govern every city primary, general and special election, including the election to be held on January 19, 1954, and the primary preceding the same, so far as they may be applicable, excepting those provisions which are inconsistent with this act. 
    Whenever in said election laws and related matters reference is made to any political party, or reference is made to voting machines as being prepared for voting purposes in accordance with political party designation, or any reference of whatever kind and designation is made in said election laws and related matters to any political party or political designation, for the purpose of this act only, each and every such reference to a political party shall be held to be eliminated from said election laws in accordance with the provisions of this act providing for nonpartisan elections. 
(C. 3239, § 31) 
Sec. 6-131. - Checking of voting machines and ballots. 
    When voting machines are used a representative of each candidate shall be permitted to check the machines to be used at a time and place designated by the board of canvassers or the election officials of the state, before they shall be sealed. Such representatives, and representatives of the press, shall further be permitted to check the accuracy of the votes tabulated upon said machines before said vote shall become official. If paper ballots shall be used, after counting, the ballots shall be re-deposited in the ballot boxes and the ballot boxes shall be sealed at the various polling places and shall be delivered to the board of canvassers by the proper election officials. No paper ballot shall be considered invalid unless it fails to clearly indicate the intent of the voter. All votes shall be counted and tabulated in accordance with existing laws, and in the case of paper ballots, they shall be resealed in containers by voting districts in the presence of the representatives of candidates and the press, and shall be kept intact for a period of two years unless both reopened and later resealed in the presence of the representatives of candidates and the press for purposes of recount or unless reopened pursuant to the order of any court. 
    The number of persons to be elected to any office receiving severally the highest number of votes cast for candidates for said office, shall be deemed elected, and the board of canvassers shall certify the persons so elected by delivery to each of them of a certificate of election, and by transmitting to the city clerk a complete list of all persons so elected. 
(C. 3239, § 32) 
Sec. 6-132. - Board of canvassers. 
    The canvassing authority of the city shall be the board of canvassers and registration, which shall consist of three members, not more than two of whom shall be adherents of the same political party, which board shall have all of the powers and duties as are now, or hereafter may be, vested in said board by law. Upon the expiration of the term of office of a member of said board there shall be appointed by the mayor, or the duly elected executive officer of the city, with the approval of the council, a member to succeed the member whose term thus expires, in the following manner: 
    Each appointee shall be an adherent of one of the political parties which receives in the next previous general election for state senator not less than 25 percent of the total vote cast in the city for state senator from the city. No later than 14 days before the date of the first regularly scheduled meeting of the council next preceding the expiration of the term of office of a member of the board, and within 14 days after the occurrence of a vacancy on said board, the chairman of the city committee of each of the political parties aforesaid, shall submit to the mayor or said officer the names of five persons for each member of said board to be filled. If the chairman of any of said political parties shall fail to submit names as aforesaid, then within 48 hours thereafter, a majority of the members of the city committee of said political party may submit such a list to the mayor or said officer. The mayor or said officer shall then submit to the council from said lists the names of the persons appointed by him to said board. If the council shall refuse to approve the appointment of any person to said board, the mayor or said officer shall submit to the council another person named on one of said lists. If the council shall refuse to approve the appointment of the second name so submitted, the mayor or said officer may appoint any other person on said lists to said board without the approval of the council. If the chairman of the city committee of a political party entitled to an appointment to said board shall fail or refuse to submit a list of names as aforesaid, the mayor or said officer shall appoint to said board with the approval of a majority of the members of the council, any person known by him to be a member of the political party entitled to said appointment. 
    No person shall be appointed or serve as a member of said board who is an officer or employee of the United States or of this state or of any city or town of this state, provided that he may act as clerk thereof. Any member of said board who becomes a candidate for election to any public office and who fails to file a declination of said candidacy within the time allowed by law, shall be disqualified from holding membership upon said board and his successor shall be appointed forthwith. 
    Every person appointed shall before entering upon his duties he [be] sworn to the faithful performance thereof and a record of such oath shall be kept by the clerk of said board. 
    Vacancies in the said board shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term in the same manner as for newly appointed members of the board. 
(C. 3239, § 34) 
Sec. 6-133. - Provisions as to the general election of January 19, 1954. 
    For the purpose of the election to be held on January 19, 1954, and for the primary preceding said election (and for such purpose only) 
(a)  Between the 60th and 30th days preceding the election, the board shall complete the filing of the registration cards, and cause the preliminary list of voters to be posted at least ten days before said primary in accordance with the provisions of section 5 of chapter 2870 of the public laws of 1951, as amended. 
(b)  Between the tenth and fifth days preceding the primary the board shall meet and canvass the preliminary list in accordance with the provisions of section 6 of said chapter 2870, as amended. 
(c)  The provisions of section 16 of said chapter 2870, as amended shall not apply. 
(d)  The board of canvassers shall certify to the secretary of state not later than 14 days before the election and/or the primary, as the case may be, the names and addresses of the candidates in accordance with the provisions of section 6 of chapter 318 of the general laws, 1938, as amended. 
(e)  The board of canvassers shall tabulate the election returns forthwith, and any candidate may challenge the correctness of the result within 2 days in accordance with the provisions of section 14 of said chapter 318, as amended. 
(C. 3239, § 35) 
Sec. 6-134. - Furnishing of and payment for necessary forms. 
    The board of canvassers shall prescribe and furnish all forms to be used in said elections in conformance with law, which forms shall be paid for by the city. 
(C. 3239, § 36) 
Sec. 6-135. - Termination of office of city officials. 
    The terms of office of all elected and appointed officials of the city, except members of political committees and the members of the board of canvassers, which board shall have the duty of conducting the first election in this act provided, shall terminate upon the 1st day of February, 1954, but shall be continued in office until their respective successors have qualified. 
(C. 3239, § 37) 
Sec. 6-136. - Invalidity of part of act. 
    If any provision of this act, or the application of such provision to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this act and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. 
(C. 3239, § 38) 
Sec. 6-137. - Severability of parts of act. 
    If any part, subdivision or section of this act shall be declared unconstitutional, the validity of the remaining parts shall not be affected thereby. 
(C. 3239, § 39) 
Sec. 6-138. - Proposition to hold elections in even-numbered years. 
    At the general state election to be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November, A. D. 1954, the following proposition shall be submitted to the qualified electors of the city of Central Falls: 
    "Shall candidates for elective public office in the city of Central Falls provided for in the Charter be elected under party labels at the general state elections to be held on the 1st Tuesday after the 1st Monday in November in the even numbered years?" 
    The secretary of state shall prepare appropriate ballot labels for the submission of said question and the board of canvassers shall, after said election, notify the secretary of state of the result of the vote upon the question hereby submitted. 
(C. 3239, § 40) 
Sec. 6-139. - Effectiveness of act. 
    This act shall take effect upon its passage, and all acts and parts of acts inconsistent herewith, insofar as the same shall apply to the city of Central Falls, are hereby modified or repealed as the case shall be; and all other acts and parts of acts, insofar as the same shall not be inconsistent herewith, shall apply to nominations and elections of all municipal officers of said city of Central Falls. 
(C. 3239, § 41) 
ARTICLE VII. - PERSONNEL SYSTEM/DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN RESOURCES 

Sec. 7-100. - Purpose. 
    In order to establish a system of personnel administration in compliance with state, federal, city council and all collective bargaining agreements. It shall be administered under the supervision of the director of human resources 
Sec. 7-101. - Employment basis. 
    All appointments and promotions of employees in the personnel system, except for the fire and police divisions, shall be made by the department heads, boards and commissions in accordance with the state, federal, city council and all collective bargaining agreements as applicable. Demotions, dismissals and suspensions of employees shall be made by the heads of the respective departments, except that in the department of public safety, suspensions, demotions and dismissals shall be made by the heads of the police division and fire division within their respective divisions. Demotions and dismissals of employees in the personnel system after the completion of the required probationary period of service, or suspension from service, shall be for just cause only. 
Sec. 7-102. - Present employees continued in office. 
    All persons who, at the time this Charter takes effect, are holding positions hereby placed in the classified service of the city, including policemen and firemen, shall hold such positions as though appointed in accordance with the provisions hereof; any vacancies thereafter occurring shall be filled in the manner herein provided. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES 
CHAPTER 1. - PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES OF ELECTED OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 8-100. - Dual office holding. 
    No person shall, at the same time, be an elected or appointed officer of the city and a city employee, or hold any other elective or appointive office or employment carrying a salary, whether municipal, state or federal, except that of constable, notary public, member of the state militia, public school teacher, or member of the military or naval forces of the United States, unless and until he shall have resigned his office, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. This provision shall be construed to be in accordance with state and federal law. 
Sec. 8-101. - Permitted activities. 
    Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit any elected or appointed official of the city or employee of the city from being appointed to any commission or committee of the city, state or federal government for the purpose of making any investigation or study, provided there shall be no remuneration attached to such services and provided further, that no such elected official or employee of the city shall be appointed to any independent board or commission of the city unless specifically authorized in this Charter. 
Sec. 8-102. - Officers not to sign contracts in which they are interested. 
    No member of the city council and no officer or employee of the city shall (1) directly or indirectly make a contract with the city, other than his or her own contract of employment service, or (2) receive any commission, discount, bonus, gift, contribution or award from, or any share in, the profits of any person making or performing such contract, unless such member, officer or employee immediately upon learning of the existence of such contract, or that such contract is proposed, shall notify in writing the city council of the nature of his interest in such contract, and shall abstain from doing any official act on behalf of the city or of the other contracting party with reference thereto. In case of such interest on the part of an officer whose duty it is to sign such contract on behalf of the city, the contract may be signed by any other officer of the city duly authorized thereunto by the mayor; provided, however, that when a contractor with the city is a corporation or a voluntary stock association, the ownership of less than five percent of the stock or shares actually issued shall not be considered as involving an interest in the contract within the meaning of this section, and such ownership shall not affect the validity of the contract unless the owner of such stock or shares is also an officer or agent of the corporation or association, or solicits or takes part in the making of the contract. 
Sec. 8-103. - Contracts in violation of section 8-102 to be voidable; penalties. 
    A violation of any provision of section 8-102 shall render the contract with respect to which such violation occurs voidable in whole or in part at the option of the city. 
Sec. 8-104. - Ratification or avoidance of contract. 
    Whenever any contract made by or on behalf of the city is voidable under the terms of this Charter, the mayor shall on behalf of the city, within ten days after the execution of such contract, or within ten days after he/she shall acquire knowledge of facts sufficient to make such contract voidable, whichever event shall happen last, either ratify or avoid such contract, in whole or in part, by rendering in writing upon said contract his/her decision with regard thereto and his/her reasons therefor, and by forwarding forthwith to the city clerk a copy thereof, which copy shall be a public record. Such decision of the mayor shall be final and shall not be subject to review by any court. 
Sec. 8-105. - Fees. 
    No officer or employee of the city shall collect any fees or perquisites for his own use, but such fees or perquisites, collectible under law, shall be paid into the city treasury, except fees of auctioneers and constables, and such other officers or employees as may be authorized thereto by ordinance. 
Sec. 8-106. - Gratuities. 
    No officer or employee of the city shall solicit or accept any compensation or gratuity in the form of money or otherwise for any act or omission in the course of his public work. 
Sec. 8-107. - City property. 
    No officer or employee of the city shall use city property for private purposes; and no officer or employee of the city shall use public facilities for the purpose of conducting private business. 
Sec. 8-108. - Corrupt practices. 
    No employee of the city shall solicit contributions of money, property, or services for any political party or campaign, nor shall any person solicit from any employee of the city any such contribution. 
CHAPTER 2. - ENFORCEMENTS 

Sec. 8-200. - Complaints by citizens. 
    Any qualified elector of the city may file a sworn statement in the office of the city clerk charging that any elected officer of the city has ceased to possess the qualifications specified in section 8-100 of this Charter, or has been convicted of a crime as set forth in said section, or that there has been a violation of any of the other sections of chapter 1 of this article, which said statement shall set out the particulars as to the charges made. The city clerk shall present such charges to the council. 
Sec. 8-201. - Penalties. 
    A violation of any of the prohibitions of chapter 1 of this article shall be punishable pursuant to Rhode Island Law. 
ARTICLE IX. - PUBLIC RECORDS 

Sec. 9-100. - Public inspection of records. 
    As provided by state open records laws. 
Sec. 9-101. - Copies. 
    As provided by state open records laws. 
Sec. 9-102. - Right to judicial relief. 
    As provided by state open records laws. 
ARTICLE X. - MISCELLANEOUS 
CHAPTER 1. - SEVERABILITY AND ACTS SUPERSEDED 

Sec. 10-100. - Severability. 
    If this Charter cannot take effect in its entirety because of the judgment of any court of competent jurisdiction holding invalid any part or parts thereof, the remaining provisions of this Charter shall be given full force and effect as completely as if the part or parts held invalid had not been included herein. If it shall be finally determined by a court of competent jurisdiction that any provisions of this Charter transferring to an office, department, board or commission the powers and duties heretofore exercised and performed by an officer, department, board or commission abolished by this Charter are invalid, the provisions abolishing such office, department, board or commission shall thereby become inoperative, and that in such event, such office, department, board or commission shall not be abolished but shall continue as prior to the adoption of this Charter. The remaining provisions of this Charter shall in any such case be given force and effect. 
Sec. 10-101. - Previous charter superseded. 
    This Charter shall supersede all previous charters and amendments thereto. 
Sec. 10-102. - Statutes and ordinances superseded. 
    This Charter shall supersede all statutes or parts of statutes, local, special or general, and all ordinances of the city, to the extent that they are inconsistent with this Charter; and all statutes and ordinances not inconsistent with this Charter shall continue in full force and effect until the council shall otherwise ordain. 
CHAPTER 2. - EFFECTIVE DATES 

Sec. 10-200. - Schedule. 
    This Charter shall become effective on the first Monday of January 2007, except in the following particulars: 
(1)  The mayor, members of the council and shall be elected under the provisions of this Charter, and for that purpose, all provisions of this Charter pertaining to elections and the manner of conducting elections shall become effective immediately upon the adoption of this Charter by the electors. The board of canvassers and registration, as then constituted, shall have all the powers and duties of the board of canvassers and registration as in this Charter provided for the purpose of conducting said election. 
(2)  All appropriations made in the budget ordinance for the fiscal year commencing July 1, 2006 shall be made to the then existing officers, departments, boards and commissions of the city or their successors under this Charter. Provisions shall also be made in the budget ordinance for the fiscal year commencing July 1, 2006 for any offices, departments, boards or commissions created by this Charter to exercise new functions, and any such provision may be increased in 2007 notwithstanding any other provisions of this Charter. 
(3)  The provisions of subdivision (1) of section 5-100 shall be effective for the fiscal year commencing July 1, 2006. 
Sec. 10-201. - Transitional provision. 
    If upon the effective date of any section or provision of this Charter there shall not be an official appointed upon whom any duty is placed by said section or provision, it shall be the duty of the mayor to designate the official or employee of the city who shall perform temporarily the said duty. 
Secs. 10-300-305. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-306. - Specific provisions. 
    To the extent that any specific provision contained in this Charter conflicts with any provision expressed in general terms, the specific provisions shall prevail. 
Sec. 10-307. - Canvassing authority. 
    Whenever the board of canvassers or canvassing authority is used in this Charter, it shall be taken to mean the board of canvassers and registration. 
Subpart B - RELATED LAWS 
    The following is a chronological list of the acts of the general assembly affecting the City of Central Falls since 1895. Many of these acts have been superseded by the Charter or the General Laws of Rhode Island and are printed herein only for historical purposes. 
Acts of Rhode Island Chapter Subject 1895 1422 License commissioners 1896 343 Election supervisors 1896 405 Jenks park 1896 406 Drainage and plumbing of buildings 1904 1174 Schoolhouse bonds 1904 1175 Bridge bonds 1906 1313 Eleventh Judicial District Court 1906 1401 Adams Library 1907 1484 License commissioners 1908 1621 Removal of swill 1908 1622 Indebtedness 1909 478 Electric contract 1909 479 Caucuses 1910 605 Sewers 1910 640 Representative districts 1910 649 Bridges 1911 716 Police department 1912 877 License commissioners 1912 878 Court house 1912 896 Grade crossings 1913 975 Police department 1913 990 Court house 1914 112 Court house 1914 1049 Caucuses 1914 1110 Fire department 1916 1422 Board of canvassers and registration 1917 1568 Sidewalks 1920 1962 Board of canvassers and registration 1922 2259 Sewers 1922 2260 Highway bonds 1922 2261 Waterworks 1923 496 Drainage and plumbing 1923 497 Traffic 1925 704 American Legion state convention 1925 705 Nursing division 1926 886 Waterworks bonds 1926 887 Sewer bonds 1926 888 Highway bonds 1928 1254 Waterworks bonds 1928 1255 Highway bonds 1928 1256 Sewers and drains 1929 1452 Water service supplies 1930 1453 Land for highways 1930 1637 Veterans of Foreign Wars 1942 1173 Fences 1946 1699 Abandonment of streets 1949 2211 Public improvement bonds 1949 2336 Refunding bonds 1950 2562 Parking meters 1951 2714 Refunding bonds 1953 3239 Municipal Elections 1973 17 Tax exemption for elderly 1973 90 Bonds, school buildings 1973 91 Bonds, public safety center 1974 99 Bonds, water system 1974 182 Police court 1975 117 Zoning board of review, add'l member 1975 294 Tax exemption, elimination of blighted areas 1976 183 Acquire land for parks & recreation 1976 224 Housing standards 1976 225 School committee, compensation 1977 No index entries 1978 12 Commercial areas projects, acquisition 1978 15 Off-street parking, acquisition 1978 39 Housing authority 1979 No index entries 1980 No index entries 1981 No index entries 1982 206 Video game rooms, license 1983 100 Tax exemption for Second Pawtucket Area Development 1984 No index entries 1985 135 Tax exemptions for veterans, and others 1986 170 Tax collections 1987 No index entries 1988 318 Regional school district 1988 552 Municipal court 1989 9 Bonds, school buildings 1989 55 Resource Recovery facility, referendum 1989 450 Tax exemption, homeowners 1990 194 Property tax classification 1991 312 School district funding 1991 421 Municipal detention corporations act 1993 173 Juvenile hearing board 1994 318 Juvenile hearing board 1996 221 Bonds, school buildings 1996 243 Bonds, school buildings 2004 236 Bond issue 2004 511 Bond issue  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location in the Charter of amendments to the charter as adopted November 4, 1952 and revised on August 30, 2006. 
Sp. Act 
Chapter Mo. Year Section  Section 
this Charter 3239 11-1953 1-32 6-100-6-131 34-41 6-132-6-139  
Adoption 
Date Section  Section 
this Charter  7-25-1955 1 5-100  9-12-1957 1 3-401 3-501 4-702 11- 5-1957 3-201  5-22-1964 1 5-100 10-14-1969 1 4-701 12- 8-1969 1 2-100 2-201 2-203 2-207, 2-208 2-301  9-25-1975 1 4-701  
Election 
Date Section  Section 
this Charter 11- 7-2000 4-909 11- 6-2012 2-100 2-101 2-103 2-203 2-208 2-301(6) 3-200 3-300 3-400       Added 3-502       Added 4-105 6-102 6-109  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and in the following chapters shall be designated and cited as the "Revised Ordinances, City of Central Falls, Rhode Island." Such provisions may also be cited as the "Central Falls Code." 
(Code 1973, § 1-1; Code 1994, § 1-1) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances enacted, the following interpretation shall be placed on the words and phrases mentioned in this section, unless such construction or interpretation shall be manifestly inconsistent with the evident intent of the city council or repugnant to the context or to the evident purport of any ordinance: 
    Charter. The term "Charter" means and refers to the Charter of the City of Central Falls, Rhode Island, as printed in part I of this volume. 
    City. The term "the city" means the City of Central Falls in Providence County in the State of Rhode Island. 
    Code. References to "this Code" or "the Code" mean and refer to the Revised Ordinances, City of Central Falls, Rhode Island, as designated in section 1-1. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 43-3-13. 
    Computation of time. The time in which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day, except that when the last day falls on a Sunday or a legal holiday, the act may be done on the next succeeding day which is not a Sunday or a legal holiday. When a public office in which an act is to be performed is closed to the public for the entire day which constitutes the last day for doing such act, or before its usual closing time on such day, then such act may be performed on the next succeeding day which is not a Sunday or legal holiday. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 43-3-13. 
    Corporate limits, corporation limits. Whenever the terms "corporate limits," "corporation limits," or "city limits" are used, they mean the legal boundary of the City of Central Falls. 
    Council. The terms "the council" or "council" mean the City Council of the City of Central Falls. 
    County. The term "the county" or "this county" means Providence County, Rhode Island. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or other officer of the city to do some act or to make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer of the city, as the case may be, to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection, unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 43-3-3. 
    G.L. The term "G.L." means the latest edition or reenactment of the General Laws of Rhode Island, Reenactment of 1956, as amended. 
    Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 43-3-5. 
    Keeper, proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 43-3-12. 
    Name of officer. Whenever the name of an officer is given it shall be construed as though the words "of the City of Central Falls" were added. 
    Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 43-3-4. 
    Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 43-3-11. 
    Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The term "owner" applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The term "person" includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, club, society, body corporate or politic, or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a natural person. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 43-3-6. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as defined in this section. 
    Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 43-3-16. 
    Premises. Whenever the term "premises" is used, it shall mean place or places. 
    Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
    Public place. The term "public place" includes, without limitation, any park, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto, and all beaches, canals or other waterways, and any public street or way. 
    Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments and rights thereto and interests therein. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 43-3-10. 
    Residence. The term "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
    Seal. Whenever the term "seal" is used, it shall mean the town or corporate seal. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the vertical curbline or edge of pavement or edge of a traveled way and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways; such portion or "sidewalk" is sometimes designated and known as the pavement "border" area. 
    Signature, subscription. The "signature" or "subscription" of a person shall include a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The term "the state" shall be construed to mean the State of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations. 
    Streets, highways, ways. The terms "streets," "highways" and "ways" when used in an ordinance shall be construed as including public boulevards, avenues, courts, lanes, alleys, squares, drives, roads, corners and sidewalks. 
    Tenant, occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant" applied to a building or land includes any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies, the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Week. The term "week" shall be construed to mean seven days. 
    Written, in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 43-3-16. 
    Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1973, § 1-2; Code 1994, § 1-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 43-3-12. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections, history notes and references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type and the history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of the Code shall not be deemed or taken to be a substantive part of any section nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  History notes, editor's notes, cross references and state law references that appear in this Code after sections or subsections or that otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  Unless specified otherwise, all references to chapters or sections are to chapters or sections of this Code. 
(Code 1973, § 1-3; Code 1994, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances that have been repealed. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinances repealed. 
(Code 1973, § 1-8; Code 1994, § 1-4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, §§ 43-3-22-43-3-24. 
Sec. 1-5. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of the Code, since such part of the Code would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1973, § 1-6; Code 1994, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein, or in the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission thereof from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code of ordinances by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section of the Code in substantially the following language: "Section ____________ of the Revised Ordinances, City of Central Falls, Rhode Island, is hereby amended to read as follows:...(set out new provisions in full)... ." 
(c)  If a new section not then existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "The Revised Ordinances, City of Central Falls, Rhode Island, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article, chapter or other designation, as the case may be), to be numbered ____________ , which reads as follows:...(set out new provisions in full)... ." 
(d)  In lieu of the foregoing subsection, when the city council desires to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature embracing a subject not previously existing in the Code, which the city council desires to incorporate into the Code, a provision in substantially the following language may be made a part of the ordinance: "It is the intention of the city council, and it is hereby ordained, that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made part of the Revised Ordinances, City of Central Falls, Rhode Island, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish such intention." 
(e)  All sections, articles, chapters or other provisions of this Code desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section number, article number, chapter or other number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1994, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; 
but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1994, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-8. - Provisions deemed continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as legislation previously adopted by the city relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-9. - Code does not affect prior offenses or rights. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects any offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code does not authorize any use or the continuation of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any city ordinance on the effective date of this Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following ordinances when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city, or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or obligation assumed by the city or creating interest and sinking funds; 
(2)  Any right or franchise, permit, or other right granted by any ordinance; 
(3)  Any personnel regulations; any ordinance or resolution establishing salaries of city officers and employees or civil service rules; 
(4)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, alley or other public way in the city; 
(5)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades in the city; 
(6)  Any appropriation ordinance or any ordinance levying or imposing taxes; 
(7)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(8)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(9)  Any ordinance establishing the official plat of the city; 
(10)  Any zoning map amendment or land use, rezoning or zoning ordinance; 
(11)  Any ordinance annexing territory or excluding territory from the city; 
(12)  Any ordinance prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, prescribing through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones; 
(13)  Any subdivision ordinance; 
(14)  Any ordinance creating special districts or assessing taxes therefor; 
(15)  Any ordinance granting specific tax exemptions; 
(16)  Any sewer use ordinance; 
(17)  Any temporary or special ordinance; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Code 1994, § 1-8) 
Sec. 1-11. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1994, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-12. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section the term "violation of this Code" means any of the following: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, a person convicted of a violation of this Code may be punished by a fine of not exceeding $500.00 for each violation, and/or the person shall be required to pay restitution in cases involving property damage or personal injury in an amount up to $2,500.00, and/or be required to provide voluntary community service for the city or its agencies for not more than 50 hours for any one violation. Each violation is subject to appeal in the municipal court with the person having notice and an opportunity to be heard. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance: 
(1)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(2)  With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each act constitutes a separate offense. 
(e)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent suspension or revocation of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(f)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief. 
(Code 1973, § 1-4; Code 1994, § 1-10; Ord. of 9-14-2015(3) , § 2) 
State Law reference- Limitation on penalties, G.L. 1956, § 45-6-2. 
Sec. 1-13. - Fee schedule. 
Office of the City Clerk 
Fee or License Amount Abutters List $100.00 Amusement $125.00 Auto Repair Permit $150.00 Class D- Bakery $100.00 Bowling $100.00 Caterer $100.00 Class A Liquor $800.00 Class A- Restaurant $100.00 Class B Liquor $1500.00 Class B LTD Liquor $1300.00 Class C-Variety $100.00 Class D Liquor $600.00 Constable $25.00 Employment Agency $125.00 Entertainment $10.00/per diem, $80.00/year Game Room $1500.00 Gun Dealer $100.00 Holiday Sales $75.00 Itinerant/Traveling Restaurant $100.00 Jiu-jitsu and Karate $25.00 Junkyard $100.00 Late License Renewal $50.00 Late Liquor Renewal $500.00 Laundry $10.00 Liquor Advertisement (new) $600.00 Liquor Advertisement (renewal) $100.00 New application fee $25.00 One Day Peddler/Hawker $10.00 Pawnshop $150.00 Peddler/Hawker $50.00 Peddler/Hawker Badge $25.00 Personal Service $125.00 Pigeon $25.00 Pool $100.00/table Private Detective $150.00 Second Hand $80.00 Second Hand Advertisement $250.00 Solicitors $50.00 Special Event (F & F1) $500.00 Tobacco $100.00 Trade Name Certificates $10.00 Transfer of Alcohol Beverage $350.00 Yard Sale $10.00  
(Ord. of 2-10-2016 ) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - City seal-Description. 
    The city seal shall be a raised circle containing the words "City of Central Falls, Rhode Island," and within the circle another circle containing the likeness of the Cogswell Clock Tower and the words "Incorporated 1895." 
(Code 1994, § 1-11; Ord. of 5-8-1995(1)) 
Sec. 2-2. - Same-Custodian. 
    The city clerk shall be ex officio keeper of the city seal. The clerk is empowered to affix the same to such papers and instruments pertaining to the city as by law are required to bear the seal of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 1-12; Ord. of 5-8-1995(1)) 
Sec. 2-3. - City flag. 
    The city flag shall be a white flag with a circle containing the words "City of Central Falls, Rhode Island," and within the circle another circle containing the likeness of the Cogswell Clock Tower and the words "Incorporated 1895." 
(Code 1994, § 1-13; Ord. of 5-8-1995(2)) 
Sec. 2-4. - City hall to be closed weekends and legal holidays. 
    The city hall shall be closed all day on Saturday, Sunday and all legal holidays throughout the year; except, that the finance office and the office of the board of canvassers may be ordered open on Saturday at the request of the heads of such departments. 
(Code 1973, § 2-1; Code 1994, § 2-1) 
Sec. 2-5. - Use of city-owned property. 
(a)  Security deposit required. Prior to the issuance of a permit for the use of city-owned property, the permittee shall deposit with the city clerk the currently required fee in cash or by certified check made payable to the city, as security to ensure the proper care and cleanup of such property. 
(b)  Return of security deposit. The city clerk shall return the security deposit required by this section to the permittee within two business days after the event is held unless notified by the director of public works that the property has been damaged and/or improperly cleaned. 
(c)  Deduction. If the city property has been damaged or improperly cleaned, then the city clerk shall deduct the reasonable anticipated cost to the city for repair and/or cleanup of such property and the balance due, if any, shall be returned to the permittee. 
(Code 1994, § 2-7; Ord. of 12-9-1985) 
Secs. 2-6-2-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- General powers of cities and towns, G.L. 1956, § 45-2-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-29. - Real property transactions; city council approval of lease. 
(a)  The city council must approve any and all leases of real property by the city. 
(b)  The city council shall not approve, nor shall the city enter into a lease agreement for real property, if said lease exceeds a period of five years. If said lessee intends to request an extension of the lease, the city must be notified one year prior to the termination of the existing lease. Said extension shall not exceed a period of five years, which will be reviewed and may be renewed. 
(c)  Despite the prohibition set forth in subsection (b) of this section, the city council may, at its discretion, renew or renegotiate any existing longterm lease that was approved by the city council, and entered into by the city, prior to the enactment of this section. 
(Code 1994, § 2-32; Ord. of 6-1-2005(5)) 
Sec. 2-30. - Real property transactions; city council approval of acquisitions and disposal. 
(a)  The city council must approve any and all acquisitions of real property by the city. The resolution approving the acquisition shall set forth the terms, conditions, and manner of acquisition. 
(b)  The city council must approve any and all disposals of real property by the city. The resolution approving the disposal shall set forth the terms, conditions, and manner of the disposal. 
(c)  Conveyances conducted pursuant to subsections (a) and (b) must be in recordable form as permitted by state law, and approved as to form by the city solicitor. The document of conveyance must be signed by the mayor, and contain specific reference to the resolution authorizing the conveyance. 
(d)  The city may acquire and hold real property as sole owner or as tenant in common or other lawful tenancy, with any other person or governmental body for any public purpose. 
(e)  The city shall have and may exercise all rights and powers in the acquisition, ownership and holding of real property as if the city were a private person. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2015, § 1) 
Secs. 2-31-2-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Public officers generally, G.L. 1956, § 36-1-1 et seq.; retirement of municipal employees, G.L. 1956, § 45-21-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-47. - Hiring preference to city residents. 
(a)  Legislative findings. 
(1)  It is the policy of the city to provide high-quality city services to our community. Quality services are provided by professional, well-trained individuals working together. Selecting the best people to work in city government is essential to the make-up of city government and the fundamental aim of a recruiting program. A proactive, positive approach to recruiting is necessary to attract quality applicants representative of the demographics of the city. 
(2)  It is the policy of the city to identify and employ the best-qualified individuals to perform the tasks and functions of city government without regard to race, color, religion, sex, age, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, socioeconomic status or mental, physical, developmental, or sensory disability. The city prohibits discrimination against any person in recruitment, appointment, training, promotion, retention, discipline, or any other aspect of personnel administration for reasons of political or religious opinions, affiliations, or because of race, color, national origin, physical disability or age, except where specific age or physical requirements constitute a bonafide occupational qualification necessary to properly and efficiently perform the functions of the job. 
(3)  It is the policy of the city to actively encourage women, traditionally under-represented populations and minorities to apply for employment in all positions within city government. All persons should have equal opportunities in recruitment, selection, appointment, promotion, training, discipline and related areas. 
(b)  Legal and actual residents of the city, who have established documented legal residency in the city for at least one year prior to application, shall be given preference in hiring when they are equally qualified, unless otherwise prohibited by law; provided, that the vacant positions be advertised in the classified section of the local newspapers or on various city websites or social media portals and that applications be submitted to the personnel department during the application period. Secondary preference shall be given to any person fluent in any second language as spoken by at least ten percent of city residents as determined by the United States Census Bureau. 
(c)  The director of human resources shall promulgate rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this section. 
(d)  The hiring process for police and fire personnel, outlined in chapters 20 and 22 are specifically excluded from the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1994, § 2-51; Ord. of 6-18-1985, § 1; Ord. of 3-13-2017(1) , § 1) 
Sec. 2-48. - Appointment of department heads. 
    In making appointments of the heads of departments, the mayor shall give preference to persons who are qualified electors of and residents of the city. If the department involves a function requiring technical or professional expertise, the mayor, with the approval of the city council, shall appoint persons especially qualified on the basis of their educational background and professional experience. 
(Code 1994, § 2-52; Ord. of 2-12-1990(2), § I) 
Sec. 2-49. - Availability of city officials; complaints. 
(a)  Availability. The department heads and heads of divisions of departments shall be available to the public in their respective offices during office hours of the business day. If in the event of necessary city business the department head or division head finds it necessary to leave his office during the business day, he will designate another to be in charge and will leave a written record of where he went and the time he left, and this record will be permanent and will be initialed each time the person leaves the city hall in the course of normal city hall hours. 
(b)  Enforcement; complaints by citizens. Any person may file a sworn statement in the office of the city clerk charging that any department head or head of division of departments of the city has violated the provisions of this section, which statement shall set out the particulars as to the charges made. The city clerk shall present such charges to the council at its next regular meeting occurring not less than three days after the filing of such charges, and the council shall consider the charges. The council may hold public hearings on such charges, and the council shall hold a public hearing on such charges within 30 days after the presentation to it of the charges by the city clerk as aforesaid if requested so to do by the petition of not less than 50 qualified electors of the city or upon written request of the accused filed with the city clerk within 14 days after the presentation of such charges to the council. In every case where charges have been presented as aforesaid the council shall, by majority vote within 60 days after the presentation of such charges to the council, make a finding of the truth or falsity of such charges, which findings shall be entered into the records of the council. 
(c)  Penalties. The city council will submit its findings under subsection (b) of this section to the mayor and the recommended punitive action. 
(Code 1973, § 2-2; Code 1994, § 2-2) 
Sec. 2-50. - Salaries considered full compensation. 
    The salaries paid to all officers, boards and commissions of the city shall be considered full compensation for all services rendered to the city unless otherwise specially provided. 
(Code 1973, § 2-8; Code 1994, § 2-3) 
Sec. 2-51. - Expense accounts. 
(a)  The expense accounts of any officer, board or commission of the city, including the mayor and city council, are established solely and exclusively for the payment and reimbursement of expenses which are reasonably related to the functions and duties of said office, department, board or commission. 
(b)  Any and all expenditures made from the expense accounts described in subsection (a) of this section shall be properly documented by a corresponding minimum, show the date of purchase, a description of the items or services procured and the consideration paid. 
(Code 1994, § 2-3.1; Ord. No. 96-005-O, 5-13-1996) 
Sec. 2-52. - Money received by officers, boards and commissions. 
    All money received by any officer, board or commission of the city by virtue of his or its official position shall inure to the benefit and use of the city and shall be payable to the city treasury as provided by the Charter. 
(Code 1973, § 2-9; Code 1994, § 2-4) 
Secs. 2-53-2-77. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - AFFIRMATIVE ACTION PROGRAM[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- State fair employment practices act, G.L. 1956, § 28-5-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-78. - Affirmative action coordinator. 
(a)  The human resources director will coordinate and be responsible for the implementation of the affirmative action plan and will be assigned the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  Assist management in resolving problems relative to any requirements or provisions of the affirmative action plan. 
(2)  Develop and implement audit and reporting system designed to: 
a.  Continually measure the effectiveness of the affirmative action plan. 
b.  Point out deficiencies and need for remedial action. 
c.  Determine degree to which goals and objectives are being reached. 
d.  Conduct periodic audits of hiring and promotion patterns and techniques to ensure that provisions of the plan are being carried out, and the goals and objectives are being met. 
e.  Make a periodic review of the affirmative action plan and submit recommendations for expansion, improvement or modification of the plan where applicable. 
f.  Serve as liaison between the city, minority organizations and community action groups. 
g.  Keep the mayor and city department management informed of the latest developments in the equal employment opportunity area. 
h.  Hold regular discussions with department heads, supervisors, and employees to ensure that the affirmative action policies are being followed. 
i.  Provide an analysis of all department activities to assure affirmative action. 
j.  Report to the mayor on a regular basis as to progress in the implementation of the affirmative action plan, modification of the plan and degree to which goals and objectives are being reached. 
k.  Complete and submit reports as required by the federal equal employment opportunities commission. 
(b)  All discriminatory or unnecessary restrictions on age, sex, physical characteristics, education, and experience will be deleted from all recruiting announcements, and only bona fide requirements may be specified, particularly of age and sex. Job description and applications will be analyzed to ensure qualifications and questions are job related and that references to sex will be deleted wherever practicable with the approval of the city council. 
(c)  Communication will be made with organizations that serve the minority population so that employment needs are widely publicized to attract minority applicants. 
(Code 1994, § 30-31; Ord. of 10-1-1984, § I) 
Sec. 2-79. - Selection process. 
(a)  The council and affirmative action coordinator shall continually review the city's selection process to ensure that the appointment process does not discriminate against any applicant on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, age, national origin, or handicap. 
(b)  Requirements involving records and other factors which may cause a disadvantage to minority groups will be examined for each class of position by the affirmative action coordinator. Only realistic requirements will be applied. 
(c)  Application forms will be revised to eliminate questions which may be racially, ethnically, religiously, or sexually biased. 
(d)  Interviewers shall not ask questions which may be interpreted to be discriminatory nor will sex or minority status be considered a factor in selecting the most qualified applicants. 
(e)  Selection will be based upon the possession of those skills and qualifications outlined in the position classification plan. 
(Code 1994, § 30-32; Ord. of 10-1-1984, § I) 
Sec. 2-80. - Testing. 
    Testing will be an area of immediate concern. All tests which are used for hiring or promotion will be professionally evaluated for their validity and significance as an indicator for effective job performance. 
(Code 1994, § 30-33; Ord. of 10-1-1984, § I) 
Sec. 2-81. - Training. 
    All formalized training which is developed or any educational program provided will be made available on an objective and nondiscriminatory manner. 
(Code 1994, § 30-34; Ord. of 10-1-1984, § I) 
Sec. 2-82. - Promotions. 
(a)  Promotional opportunities will be publicized within all city departments. 
(b)  Programs will be established to provide for the following: 
(1)  Listing of job vacancies. 
(2)  Equal opportunity for all employees to apply for promotion. 
(3)  Fair and equal selection standards. 
(4)  Pointing out deficiencies and need for remedial action. 
(c)  Exceptional vocational achievements will be publicized in local news media. 
(d)  All employees, especially minorities and women, will be encouraged to seek promotional opportunities. 
(Code 1994, § 30-35; Ord. of 10-1-1984, § I) 
Sec. 2-83. - Contractor-vendor relations. 
    Pursuant to federal regulations, affirmative action is required of employers holding federal contracts. A written affirmative action program is required of all large nonconstruction contractors and subcontractors. As a prime contractor, the city has to inform all contractors and subcontractors of its policy of nondiscrimination and affirmative action. The affirmative action coordinator shall immediately: 
(1)  Identify and list all contractors and vendors doing business with the city. 
(2)  Ensure that all contractual provisions are nondiscriminatory. 
(3)  Incorporate the equal opportunity clause in all purchase orders, contracts, leases, etc. 
(4)  Send written notification to all contractors, vendors and suppliers to inform them of the city's affirmative action policy and requesting compliance on their part. 
(5)  Develop a system of monitoring the city's contractors, vendors and suppliers to ensure that appropriate sanctions are taken when warranted. 
(6)  Meet with minority and female contractors, vendors and suppliers to inform them of the city's affirmative action policy and posture. 
(Code 1994, § 30-36; Ord. of 10-1-1984, § I) 
Sec. 2-84. - Compensation. 
(a)  The city will ensure equal pay for equal work regardless of sex, race, creed, national origin or handicap. 
(b)  A continuing review of jobs will be conducted to ensure that compensation for work performed will not be discriminatory. 
(c)  Fringe benefits will be afforded on an equal basis for all employees. 
(d)  All job classifications will be reviewed on an annual basis to ensure adequate compensation for work performed. 
(Code 1994, § 30-37; Ord. of 10-1-1984, § I) 
Sec. 2-85. - Long range plan. 
    The affirmative action officer will initiate steps with other departments to develop common guidelines and procedures and take joint action in implementing affirmative action relationships with respect to contractors, vendors and suppliers to impact change more effectively. 
(Code 1994, § 30-38; Ord. of 10-1-1984, § I) 
Sec. 2-86. - Dissemination of policy, plan and program. 
(a)  Internal. Each employee shall be fully informed of the city's affirmative action policy, plans and commitments, as well as their own responsibilities to ensure an on-going program with positive results. This shall be accomplished by the following: 
(1)  Written communication from the council president. Initially, this will be sent to all employees and department heads. 
(2)  Each city department will be provided with a complete copy of the city's affirmative action plan; additionally each department head will have a copy readily available for reference and employee inquiries. 
(3)  Special meetings, during initial stages, will be held regularly to discuss program responsibility and to review progress. 
(b)  External. Copies of the city's affirmative action program shall be placed in the secretary of states' office, available on a noncirculatory basis to employees and general public. Additionally, the affirmative action coordinator will: 
(1)  Initially, forward a letter to all regular recruitment sources, along with a copy of the council's resolution of affirmative action, advising them of the city's policy and that legally the city cannot continue to use their services unless applicant referrals are made on a nondiscriminatory basis. This shall include: 
a.  Public and private employment agencies. 
b.  Appropriate media. 
c.  Educational institutions. 
d.  Minority and female organizations. 
e.  Community groups. 
(2)  Meet periodically with department heads to explain and to review progress of the city's affirmative action policies and programs. 
(3)  Notify all contractors, subcontractors, vendors and suppliers in writing of the city's affirmative action policy and program, requesting appropriate supportive action on their part by means of written acknowledgement or receipt of the city's policy. 
(c)  Insertion of equal opportunity clause into documents; revocation clause for noncompliance. The affirmative action coordinator will ensure that an equal opportunity clause is included in all purchase orders, contracts, leases, etc., with revocation clauses for noncompliance. 
(Code 1994, § 30-39; Ord. of 10-1-1984, § I) 
Sec. 2-87. - Records and reports. 
(a)  Personnel records will be established and maintained to permit assessment of the city's effort towards affirmative action and equal employment opportunity. 
(b)  The affirmative action coordinator will monitor records of referrals, placements, transfers, promotions and terminations at all levels of city government to ensure that the goals of the affirmative action plan are met. 
(c)  All department heads will require reports as requested from supervisory personnel. 
(Code 1994, § 30-40; Ord. of 10-1-1984, § I) 
Sec. 2-88. - Program evaluation. 
(a)  The major objectives of affirmative action program evaluations are to: 
(1)  Assess the effectiveness of management in: 
a.  Identifying the factors and problems that have bearing on equal employment opportunity. 
b.  Developing and implementing action programs to meet and overcome any obstacles to full equality of opportunity. 
(2)  Provide management with a date upon which to base recommendations or directions for future remedial action. 
(3)  Assure that action has been taken on prior recommendations and directions. 
(b)  The evaluation will be directed toward accomplished results rather than just efforts made. 
(c)  The evaluation will focus attention on assessing the adequacy of problem identification in the affirmative action program and the extent to which the specific action steps in the plan provide solutions, rather than mere identification of a remaining problem and recommendations for their solution. 
(d)  The evaluation should determine that there is motivation for improvement and a willingness at all organizational levels to follow through on problem resolution. 
(e)  The affirmative action coordinator shall make an annual report to the city council detailing the overall status of the program, results achieved toward established objectives, identification of any particular problems encountered and recommendations for corrective actions needed. 
(f)  The affirmative action plan shall be reviewed at least annually and revised as necessary with new objectives and timetables established for the ensuing year. The affirmative action coordinator shall make available to the city council any reports detailing: 
(1)  Annual statistical report (current employment). 
(2)  Applicant referrals. 
(3)  Promotions and transfers. 
(4)  Hires (appointments). 
(5)  Separations. 
(6)  Promotable employees. 
(7)  Training summary. 
(8)  Annual narrative summary. 
(Code 1994, § 30-41; Ord. of 10-1-1984, § I) 
Sec. 2-89. - Freedom of information. 
(a)  All records of the city pertaining to the affirmative action program will be open to any and all persons. 
(b)  With the exception of federal auditors from the federal or state equal employment opportunity agencies, a request, in writing, will be required from an individual or organization wishing to examine the files. 
(c)  No person or organization will be permitted to review or examine any part of the affirmative action files pertaining to disciplinary action against an employee without a duly signed and notarized document of release executed by the employee to whom the records pertain. 
(Code 1994, § 30-42; Ord. of 10-1-1984, § I) 
Secs. 2-90-2-106. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - INDEMNIFICATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Indemnification of public officials, employees or elected officials, G.L. 1956, § 45-15-16. 

Sec. 2-107. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Acting within the scope of his official duties or employment shall not include any action which occurs during a period of time in which the officer or employee is engaged in outside employment or is rendering contractual services to someone other than the city. 
(Code 1994, § 30-68; Ord. of 8-31-2004(3)) 
Sec. 2-108. - Coverage. 
    The city shall indemnify any and all public employees, officials, members of boards, agencies and commissions appointed by the mayor, the city council or by any other person exercising appointing authority delegated to them by said mayor and/or city council, whether or not such employees, officials or members are paid, from all loss, cost, expense and damage, including legal fees and court costs, if any, arising out of any claim, action, compromise, settlement or judgment, by reason of any intentional tort or by reason of any alleged error or misstatement or action or omission, or neglect or violation of the rights of any person under any federal or state law, including misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance or any act or omission or neglect contrary to any federal or state law which imposes personal liability on any such employee, official or member, if such employee, official or member, at the time of such intentional tort or act, omission or neglect, was acting within the scope of his official duties or employment. 
(Code 1994, § 30-61; Ord. of 8-31-2004(3)) 
Sec. 2-109. - Denial of indemnification. 
    The city shall decline to indemnify any such employee, official or member for any misstatement, error, act, omission or neglect if the same resulted from willful, wanton or malicious conduct on the part of such employee, official or member. The city council shall decide, on a case-by-case basis, whether indemnification should be allowed or declined. 
(Code 1994, § 30-62; Ord. of 8-31-2004(3)) 
Sec. 2-110. - Defense in actions. 
(a)  The city shall have the duty to provide legal representation through the city solicitor or through outside legal counsel without charge to the persons involved to any city officer or employee indicated in section 2-108, in connection with any claim, suit for damages or other action against such person arising from the performance by said person of his public duties, provided that such person may have his own private counsel to assist in his defense, at the expense of the person so involved. 
(b)  The city council shall have the authority to approve or deny any and all requests for outside legal counsel on a case-by-case basis. 
(c)  The city shall not be liable for settlement, costs, expenses, or attorney's fees arising out of any claim or suit effected without its consent. 
(d)  The city reserves the right to assert any defense and make any settlement of any claim or suit that it deems expedient. 
(Code 1994, § 30-63; Ord. of 8-31-2004(3)) 
Sec. 2-111. - Expenses included in indemnification. 
(a)  Indemnification shall include provision of legal counsel at the expense of the city and expenses incurred in connection with the conduct of such defense, including payment of any judgment thereon. 
(b)  The city shall be responsible for paying attorneys' fees for outside legal counsel only upon approval of same by the city council. 
(Code 1994, § 30-64; Ord. of 8-31-2004(3)) 
Sec. 2-112. - City's defenses. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed or interpreted as waiving the city's defense of governmental immunity to it or its employees or officers in any action brought against the city or any of its officers or employees. 
(Code 1994, § 30-65; Ord. of 8-31-2004(3)) 
Sec. 2-113. - Notice required. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply only where the city has been given timely notice of any actions brought against any person. 
(Code 1994, § 30-66; Ord. of 8-31-2004(3)) 
Sec. 2-114. - Conflict of interest. 
    Nothing in this article or in any ordinance of the city shall be construed to require the city solicitor to provide legal services in any manner which would cause the attorney to be involved in a conflict of interest. 
(Code 1994, § 30-67; Ord. of 8-31-2004(3)) 
Secs. 2-115-2-141. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CITY SOLICITOR 

Sec. 2-142. - Duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the city solicitor, or some person duly authorized by him and for whose conduct, skill and faithfulness he shall be accountable, to draft all bonds, deeds, obligations, conveyances, agreements and other legal instruments of whatsoever nature which may be required of him by any provision of this Code or other ordinance or order of the city council or by any committee of the council. The city solicitor shall commence and prosecute all actions and suits to be commenced by the city before any tribunal of the state, whether at law or in equity, and shall appear in, defend and advocate the interests and rights of the city or of any officers thereof in any suit or prosecution for any act or omission in the discharge of their official duties wherein any estate, right, privilege, ordinance or act or any breach of any ordinance may be brought into question. The city solicitor shall also, when requested, act as attorney and counsel for any officers of the city in any prosecution or proceeding which may be instituted by such officers in their official capacity for any breach of any of the laws of the state or of any of the provisions of this Code or other ordinances, orders or bylaws of the city. The city solicitor shall, in all matters, do every professional act incident to the office which may be required of him by the city council or by any committee thereof and shall, when required, furnish the city council or any officer of the city who may require it in the discharge of his official duties with his written legal opinion on any subject touching the duties of their respective offices or the rights, duties and interests of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 2-20; Code 1994, § 2-67) 
Sec. 2-143. - Compensation. 
    In all cases, when attendance out of the city may be required of the city solicitor, his reasonable traveling expenses shall be allowed him. 
(Code 1973, § 2-21; Code 1994, § 2-68) 
Sec. 2-144. - Assistant city solicitor. 
(a)  Position established. There is hereby created in the law department of the city the position of assistant city solicitor. 
(b)  Appointment; qualifications. The mayor shall make the appointment of the assistant city solicitor, who shall be a lawyer admitted to the practice before the supreme court of the state. 
(c)  Functions and duties. The assistant city solicitor shall have such functions and duties as are authorized and delegated to the law department of the city under provisions of Charter. He or she shall work under the supervision of the mayor and the city solicitor and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. 
(Code 1973, § 2-21.1; Code 1994, § 2-69; Ord. of 6-23-2000; Ord. of 4-12-2013 ) 
Sec. 2-145. - Legislative solicitor-Legislation. 
(a)  Position established. The position of legislative solicitor is hereby established to provide advice and counsel to city council on matters wherein the city council by majority vote has determined the need for advice and counsel separate and apart than that being rendered by the city law department on a particular city matter. 
(b)  Appointment; qualifications. The city council may engage a legislative solicitor, who shall be a lawyer licensed to practice in Rhode Island and have a minimum of five years experience. Said engagement shall be on a contract basis and it shall not constitute an appointment as a city employee or a member of the law department. 
(c)  Functions and duties. The legislative solicitor shall have such functions and duties to advise the council on legislative and other legal matters wherein the council has determined the need for legal representation separate and apart from the law department and such engagement shall be for a period not to exceed 90 days with compensation allocated annually at the amount of $7,500.00 from the city's contingency fund. This legislative solicitor shall serve at the pleasure of the council and address those issues as outlined in a duly authorized and approved letter of engagement. 
(Code 1994, § 2-70; Ord. of 6-4-2001; Ord. of 4-20-2013 ) 
Secs. 2-146-2-173. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CITY CLERK 

Sec. 2-174. - Deputy city clerk. 
    The mayor shall designate one employee in the department of records to be the deputy city clerk. Such deputy shall have and exercise all the powers and perform all the duties which are incumbent on the city clerk, being thereunto qualified by taking the oath of office. 
(Code 1973, § 2-26; Code 1994, § 2-83) 
Sec. 2-175. - Records. 
    The city clerk shall maintain an official electronic tape recorded copy and a video copy as well as written minutes of all city council and liquor board public meetings for public review. 
(Code 1994, § 2-84; Ord. of 4-17-2000) 
Secs. 2-176-2-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - MUNICIPAL CODE OF ETHICS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Feb. 13, 2013 adopted Feb. 13, 2013 , set out provisions intended for use as § 2-53. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Div. 6. 

Sec. 2-191. - Code of ethics. 
(a)  Legislative intent and declaration of policy . It is declared to be the policy of the city that all officers and employees of the city are public servants of the people and hold their positions for the benefit of the public. These public servants shall fulfill conscientiously, according to the Home Rule Charter, the Code of Ordinances of the city and all applicable laws, their duties and shall prove themselves in their behavior worthy of the esteem which their position requires. In all official activity, such officers and employees shall strive to meet the highest standards of ethics consistent with this code and state law, regardless of personal considerations, recognizing that maintaining the respect of the people must be their foremost concern. In enacting this code of ethics the city recognizes that the state code of ethics applies to all city employees and officials. Accordingly, the purpose of the city's ethics code is not to replicate the prohibitions and regulations which already govern municipal employees. Rather, the goal of this ethics code is to address issues and conduct not covered by the state ethics code and in so doing to hold the city's employees and officials to the highest possible standards of ethics. 
(b)  Definitions . For purposes of this section: 
(1)  Business associate means a person joined together with another person to achieve a common financial objective, irrespective of any profit or non-profit making status. 
(2)  City means the City of Central Falls. 
(3)  City facility means any structure or building owned, operated or managed by the city or a municipal agency. 
(4)  Elected official means any individual elected to an office created by the Charter of the city. 
(5)  Employee means any individual other than an elected official or an independent contractor, receiving compensation for services performed for the city. 
(6)  Family member means an individual who is related to a person as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half sister, grandparent, great grandparent, grandchild, great grandchild, step-grandparent, step-great grandparent, step-grandchild, step-great grandchild, person who is engaged to be married to the public officer or employee or who otherwise holds himself or herself out as or is generally known as the person whom the public officer or employee intends to marry or with whom the public officer or employee intends to form a household, or cohabitating and/or living arrangement in any form whatsoever. 
(7)  Municipal agency means any department, bureau, commission, board, or authority, of the city or quasi-public authority recognized by city charter or created by ordinance or resolution. It shall also include any group of persons, corporations, organizations, or other entities, however created, which exercise governmental functions of the city, other than in an advisory nature, and expend public funds in excess of $10,000.00 annually. 
(8)  For the purposes of interpretation and application under this city code of ethics, any reference to "city official", or "official", shall mean the mayor, the members of the city council and the members of all boards, commissions and authorities whose members are appointed by the mayor, with or without city council approval, and those appointed or elected by the city council, all department heads and all deputy department heads or city employees. 
(9)  A person "represents" another person before a municipal agency if he or she is authorized by that other person to act, and does in fact act, as the other person's attorney-at-law or his or her attorney-in-fact or a duly authorized agent in the presentation of evidence or arguments before that agency for the purpose of influencing the judgment of the agency in favor of that other person. 
(10)  A person "represents" himself or herself before a municipal agency if he or she participates in the presentation of evidence or arguments before that agency for the purpose of influencing the judgment of the agency in his or her favor. 
(c)  Prohibited conduct relating to employment . 
(1)  Coercion for trading with a particular business . It is unlawful for any official or employee of the city or a municipal agency to discharge, threaten to discharge, discipline, threaten to discipline or otherwise discriminate against any other officer or employee for trading or not trading as a customer or patron with any particular business, without just cause or reason not to engage any particular business. 
(2)  Use of public property . It is unlawful for an official or employee of the city or a municipal agency to knowingly use property, including but not limited to intellectual property, or resources, or city services wherein the city is the participating customer or patron, owned by the city or an independent agency, including but not limited to vehicles, for his or her personal benefit, convenience or profit, except in accordance with policies promulgated by the council or by the governing body of the municipal agency owning the property. 
(3)  City seal . It is unlawful for any person to fraudulently affix or impress the seal to or upon any certificate, instrument, commission, document or paper or with knowledge of its fraudulent character to use, buy, procure, sell or transfer to another any certificate, instrument, commission, document or paper, to or upon which the seal has been fraudulently affixed. 
(4)  Activities relating to promotion or appointment . It shall be unlawful for any person seeking employment or promotion in the city or a municipal agency to either directly or indirectly give, promise, or pay any money, service of other thing of value for, or on account of, in connection with or for the purpose of influencing or affecting their test, appointment, proposed appointment, promotion or proposed promotion. 
(5)  Misuse of position . It is unlawful for an official or employee of the city or municipal agency to intentionally use his or her official position to secure a special privilege or exemption for himself, herself or any other person that said employee may have an association or relationship with defined under section 2-191(b)(1) and (6) of this article. 
(6)  Misuse of information . It is unlawful for an official or employee of the city or a municipal agency to willfully or knowingly disclose any confidential or privileged information acquired by reason of the officer or employee's position, unless authorized or required by law to do so. Provided that nothing herein shall prohibit an officer or employee from engaging in conduct protected by Chapter 28-50 of the Rhode Island General Laws, the Rhode Island Whistle Blower's Protection Act. 
(7)  No show jobs . It is unlawful for an official or employee of the city or a municipal agency to knowingly employ a person with public funds who does not perform tasks which contribute substantially to the work of the government of the city or a municipal agency or whose tasks are grossly disproportionate to the compensation received. 
(8)  Outside work during business hours . No city employee shall engage in any outside business or commercial activity during regular business hours of his or her city position. All city employees are assumed to be full time, unless their personnel record or applicable personnel policies indicate otherwise. 
(9)  Representing persons . It shall be unlawful for any official or employee of the city or a municipal agency to act as agent or attorney for, or otherwise represent any person (except the city or the municipal agency) before any court, or before any state, federal, or local agency, or any officer or employee thereof in connection with a particular matter: 
a.  In which the city or a municipal agency is a party or has a direct and substantial interest; and 
b.  In which the employee or official participated personally and substantially as a city official or employee; and 
c.  Which involved a specific party or parties at the time of such participation; and 
d.  Which is the same matter in which the official or employee participated as a city official or employee. 
(10)  Advising or consulting . It shall be unlawful for any official or employee of the city or a municipal agency to aid, advise, counsel, consult or assist another person (except the city or municipal agency) in connection with a particular matter: 
a.  In which the city or a municipal agency is a party or has a direct and substantial interest; and 
b.  In which the employee or official participated personally and substantially as a city official or employee; and 
c.  Which involved a specific party or parties at the time of such participation; and 
d.  Which is the same matter in which the official or employee participated as a city official or employee. 
(d)  Duty to report . A city employee with knowledge or information as to any prohibited conduct within subsection (c) above shall have a responsibility to report said information in a timely manner to the city ethics integrity officer. 
(e)  Report of testimonial proceeds intended for personal use . Within 90 days from the date of a testimonial affair which was intended to raise funds for the personal use of a person who is a city employee upon her or his retirement or departure from the city or any municipal agency of the city, said city employee or a duly authorized designee shall make a full report to the city clerk, upon a form to be provided by the city ethics integrity officer setting forth the net proceeds realized by the testimonial affair and the names and addresses of each contribution of in excess of $100.00 to the affair and the amount contributed by each. The person making said report shall certify to its correctness. The city employee shall be responsible for maintaining accurate financial records of the testimonial affair and for filing the aforementioned report unless he or she files with the city clerk, prior to the affair, a statement designating another city employee who has signed an acknowledgement accepting responsibility to maintain those records and to file said report. 
(f)  Former employees/officials . 
(1)  Representing persons . It shall be unlawful for any person who was an official or employee of the city or a municipal agency or instrumentality, for a period of one year after separation of said position, to act as agent or attorney for, or otherwise represent any person (except the city or the municipal agency) before any court, or before any state, federal, or local agency, or any officer or employee thereof in connection with a particular matter: 
a.  In which the former employee or official participated personally and substantially as a city official or employee; and 
b.  Which involved a specific party or parties at the time of such participation; and 
c.  Which is the same matter in which the official or employee participated as a city official or employee. 
(2)  Advising or consulting . It shall be unlawful for any person who was an official or employee of the city or a municipal agency or instrumentality, for a period of one year after separation of said position, to aid, advise, counsel, consult or assist another person (except the city or municipal agency) in connection with a particular matter: 
a.  In which the former employee or official participated personally and substantially as a city official or employee; and 
b.  Which involved a specific party or parties at the time of such participation; and 
c.  Which is the same matter in which the official or employee participated as a city official or employee. 
(3)  Contracts, grants and subsidies . It shall be unlawful for any former employee or official of the city or a municipal agency who participated personally and substantially in the negotiation of a municipal contract, grant or, subsidy, including but not limited to a tax stabilization agreement or a tax increment financing arrangement valued at $50,000.00 or more, or who supervised the negotiation or award of such a contract to accept employment with a party to the contract (except the city or municipal agency) or with the recipient of the grant or subsidy for a period of one year after such contract is signed or the grant or subsidy is awarded. 
(4)  Confidential information . It shall be unlawful for any former employee or official of the city or a municipal agency to disclose confidential or privileged information acquired during service as employee or official, unless authorized or required by law to do so. 
(5)  Revolving door . 
a.  It shall be unlawful for an elected official, while holding office and for a period of one year after leaving office, to seek or accept employment with any municipal agency or instrumentality, other than employment which was held at the time of the official's election or at the time of the enactment of this section, except as provided herein. 
b.  Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit an elected official from seeking or being elected to any other elective office. 
(g)  Campaign ethics . 
(1)  Political activities while on duty with the exception of the mayor, it is unlawful for an employee of the city or an independent agency to take any active part in political management or in political campaigns during duty hours; provided that this section shall not be construed to prohibit an officer or employee from voting as he or she may choose and from expressing his or her opinion on a political subject or candidate. 
(2)  Restrictions on campaigning by city employees. It is unlawful for any employee of the city or a municipal agency while attending to city business within city offices; or while wearing a city uniform required for his or her employment to: a. Request, in person, that any individual contribute any time, money or other thing of value to any candidate, political party or political committee; or b. Solicit, in person, support or votes for any candidate, political party or political measure. 
(3)  Soliciting contributions from city employees. It is unlawful for any person to solicit political contributions from employees of the city or a municipal agency during the employee's hours of employment. 
(4)  Soliciting contributions in city facilities. It is unlawful for a person to make, solicit, or knowingly accept any campaign contribution in a city facility. 
(h)  Aiding and abetting . No person shall knowingly and intentionally provide assistance to or otherwise aid or abet any other person in violating any provision of this ordinance. 
(i)  Suspension or dismissal for felonies related to employment . Upon indictment, information or complaint and/or arraignment for a felony directly related to his or her employment, any city employee shall be suspended with or without pay, or transferred to another position. Upon conviction of or plea of nolo contendere to a felony related to his or her employment, a city employee shall be dismissed immediately. 
(j)  Penalties and enforcement . 
(1)  Criminal penalties . Any person who knowingly and willfully violates the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 for each violation and/or imprisonment of not more than 30 days. 
(2)  Civil penalties . Any person who intentionally or negligently violates the provisions of this article shall be liable in a civil action brought by the city solicitor in the municipal court for an amount up to $500.00 for each violation as well as the pecuniary value of any unjust enrichment realized by the violator, a family member of the violator or a business associate of the violator as the result of his or her violation of this article. 
(3)  Statute of limitations . No complaint may be made under this article except within five years after the violation alleged in the complaint has been committed. 
(k)  City ethics integrity officer . The role of city ethics integrity officer is hereby established and shall be executed by the city solicitor. 
(1)  Mission . The mission of the city ethics integrity officer is to encourage each of the officials and employees of the city and municipal agencies to act in an ethical manner. This mission requires that the city ethics integrity officer encourage employees and officials not only to comply with various laws, but more importantly, to adhere to the highest standards of ethical behavior. 
(2)  Duties . In pursuing the above referenced mission, the duties of the city ethics integrity officer include, but are not limited to the following: 
a.  Education and training . Develop training and education programs in coordination with the state ethics commission and in so doing encourage compliance with both the letter and the spirit of ethics laws. An introductory program will be required for all employees and officials. 
b.  Written materials . The city ethics integrity officer will publish a "plain English" Ethics Handbook which addresses the requirements of the city ethics code and the code of ethics of the state. 
c.  Website and reporting . The city ethics integrity officer may develop and publish a website related to city ethics to contain a vehicle whereby members of the public may report any circumstance or situation involving an employee or official of the city or a municipal agency which appears to violate or may potentially violate the city ethics code or the code of ethics of the state. The website should contain links to readable and downloadable copies of the city ethics code and the code of ethics of the state. 
d.  Information advice . The city ethics integrity officer will be available on a confidential basis to all employees and officials to answer questions regarding ethics and may provide informal advice regarding issues relating to the city code of ethics. The municipal integrity officer will also assist employees and officials in seeking guidance from the state ethics commission relative to the code of ethics of the state. 
e.  Review and recommend . Review periodically this code and other applicable laws and recommend to the office of the mayor and the city council appropriate changes to this ordinance. 
f.  Liaison with state ethics commission . The city ethics integrity officer will maintain liaison with the state ethics commission on a regular basis to remain attuned to the requirements of the state code to engender cooperation with the state ethics commission. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2013 , § 1) 
Sec. 2-192. - Lobbyist disclosure. 
(a)  Purpose . The purpose of this section is to create disclosure requirements for municipal lobbyists to ensure the transparency and openness of city government. This disclosure will require lobbyists to provide pertinent information for the benefit of the general public, the mayor and the city council. This section is not intended to discourage or prohibit the exercise of constitutional rights. 
(b)  Definitions . 
(1)  City official means the mayor, members of the city council, directors, deputy directors and department heads in the City of Central Falls. 
(2)  Lobbying means any verbal communication with a city official for the purpose of influencing a municipal decision and for which compensation is received. 
(3)  Lobbyist means any person who engages in lobbying for compensation. 
(c)  Lobbyist disclosure required. Prior to any lobbying, every lobbyist is required to disclose the following information to the city clerk in a publicly accessible database: lobbyist name, name of lobbyist entity, if applicable, work address, work phone number, work email, name of person or entity on whose behalf the lobbying activity is occurring, amount of compensation for lobbying activity and specific subject matter of lobbying activity. 
(d)  Lobbyist reports required . Reports shall e filed with the city ethics integrity officer, both by the person, corporation, or association having engaged any person to act as a lobbyist, and by the lobbyist, as follows: 
(1)  A final report shall be filed not later than January 15th of each year. The report shall include all money or anything of value which in the aggregate exceeds $250.00 provided or promised to any city official within the preceding calendar year. "Money" and "anything of value" in this subsection and in subsection (d)(2) of this section shall mean any fee, salary, commission, expense, allowance, forbearance, forgiveness, royalty, rent, capital gain, gift, loan, reward, favor or service, gratuity or special discount, or any other form of recompense that constitutes income under the Federal Internal Revenue Code. In the event no compensation has been paid or received, and no expenses have been paid or incurred during the preceding calendar year, an annual report stating such information shall be filed not later than January 15th. 
(2)  Not later than January 15th of each year, every person, corporation, or association specified in this subsection shall provide an exact copy of the report required in subsection (d)(1) [of this section] to the Rhode Island Ethics Commission and to any city official to whom the person, corporation, or association provided or promised money or anything of value which in the aggregate exceeds $250.00 within the preceding calendar year. 
(e)  Administrative penalty for violations . Any person, corporation, association, or lobbyist who is found to have intentionally violated any provision of this article may be subject to administrative penalties imposed by the city clerk as the circumstances may merit upon notice and opportunity to be heard before the city clerk. Said penalties include the imposition of a fine not to exceed $250.00 per day and/or the removal of such lobbyist from the city clerk's register of lobbyists and prohibition of lobbying activity until the following year or until compliance is established. 
(f)  Exceptions . The following persons or actions shall be exempt from the provisions of this section: 
(1)  Any elected public official or the official's designee acting in his or her official capacity, or any municipal employee acting within the scope of his or her employment. 
(2)  News media employees or agents who in the ordinary course of business write, publish, or broadcast news items, editorials, or other comments or paid advertisements which directly or indirectly urge legislative action, if those persons engage in no other lobbying activities in connection with that action. 
(3)  Drafting legislation. 
(4)  A person appearing to testify in a public forum in support of or in opposition to legislation or municipal decision. 
(5)  Attorneys representing clients before a city board or commission shall not be considered lobbying for purpose of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2013 , § 2) 
Sec. 2-193. - Pay to play prohibited. 
(a)  Definitions . For purposes of this section: 
(1)  Candidate for Central Falls public office means the candidate committee of any holder of or candidate for municipal public office in the City of Central Falls which has filed a Notice of Organization with the Campaign Finance Division of the Rhode Island Board of Elections. 
(2)  Contribution means any contribution, whether a monetary or in-kind contribution, of any amount, made to a candidate for Central Falls public office. 
(3)  "No-bid contract" means any contract awarded without public bidding pursuant to Chapter 9 of the Home Rule Charter. 
(b)  Restrictions . 
(1)  The City of Central Falls shall not enter into a no-bid contract with any person or entity if that person or entity has made any contribution to a candidate for Central Falls public office which exceeds the thresholds set forth in subsection (2) below within one year prior to the date of the award of the no-bid contract for such services. 
(2)  Any person or entity may annually contribute a maximum of $300.00 each for any purpose to any candidate for Central Falls public office without violating subsection (1) above. 
(3)  All no-bid contracts shall provide that it shall be a breach of the terms of the contract for the person or entity to make or solicit a contribution in violation of this section. 
(4)  No contribution shall be deemed a violation of this section if made prior to the effective date of this article. 
(5)  Prior to awarding any no-bid contract, the purchasing agent shall receive a written certification from the person or entity attesting to compliance with this section. 
(c)  Penalty . Any person or entity who violates the provisions of this article shall be deemed to have materially breached the no-bid contract and shall be disqualified from eligibility for any future no-bid contract with the City of Central Falls for a period of one year from the date of violation and shall be subject to a fine up to $500.00 for each violation. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2013 , § 3) 
Sec. 2-194. - Revocation or reduction of retirement benefits of employees for dishonorable service. 
(a)  Payment of a retirement allowance or annuity or other benefit or payment subject to section 4-1601 of the Home Rule Charter shall be for "honorable service" only. 
(b)  Definitions. For purposes of this section: 
(1)  Board shall mean the Board of Retirement of the City of Central Falls; 
(2)  Crime related to his or her public employment shall constitute "dishonorable service", and shall include any of the following conduct, whether or not the conduct results in a criminal conviction: 
(A)  Committing, or aiding or abetting the commission of, embezzlement of public funds; 
(B)  Committing, or aiding or abetting the commission of, any felonious theft by a public employee from his or her employer; 
(C)  Committing, or aiding or abetting the commission of, bribery in connection with, or involving, a public employee; 
(D)  Committing, or aiding or abetting the commission of, any felony by a public employee who willfully, and with the intent to defraud, realizes or obtains, or attempts to realize or obtain, a profit, gain, or advantage for himself or for some other person, through the use or attempted use of power, rights, privileges, duties, or position of his or her public office or employment; and 
(E)  Any other misconduct or crime which the board, by a majority vote, determines is "dishonorable service," after weighing and balancing the following factors: 
(i)  The employee's length of service; 
(ii)  The basis for retirement, i.e., age, service, disability, etc.; 
(iii)  The extent to which the employee's pension has vested; 
(iv)  The duties of the particular employment; 
(v)  The employee's public employment history and record; 
(vi)  The employee's other public employment and service; 
(vii)  The nature of the misconduct or crime, whether it involved an isolated act or multiple acts, and its gravity or substantiality; 
(viii)  The relationship between the misconduct or crime and the employee's public duties; 
(ix)  The quality of moral turpitude or the degree of guilt and culpability, including the employee's motives and reasons, personal gain, and the like; 
(x)  The availability and adequacy of penal sanctions; and 
(xi)  Other personal circumstances relating to the employee bearing upon the justness of forfeiture. 
(3)  Employee shall mean any current or former city elected official, or any appointed official, or employee of the city, or of a city board, commission or agency, who is otherwise entitled to receive a pension. 
(4)  Pension shall include an employee's retirement allowance or annuity or other benefit or payment subject to section 4-1601 of the Home Rule Charter. 
(c)  Mandatory board action. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a pension shall be revoked or reduced by the board under this section if an employee is convicted of, or pleads guilty or nolo contendere, to any crime related to his or her public employment. Any such conviction or plea shall be deemed to be "dishonorable service" and a breach of the employee's contract with his or her employer; however, for purposes of this section, "pleads guilty or nolo contendere" shall not include any plea of guilty or nolo contendere which does not result in a conviction by virtue of G.L. 1956, § 12-10-12 or § 12-18-3, as amended. 
(d)  Permissive board action. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a pension may be revoked or reduced by the board under this section if a majority of the board determines by a preponderance of the evidence that an employee has engaged in "dishonorable service" after weighing and balancing the factors set forth in section (b)(1)(E). 
(e)  Due process. If a majority of the members of the board vote to consider any action to revoke or reduce any pension, the board, before taking any such action, shall: 
(1)  Conduct a meeting with the involved employee and inform the employee of the alleged conduct forming the basis of the contemplated board action; and thereafter, 
(2)  Provide the employee, and his or her spouse or domestic partner, dependents and/or designated beneficiaries, with ample notice of the relevant alleged conduct and an opportunity to be heard. 
(f)  Balancing test; calculations. This section is intended to be equitable, rather than penal, in nature. Thus, when deciding to revoke or reduce a pension, the board shall weigh and balance the factors set forth in subsection (b)(1)(E). In addition: 
(1)  The board need not compare an employee's periods of dishonorable service with periods of allegedly honorable service, other than as may be required to determine the legitimate interest of an innocent spouse, domestic partner, dependent, and/or designated beneficiary, and the board may revoke or reduce a pension even if the evidence of "dishonorable service" is limited to an isolated act by an employee who had separate periods of city employment; 
(2)  The board shall decide whether the revocation or reduction shall take effect (and be calculated) from the date: 
(A)  Of the dishonorable service; or 
(B)  The date notice was provided under subsection (e)(2); or 
(C)  The date of the board's decision under subsection (g); and 
(3)  If the board determines to revoke or reduce a pension, the employee's contribution to the pension system shall be refunded, without interest; however, if, as of the date of the board decision, the employee: 
(A)  Has not made full restitution for any loss proximately caused by his or her dishonorable service (including, but not limited to, the fees and costs incurred by the board), and/or 
(B)  Has already received pension payments, the amount of the unreimbursed loss and/or the pension payments received shall be deducted from any such refund. 
(g)  Appeal and standard of review. 
(1)  If the board determines by a majority vote that revocation or reduction of a pension is warranted, it shall make specific factual findings in support thereof and shall render a written decision, which shall be appealable to the superior court as long as such an appeal is filed within 20 calendar days from the date the board decision was rendered. Such appeals shall be pursuant to the Rhode Island Administration Procedures Act 42-35-1, et seq. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2013 , § 4) 
Secs. 2-195-2-203. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS, DIVISIONS AND SIMILAR AGENCIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-204-2-229. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DIVISION OF CODE ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 2-230. - Purpose. 
    The division of code enforcement shall enforce the state building code, the city's zoning ordinance and the ordinance providing for minimum housing standards for housing and such other matters as may be appropriately assigned to it. 
(Code 1994, § 10-26; Ord. of 8-10-1993, § 12.1) 
Sec. 2-231. - Appointment of director. 
    The mayor, with the approval of a majority vote of the council, shall appoint the director of code enforcement as required to enforce the functions, powers and duties of the division of code enforcement. 
(Code 1994, § 10-29; Ord. of 8-10-1993, § 12.4) 
Sec. 2-232. - Fence viewers. 
    The director of code enforcement shall perform all duties prescribed to fence viewers by the law of the state. 
(Code 1973, § 2-12; Code 1994, § 10-30) 
State Law reference- Fences and fence viewers, G.L. 1956, § 34-10-1 et seq. 
Secs. 2-233-2-257. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-258-2-277. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - JUVENILE HEARING BOARD[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Juvenile hearing board, G.L. 1956, § 16-19-8. 

Sec. 2-278. - Establishment. 
    Pursuant to G.L. 1956, § 16-19-8, a juvenile hearing board shall be established in the city for the purpose of hearing all cases referred to it by the juvenile division of the police department or the chief of police with respect to persons under the age of 18 who are charged with violating the criminal laws of the state or the city. Such board shall be called the "Central Falls Juvenile Board." 
(Code 1994, § 2-106; Ord. of 1-9-1995, § I) 
Sec. 2-279. - Membership. 
(a)  The membership of the city juvenile hearing board (the board) shall consist of not less than five nor more than seven residents of the city and one ex officio member named by the mayor from the city council over the age of 18 years. 
(b)  The members of the board shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the council. 
(c)  The term of appointment for members of the board shall be for three years, except that the initial appointments shall be for less than three years, hereby staggering such initial appointments. 
(d)  Appointed members of the board shall be eligible for reappointment, and upon expiration of their term shall continue to serve until replaced or otherwise reappointed. In the event of a vacancy on the board, interim appointments of appointed members may be made by the mayor and confirmed by the council to complete the unexpired term of the vacant position. 
(Code 1994, § 2-107; Ord. of 1-9-1995, § II) 
Sec. 2-280. - Referral to the juvenile hearing board; exceptions; waiver of rights to family court. 
(a)  Persons who are under the age of 18 years may be referred to the board which shall have concurrent jurisdiction with the state family court if the alleged offense is one which, if committed by an adult, would be a misdemeanor. This requirement shall not apply in the case of any person: 
(1)  Charged with the offense of simple assault; 
(2)  Who shall have been twice previously referred to the board or have been once previously referred and refused or failed to abide by the sanctions imposed or make the restitution recommended; and 
(3)  Also at the time of the alleged commission of such offense shall be within the custody and control of the family court. 
(b)  The juvenile division of the police department or the chief of police may refer any other juvenile offender to the board where, in the opinion of the juvenile division or the chief of police, such referral would be beneficial to the juvenile concerned and the community at large. 
(c)  No referral to the board shall be made until such person, together with his legal guardians and/or legal representative shall have in writing waived such person's right to a hearing in the family court with respect to the offense charged, has admitted to the alleged offense and shall have agreed to abide by the decision of the board. 
(Code 1994, § 2-108; Ord. of 1-9-1995, § III) 
Sec. 2-281. - Duties. 
(a)  The board shall be authorized to hear all cases referred by the juvenile division of the police department or the chief of police, and to impose and order sanctions other than incarceration. Such sanctions may include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Fines up to a maximum of $100.00 for each offense charged; 
(2)  Community service; 
(3)  Restitution for any injuries and/or damages, where appropriate, resulting from the commission of any offense; 
(4)  Imposition of a reasonable curfew; 
(5)  Denial or revocation of the juvenile's driving privileges for a period of up to two years. 
(b)  In any such proceedings, the board, prior to imposing sanctions, shall request the juvenile offender and his parents or legal guardians to agree to the sanctions imposed, the amount of restitution and manner of making the same. 
(c)  In ordering restitution, the board shall take into account the juvenile offenders' ability to pay and the amount of actual damage caused as a result of the commission of such offenses. 
(Code 1994, § 2-109; Ord. of 1-9-1995, § IV) 
Sec. 2-282. - Quorum; rules. 
(a)  A majority of the board's membership shall constitute a quorum, and a majority of the members present shall be required to take any action. Any juvenile offender may be represented by counsel and may present evidence in his behalf. 
(b)  The board shall have the power to, from time to time, adopt and publish all rules and regulations necessary to carry out its function under the provisions of this division. 
(c)  The board shall give notice of the date and time of meeting to the juvenile division of the police department or the chief of police, and the alleged juvenile offender and his parents or legal guardians, not less than seven days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(d)  Board proceedings shall be closed to the public, and the provisions of G.L. 1956, chapter 42-46 (G.L. 1956, § 42-46-1 et seq.) shall not apply to such proceedings. All records of proceedings, including records concerning the arrest, apprehension or detention of any juvenile offender, shall be withheld from public inspection, but such records shall be available to the parent, legal guardians or attorney of the juvenile for inspection. 
(Code 1994, § 2-110) 
Secs. 2-283-2-292. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - THE PAWTUCKET CENTRAL FALLS STATION DISTRICT JOINT PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-293. - Purpose. 
    There is hereby created the Pawtucket/Central Falls Station District Joint Planning Commission (hereafter known as the "JPC"), a joint planning commission created in accordance with G.L. 1956, § 45-22.1 by the cities of Central Falls and Pawtucket (hereafter known as the "cities"), that shall be responsible for: 
(1)  Planning for the revitalization of the Pawtucket Central Falls Station District (hereafter known as the "district") to ensure that the district will: realize its potential as a state-designated urban growth area; open up opportunities to reuse the historic mill buildings that are vacant or underutilized; stimulate the economic vitality of the area by strengthening and highlighting access to the multi-modal transportation options available, as well as to neighboring employment, social services, cultural and recreational activities; and, supporting both public and private infrastructure investments and development plans. 
(2)  Regulating development of the district in accordance with the powers granted to the commission by the ordinances and regulations of the cities of Pawtucket and Central Falls. 
(3)  When both cities have adopted an ordinance establishing the JPC, the chair of the Pawtucket Planning Commission shall call an organizational meeting of the JPC. Once this organizational meeting is held, the JPC shall notify both cities that it is operational. From that day forward, the JPC shall exercise the powers granted by this section. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2017(1) , § I) 
Sec. 2-294. - Composition. 
    The commission shall consist of the members of the Pawtucket Planning Commission and the Central Falls Planning Board. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2017(1) , § I) 
Sec. 2-295. - Election of officers, adoption of rules and staffing. 
(a)  The commission shall elect a chairperson, vice chairperson and a secretary whose terms do not exceed one year and who are eligible for reelection. The commission may create and fill any other offices that it may determine to be necessary. 
(b)  The commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations, which record is a public record. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2017(1) , § I) 
Sec. 2-296. - Finances and staff. 
    The cities may appropriate funds for the purpose of contributing to the operation of the commission. The commission may receive grants from the federal or state governments, or from individuals or foundations, and may contract with these entities. Purchasing shall be in accordance with the requirements of the City of Pawtucket. 
(1)  The cities shall assign staff to the commission which shall assist the commission in its day-to-day activities. 
(2)  The commission may contract with planners and other consultants for the services it may require to the extent permitted by its financial resources. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2017(1) , § I) 
Sec. 2-297. - Powers and duties of the commission. 
    The commission shall exercise the following powers in the district. 
(1)  Prepare and maintain a comprehensive plan for the district in accordance with the provisions of the cities' ordinances and G.L. 1956, § 45-22.2 for the guidance of the continuing development of the district. The commission may do planning work, including surveys, land use studies, urban renewal plans, technical services, and other elements of comprehensive planning and planning effectuation and said planning may be concerned with existing and proposed highways, public places, bridges and tunnels, viaducts, parks, parkways, recreation areas, sites for public buildings and structures, land use areas, building and zoning districts, waterways, routes of railroads and buses, location of sewers, water supplies and conduits, and other public utilities of the area. The plans shall be submitted to the cities for adoption as part of each city's comprehensive plan. 
(2)  Adopt, modify and amend regulations and rules governing land development and subdivision projects within the district and to control land development and subdivision projects pursuant to these regulations and rules. These regulations and amendments thereto, shall be adopted after a public hearing in accordance with G.L. 1956, § 45-23. 
(3)  Carry out development plan review as granted by the cities' zoning ordinances in accordance with G.L. 1956, § 45-24-49 and unified development review as granted by the cities' zoning ordinance in accordance with G.L. 1956, § 45-24-46.4. 
(4)  Recommend to the cities, for inclusion in the annual budget, a capital program of proposed capital projects for the five fiscal years next succeeding the budget year, the proposed projects to be arranged in order to preference with recommendations as to which projects should be constructed and in which year. 
(5)  Receive and review all applications in the district for variance and/or special use permit which are not part of a unified development review or change of zoning and make recommendations prior to the hearing on the application. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2017(1) , § I) 
Sec. 2-298. - Cooperation with the commission-Municipalities and others. 
    The commission shall encourage the cooperation of the participating cities in matters which concern the integrity of the comprehensive plan or maps prepared by the commission, and, as an aid toward coordination, all municipalities and public officials shall, upon request, furnish to the commission within a reasonable time the available maps, plans, reports, statistical, or other information the commission may require for its work. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2017(1) , § I) 
Sec. 2-299. - Pawtucket/Central Falls Station District. 
(a)  There is hereby created the Pawtucket/Central Falls Station District, a transit oriented development district. The purpose of this district is to create a community that includes a mixture of residential and commercial development and other amenities integrated into a walkable neighborhood and located within a half-mile of quality public transportation. This district is intended to create better access to jobs, housing and opportunity for people of all ages and incomes; to provide people from all walks of life with convenient, affordable and active lifestyles and create places where our children can play and our parents can grow old comfortably. 
(b)  The Central-Falls portion of the district is that area bounded as follows: 
Starting at the Pawtucket/Central Falls city line on Lonsdale Avenue and heading north along Lonsdale Avenue to a point that is halfway between Rand Street and Watson Street, then turning easterly and running along property lines to the intersection of Rand Street with Pine Street, then turning northwesterly and running along Pine Street to a point that is halfway between Mowrey Street and Richardson Street, then turning northeasterly and running along property lines to the intersection with Dexter Street, then turning southeasterly and running down Dexter Street to the intersection with Cross Street, then turning northeasterly and running down Cross Street approximately 400 feet, then turning southeasterly and running along the property lines until it intersects with Clay Street, then turn southwesterly and run down Cross Street until it intersects with Dexter Street, then southeasterly down Dexter Street to the Pawtucket/Central Falls city line. 
(c)  The Pawtucket portion of the district shall be designated by the City of Pawtucket. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2017(1) , § I) 
Sec. 2-300. - Sunset. 
    Unless reauthorized by ordinance, this division shall sunset 20 years from the date of the organization meeting of the JPC. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2017(1) , § I) 
Secs. 2-301-2-312. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-313. - Acceptance of payment of delinquent taxes without recourse to assessment penalty. 
    The director of finance is hereby authorized and empowered to accept payment of delinquent taxes when, in his discretion, he believes the best interests of the city are being served without recourse to the assessment penalty. Any taxpayer, as a condition precedent to accepting the benefits of the provisions of this section, shall be deemed to have waived any and all protests, rights of protest and demands, either at law or in equity, which he may have by reason of the tax or assessment for which such abatements are herein granted to the taxpayer. 
(Code 1973, § 8-11; Code 1994, § 2-136) 
Sec. 2-314. - Settlement of claims against city. 
    The city council may make a settlement of any claim for damages against the city if such settlement seems to be advantageous to the interests of the city and if the claim appears to be a valid one. When a claim has been approved, the council shall certify the claim to the director of finance with the amount approved to be paid, and the director of finance shall forthwith pay such amount out of the contingent appropriation. 
(Code 1973, § 2-10; Code 1994, § 2-5) 
State Law reference- Actions by and against cities, G.L. 1956, §§ 45-15-1-45-15-15. 
Sec. 2-315. - Approval of compensation for wardens and ward clerks. 
    Before any bill for the compensation of any warden or ward clerk shall be audited for payment, the board of canvassers and registration shall approve the payment for each on a payroll voucher, but before such approval is made by the board of canvassers and registration, the wardens and clerks shall have returned to them their certificates as required by the public laws in relation to their duties. 
(Code 1973, § 8-3; Code 1994, § 2-128) 
Sec. 2-316. - Borrowing in anticipation of taxes. 
(a)  The director of finance shall notify the city council whenever a sum certain is required to be borrowed on the anticipated sums to be collected from taxes levied by the city during the fiscal year for the general operating budget of the city. The director of finance shall solicit bids or proposals for the sale of notes to be issued in anticipation of the collection of taxes by advertising at least one time in a newspaper having substantial circulation in the city. No bids shall be acted upon by the council until at least ten days have elapsed since such publication or at least seven days have elapsed since the last publication in the event that two or more publications of such advertisement have been ordered. All such bids shall be opened in a regular meeting of the council or in a special meeting of the council called for that purpose. 
(b)  The finance director shall keep a list of banks normally interested in submitting bids for the purchase of tax anticipation notes and shall request bids from at least two-thirds of the banks on such list. All such bids received by the director of finance shall be turned over by him to the clerk of the council to be opened in a regular meeting of the council or in a special meeting of the council called for that purpose. 
(c)  It shall be the established policy of the council to award the sale of all tax anticipation notes to the lowest responsible bidder, except where the director of finance makes known to the council reasons that shall warrant the rejection of such bid. After hearing the finance director, the council shall accept the lowest bid or the bid in accordance with the recommendation of the director of finance or a bid in accordance with the recommendation of a special committee appointed by the council for the purposes of investigating the proposed bids, or it shall reject all bids and order the obtaining of new bids. The accepting of any such bid shall be by resolution passed in accordance with the provisions of the Charter for the city. 
(Code 1973, § 8-4; Code 1994, § 2-129) 
Sec. 2-317. - Accounts of matured indebtedness to city to be filed with director of finance. 
    It shall be the duty of the officer having charge of any department of the city government in which any indebtedness to the city shall accrue, not later than one month thereafter, to make out and file with the director of finance accounts thereof, with notices that such accounts are due and payable to the director of finance. 
(Code 1973, § 8-6; Code 1994, § 2-131) 
Sec. 2-318. - Monthly report; payment of money and fees received by officers. 
    All officers now by law authorized to receive fees or money and by law required to make returns of such fees or money under oath shall, on or before the third day of each month, make a detailed return, under oath, to the director of finance of all fees and moneys received by them during the preceding month and shall pay over such money to the director of finance as required by law. 
(Code 1973, § 8-7; Code 1994, § 2-132) 
Sec. 2-319. - Annual statement of money due city from departments. 
    Each department of the city government shall render to the director of finance on July 1 in each year a detailed statement of all moneys due therefrom to the city for the preceding fiscal year that have not been previously reported to the director of finance. 
(Code 1973, § 8-8; Code 1994, § 2-133) 
Sec. 2-320. - Schedule of real estate and leases; summary of inventories. 
    The accounting division shall annually, on or before the first Monday in July, prepare a schedule of all real estate of the city and the leases thereof with the names of the lessees, the rate of rent and the time when such leases respectively terminate. In addition, they shall prepare a summary of the inventories mentioned in this article, giving the valuation of all the personal property belonging to the city which may be in the custody of any officer or agent of the city, together with the names of the persons having charge of such property, and for this purpose every officer of the city or other person in whose control or custody any such property may be is hereby required to present to the accounting division, on or before June 15 in each year, a detailed inventory of all such property, giving the items and the valuation thereof. 
(Code 1973, § 8-9; Code 1994, § 2-134) 
Sec. 2-321. - Employment of tax collection attorneys. 
    The finance director and the city solicitor are hereby authorized and directed to employ attorneys at law to aid in the collection of personal property taxes due and payable to the city. The terms and conditions of employment, including compensation, shall be determined by the finance director. The city council shall appropriate such sum of money as may be deemed necessary to pay for such services and for all other expenses to be reasonably incurred in connection therewith. Payment shall be made upon vouchers duly approved by the finance director. 
(Code 1973, § 8-10; Code 1994, § 2-135) 
Sec. 2-322. - Register of city debts. 
    The director of finance shall cause to be prepared a register of the number, date, amount, day of payment and rate of interest of every city note, bond or other obligation outstanding. Whenever any note, bond or other obligation of the city shall be issued, the director of finance shall record in such register all the particulars stated in this section, and whenever any city note, bond or other obligation shall be paid or cancelled, the director shall record in his records the fact that such payment or cancellation has been made. Such register of the city debts shall be open to public inspection. 
(Code 1973, § 8-17; Code 1994, § 2-139) 
Sec. 2-323. - Departments to submit annual report of stock on hand. 
    All city departments shall submit to the purchasing agent on or before July 31 in each year a report showing stocks of supplies, materials and equipment on hand awaiting use. 
(Code 1973, § 8-32; Code 1994, § 2-140) 
Sec. 2-324. - Disposition of surplus or obsolete stocks. 
    When a surplus of stock exists in one department, the purchasing agent may transfer it to any other department having need for it. Any sale of supplies, materials and equipment not needed for public use or that may have become unsuitable for public use shall be based on competitive bids. 
(Code 1973, § 8-33; Code 1994, § 2-141) 
Sec. 2-325. - Reports by purchasing agent. 
    The purchasing agent shall submit to the city council such reports from time to time as may be requested by them concerning his work. 
(Code 1973, § 8-34; Code 1994, § 2-142) 
Sec. 2-326. - Disaster response expenses; exceptions. 
(a)  Any private facility operating within the city that houses any convicted prisoners of this or any other state must post with the city clerk a true and certified copy of a financial bond or insurance policy issued by a recognized and sound financial institution or insurer and naming the city as beneficiary or coinsured in an amount not less than $100,000.00 times the maximum inmate capacity of the facility, to provide the city, that is self-insured with respect to its police and fire disability payments and pensions, with adequate security for its reasonably foreseeable expenses of responding to a disaster at such facility. 
(b)  The city council shall request the opinion of the attorney general of the state if any question arises as to the soundness of any financial institution or insurer and the opinion of the attorney general in such respect shall be deemed conclusive. 
(c)  The claims allowable by the city council on behalf of the city or any of its citizens against such bond or insurance policy shall include, but are not limited to, claims for personal injury, disability, loss of income, loss of life or the enjoyment of life, property damage, business interruption and all the direct and indirect costs incurred by the city in responding to any disturbance at such a facility. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to any facility within the city exclusively housing federal detainees awaiting trial. 
(Code 1994, § 2-143; Ord. of 3-15-1994, §§ 10-21-1-10-21-4) 
Sec. 2-327. - Operating budget balance sheet due. 
    The accounting division shall submit to the city council on a monthly basis a detailed line item departmental balance sheet of the city's current year operating budget. 
(Code 1994, § 2-145; Ord. of 10-23-2000) 
Sec. 2-328. - Reserve fund. 
(a)  There is hereby created a reserve fund which must maintain a minimum fund balance of ten percent of the previous fiscal year's expenditures. 
(b)  The mayor may request of the city council the appropriation of any amount available within the fund for emergency purposes and the city council may only grant approval of the appropriation request with the affirmative vote of five members of the council. 
(c)  The finance director shall make a monthly accounting to the city council on the status of the fund. 
(Code 1994, § 2-146; Ord. of 6-8-2001; Ord. of 6-13-2001; Ord. of 6-19-2017(1) , § 1) 
State Law reference- Reserve funds authorized, G.L. 1956, § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 2-329. - Reappropriation of capital program and capital budget. 
(a)  The city council must, by ordinance, reauthorize and reappropriate the use of any dollar amounts remaining in the capital program and capital budget ordinances, by a majority vote of the city council, if not properly already so authorized and encumbered before June 30, 2001. 
(b)  The mayor and the finance director may annually request the city council to reappropriate any remaining funds available within these programs until June 30, next. 
(c)  The mayor shall report quarterly to the city council on all changes and authorizations of these funds and within 30 days of all special requests made by the city council. 
(d)  The finance director shall make a monthly accounting to the city council on the status of these funds. 
(Code 1994, § 2-147; Ord. of 8-20-2001) 
Sec. 2-330. - Capital improvement fund. 
(a)  There is hereby created a capital improvement fund in accordance with section 2-304 of the Home Rule Charter of at least $250,000.00. 
(b)  This fund shall be used to make capital improvements, to acquire and maintain all types of equipment, to purchase property and for all physical improvements in the city. 
(c)  The finance director shall make a monthly accounting to the city council on the status of the fund. 
(Code 1994, § 16-1; Ord. of 5-31-1995(2), §§ 1-4; Ord. of 6-19-2017(1) , § 1) 
State Law reference- Reserve funds authorized, G.L. 1956, § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 2-331. - Schedule of fees for licenses and permits. 
    The comprehensive schedule of fees for licenses and permits required by this Code is not printed in this volume but is on file and available in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1973, § 14-1; Code 1994, § 12-8; Ord. of 4-9-1990(1); Ord. of 11-12-1991(1); Ord. of 8-26-2002; Ord. of 8-24-2009) 
Sec. 2-332. - The economic expansion incentive program. 
(a)  Job creation incentive plan. Any business operating within city limits that, upon enactment of this section-economic expansion incentive program-creates and/or adds a minimum of five new permanent full-time or full-time equivalent jobs will be eligible for tax exemptions percentages for additional tangible personal property located at the business situs within the city limits under the following schedule: 
Year 1 - 5-9 Jobs = 50% 
Year 1 - 10-49 Jobs = 60% 
Year 1 - 50+ Jobs = 70% 
  
Year 2 - 5-9 Jobs = 40% 
Year 2 - 10-49 Jobs = 50% 
Year 2 - 50+ Jobs = 60% 
  
Year 3 - 5-9 Jobs = 30% 
Year 3 - 10-49 Jobs = 40% 
Year 3 - 50+ Jobs = 50% 
  
Year 4 - 5-9 Jobs = 20% 
Year 4 - 10-49 Jobs = 30% 
Year 4 - 50+ Jobs = 40% 
  
Year 5 - 5-9 Jobs = 10% 
Year 5 - 10-49 Jobs = 20% 
Year 5 - 50+ Jobs = 30% 
  
Year 6 - 5-9 Jobs = 10% 
Year 6 - 10-49 Jobs = 20% 
Year 6 - 50+ Jobs = 30% 
  
Year 7 - 5-9 Jobs = 10% 
Year 7 - 10-49 Jobs = 20% 
Year 7 - 50+ Jobs = 30% 
  
Year 8 - 5-9 Jobs = 10% 
Year 8 - 10-49 Jobs = 20% 
Year 8 - 50+ Jobs = 30% 
  
Year 9 - 5-9 Jobs = 10% 
Year 9 - 10-49 Jobs = 20% 
Year 9 - 50+ Jobs = 30% 
  
Year 10 - 5-9 Jobs = 10% 
Year 10 - 10-49 Jobs = 20% 
Year 10 - 50+ Jobs = 30% 
(1)  Employers who fill at least 20 percent of newly created jobs with city residents will receive an additional five percent personal tangible property tax exemption for additional tangible personal property. 
(2)  Employers who provide employees with a group medical insurance plan will receive an additional five percent personal tangible property tax exemption on additional tangible personal property. 
(3)  Employers who pay annual salaries or wages to at least 20 percent of the newly created jobs rates of 250 percent of the minimum annual wage (currently $38,480.00) or more will receive an additional five percent tax exemption on additional tangible personal property. 
(b)  Real property improvement plan. Any property owner renovating or upgrading any property within the city where such renovations or upgrades, approved by the building inspector, result in an increase in the assessed value of the structure, as determined by the tax assessor, shall be eligible for tax exemption percentages on the increased amount over a 12-year period under the following schedule: 
Year 1 - 100% 
Year 2 - 75% 
Year 3 - 50% 
Year 4 - 50% 
Year 5 - 50% 
Year 6 - 50% 
Year 7 - 25% 
Year 8 - 25% 
Year 9 - 25% 
Year 10 - 25% 
Year 11 - 10% 
Year 12 - 10% 
(1)  In order to be eligible for the above-referenced real property tax exemption percentages the following criteria shall be applicable: 
a.  Qualifying property owner must invest in the new construction or substantial renovation of an existing structure on his or her property. 
b.  Qualifying vacant or abandoned properties are eligible for a separate, additional five percent exemption in addition to the above referenced exemption percentage for the duration of the exemption period. 
c.  Qualifying historic properties are eligible for a separate additional five percent exemption in addition to the above referenced exemption percentage for the duration of the exemption period. 
d.  Investments that would result in an increased assessed value of over $5,000,000.00 will receive a separate, additional five percent exemption in addition to the above referenced exemption percentage for the duration of the exemption period. 
e.  Investments that would result in an increased assessed value of over $10,000,000.00 will receive a separate, additional five percent exemption in addition to the above referenced exemption percentage for the duration of the exemption period. 
f.  Property owners must invest a minimum of $50,000.00 in cumulative building permits to qualify for the phase-in schedule. 
(c)  Development fees waiver. Any property owner who receives the approvals pursuant to subsection (d) for the tax benefits of subsection (a) or (b) may petition the planning director and the finance director for their joint approval of a waiver of some or all building, fire, zoning and planning permit and review fees, as allowed by law. 
(d)  Approval required. All of the tax incentives in this section are subject to the discretion and approval of both the finance director and the planning director. The director of planning shall promulgate and publish rules and regulations, including, but not limited to, an application procedure, within 30 days of passage of the ordinance from which this section derives. 
(Ord. of 11-28-2016(1) , § 1; Ord. of 6-12-2017(1) , § 1) 
Secs. 2-333-2-348. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONTRACTS AND PURCHASING[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal purchasing, G.L. 1956, § 44-55-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-349. - Cooperative purchasing. 
    The purchasing agent shall have the authority to join with other units of government in cooperative purchasing plans when the best interests of the city will be served thereby. 
(Code 1994, § 2-157; Ord. of 6-14-1989, § 8-37) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Alcoholic beverages, G.L. 1956, § 3-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 4-1-4-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEALERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 4-19-4-39. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RETAIL LICENSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Retail licenses, G.L. 1956, § 3-7-1 et seq. 

Sec. 4-40. - Maximum number of licenses fixed. 
(a)  The maximum number of class A, class B, class C, class D (limited), class D (full privilege) and class T (legitimate theater) alcoholic beverage licenses which may at any time be issued and outstanding within the city is hereby fixed as follows: 
Class of License Maximum Number A 4 B (victualler) 25 B (limited) 8 C 0 D (limited) 0 D (full privilege) 2 T (legitimate theater) 0 B-M (brewpub manufacturer) 1 *  
(b)  The specific project identified as 1420 Broad Street, "The Landing," has a site and project specific B-M license and class B (victualler) license, subject to suspension or revocation by the city council, sitting as the city board of license commissioners, for violations of Title 3 of the Rhode Island General Law and/or relevant city ordinances. 
(c)  Effective upon passage of this ordinance, the total number of class B (victualler) liquor licenses shall be diminished by that number that have failed to renew or have been revoked until the 25 current and active class B (victualler) licenses reach a quantity of 22 B (victualler) licenses. 
(d)  All holders of class D (full privilege) licenses may apply for class B (victualler) licenses, and the city council, sitting as the board of license commissioners, may grant such applicant a class B (victualler) license and thereby increase the number of such licenses; provided, however, that the number of class B (victualler) licenses shall never exceed 27 in number, the number of outstanding class D (full privilege) licenses shall be reduced by the number of such class B licenses so issued, that such class B (victualler) license shall remain in effect only as long as the original class D license holder remains the same entity as originally established, and that the newly issued class B (victualler) license shall be nontransferable. 
(e)  Upon an aforementioned license becoming available, the city, in its discretion, may advertise and accept applications for the new license in the following manner: 
(1)  The clerk shall advertise the application for the available license(s) on the city's website and on relevant city bulletin boards for a minimum of 14 days. The application shall be developed by the clerk and shall include, but not be limited to, a BCI check, a 200 foot radius map, mailing labels for all of those within the 200 foot radius, a certified check and/or money order for the costs of mailing to those within the 200 foot radius, and a business plan for the proposed establishment including answers to the following questions: 
a.  Will the business promote the general economic development of the city; and 
b.  Is the proposed location one that is targeted for commercial development; and 
c.  Will the business promote revitalization of the area where it will be located; and 
d.  Will the issuance result in substantial employment opportunities; and 
e.  Is the business proposed one that presents a unique concept not currently existing in the city. 
f.  What is the law enforcement track record of the applicant(s) or the establishment and the applicant's plan relating to security and the prevention of underage drinking and/or drinking in excess. 
(2)  The city council, sitting as the city board of license commissioners, shall conduct a public hearing on each application and, thereafter, shall consider a list of eligible applications for the lottery. The city council has general discretionary authority to deny a license application's eligibility for the lottery based on the following criteria: 
a.  Objection is made by owners of the greater part of the area within 200 feet of the premises where a Class B, C or I license is to be operated. (Rhode Island General Laws § 3-7-19) If the owner or owners of the majority of this area object, then the Council is without authority to issue the license. The area within 200 feet of the premises means the area within a line 200 feet distant from every side of the proposed premises. 
b.  Premises is located within 200 feet of a school or place of public worship. (Rhode Island General Laws § 3-7-19) The 200 foot measurement shall be made from that point of the proposed licensed place closest to the nearest improved point of the school or place of worship. 
c.  Compliance with all city ordinances. 
d.  The history of operations at the premises for which a license is requested. 
e.  Qualification of the applicant to hold and operate the license. 
f.  Failure of applicant to comply with the requirements of state law, including, but not limited to: 
1.  Applicant must be a resident of Rhode Island, except that licenses may be issued to corporations incorporated in other states of the United States if they are authorized to transact business in Rhode Island. (R.I.G.L. § 3-5-10) 
2.  Corporate applicants with 25 stockholders or less must provide a list of the names and addresses of all stockholders, officers and members of the board of directors to the city council, and each person listed must be a suitable person to hold a license within the discretion of the city council. (R.I.G.L. § 3-5-10) 
3.  Failure of a corporation to report the acquisition of a ten percent interest and any change of officer or directors within 30 days. (R.I.G.L. § 3-5-10) 
4.  Applicant has a criminal record or repeated violations of the alcoholic beverage laws. (R.I.G.L. § 3-5-10) 
(3)  Each application that has been deemed eligible for the lottery shall be given one ball to put into the lottery. Each applicant may receive an additional one or two chances to be put into the lottery for his or her application if they meet the following criteria, as determined by the city council: 
a.  Is the applicant currently a resident of the City of Central Falls? 
b.  Is the applicant currently a business owner in good standing with the City of Central Falls? 
(f)  No application or petition for granting, renewing or transferring a license may be approved by the city council sitting as the city board of license commissioners if the existing license holder, applicant or petitioner is delinquent in the payment of taxes to the city for the real property where the business is situated or for personal property and/or tangible property utilized in the operation of the business. 
(Code 1973, § 3-4; Code 1994, § 4-4; Ord. of 5-11-1992; Ord. of 8-16-1993(3), § 1; Ord. of 12-11-1995; Ord. of 3-18-1998(1); Ord. of 6-8-1998; Ord. of 4-14-2003; Ord. of 6-1-2005(2); Ord. of 8-13-2014; Ord. of 12-14-2015 , §§ 1, 2) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to license the sale of alcoholic beverages, G.L. 1956, § 3-5-15; retail licenses, G.L. 1956, § 3-7-1 et seq.; maximum number of licenses, G.L. 1956, § 3-5-16. 
Sec. 4-41. - Licenses void. 
(a)  All licenses issued under this chapter must be paid for and claimed from the city clerk within 30 days following the approval of the license by the city council sitting as the city board of license commissioners. All licenses not claimed within such 30 days shall be automatically null and void; provided, that if a reasonable cause for failure to claim such license shall be filed with the city clerk within 30 days of the approval of such license, the city council, sitting as the city board of license commissioners, may, if it finds the cause adequate, grant a further extension within which such license may be claimed. 
(b)  Whenever it is determined by the city council sitting as the city board of license commissioners that the holder of any liquor license issued on an annual basis has abandoned the premises from which the licensee has been conducting business or shall have ceased to operate under the license for a period of not less than 90 days, the city council sitting as the city board of license commissioners shall hold a hearing after giving written notice to the licensee and may declare the license void, vacated and/or revoked, provided that the city council sitting as the city board of license commissioners may grant a reasonable time, not to exceed nine months, to the licensee within which to reestablish his or her interest in the business where the abandonment or cessation of operations shall have been due to illness, death, fire or other casualty, condemnation of business or other good cause. 
(Code 1973, § 3-5; Code 1994, § 4-5; Ord. of 8-13-2014) 
Sec. 4-42. - Transfer of license. 
(a)  All licenses issued under this chapter granted and issued by the city after the effective date of this ordinance shall not be transferred to a new license premises or to another person, without application to and approval of the city council sitting as the city board of license commissioners which shall use the factors enumerated in section 4-40(e)(2) in consideration of the application. 
(b)  No liquor license holder shall make or allow to be made substantial changes to the operation of his/her establishment from that which is represented at the issuance of the license, without first obtaining the approval of the city council sitting as the city board of license commissioners which shall use the factors enumerated in section 4-40(e)(2) in consideration of the application. 
(c)  A transfer of a license shall not be issued by the city clerk unless all requirements in this chapter have been met, the currently required fee is paid, and the applicant is not delinquent on any taxes to the city for the real property where the business is situated or for personal property and/or tangible property utilized in the operation of the business. 
(Code 1973, § 3-6; Code 1994, § 4-6; Ord. of 8-13-2014) 
State Law reference- Transfer or relocation of licenses, G.L. 1956, § 3-5-19. 
Sec. 4-43. - City liquor establishments. 
(a)  Management and personnel. All personnel managing, working in or in charge of any establishment holding or seeking a license to permit the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages must meet the same requirements in the city as the licensee must meet to be a licensee under state or city law. Violators of this section will be referred to the proper state agency for prosecution under the state statutes for violation of local rules, regulations or laws. 
(b)  Regulation of trade names. All licensees, with their application submitted to the state liquor license commission, will also submit for approval the name which the establishment will be called. Any name, except the legal name of the licensee if an individual, can be rejected by the commission if within its discretion it may find the name by its tone or double meaning to be disruptive to the community. 
(Code 1973, §§ 3-7, 3-8; Code 1994, § 4-8; Ord. of 8-13-2014) 
Sec. 4-44. - License fees. 
(a)  The applicant shall be responsible to pay all advertising and related costs for transfer or new alcoholic beverage licenses. 
(b)  The annual license fee for a class B license shall be $2,000.00 notwithstanding if said fee is paid on or before December 1, then the license fee for a class B license shall be $1,500.00. 
(c)  The annual license fee for a class A license shall be $1,000.00 notwithstanding if said fee is paid on or before December 1, then the license fee for a class A license shall be $800.00. 
(d)  The annual license fee for a class B Ltd license shall be $1,500.00 notwithstanding if said fee is paid on or before December 1, then the license fee for a class B Ltd license shall be $1,300.00. 
(e)  The annual license fee for a class D license shall be $800.00 notwithstanding if said fee is paid on or before December 1, then the license fee for a class D license shall be $600.00. 
(f)  The fee for a class F license shall be $15.00 for each application and the fee for a class F1 license shall be $35.00 for each application. 
(Code 1994, § 4-9; Ord. of 12-14-2003; Ord. of 6-26-2006; Ord. of 8-13-2014) 
Sec. 4-45. - Class F and F1 licenses. 
(a)  The city council sitting as the city board of license commissioners may grant a class F, for sale of beer and wine only, or class F1 license, for sale of beer, wine and liquor, to an applicant provided that the following conditions have been met: 
(1)  Only the beer, wine and liquor as described in the license application may be sold on premise; and 
(2)  The license is only valid for a maximum of 19 hours; and 
(3)  The license is only valid between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 1:00 a.m.; and 
(4)  The only eligible applicants for this license are religious organizations, non-profit organizations and political organizations; and 
(5)  The license is to be considered a "special event" license, which is not subject to issuance on a regular basis to the same party and/or premises. "Special Event" is defined as any occasion and/or event which shall occur at irregular intervals of time not subject to any permanent scheduling. No licensee may receive more than five such licenses in any one calendar year. Upon a showing of good cause, the City Council sitting as the city board of license commissioners may grant up to an additional seven licenses to a proposed licensee whose event exceeds said five licenses; and 
(6)  The applicant must present evidence that all bartenders employed by the licensee shall be certified by a Nationally Recognized Alcohol Beverage Server Training Program. 
(7)  The applicant shall purchase all alcoholic beverages at retail from a licensed class A alcohol retail establishment located in the State of Rhode Island. 
(8)  The city council sitting as the city board of license commissioners has weighed and considered the following facts and evidence: 
a.  Whether proper health and safety precautions have been put into place; 
b.  Adequate police control or protection; 
c.  Satisfactory sanitary and health facilities on the premises. 
d.  Control procedures that will be in place to prevent under-aged drinking and excessive drinking by any individual or individuals frequenting the "special event." 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall be enforced in accordance with Title 3 of the General Laws. Any person or entity violating this section shall be fined $500.00 for such violation and shall be subject to license suspension and/or revocation. 
(Ord. of 8-13-2014) 
Secs. 4-46-4-61. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ENTERTAINMENT IN PREMISES LICENSED FOR ON-PREMISES CONSUMPTION 

Sec. 4-62. - Liquor license suspension, revocation or other sanction. 
(a)  The city council sitting as the city board of license commissioners may summon any licensee on charges and/or for a hearing on charges of violating any city, state or federal regulation or law. After notice and the opportunity to be heard, the city council sitting as the city board of license commissioners may sanction the licensee including fines, suspension of license, revocation of license, and/or any other sanction reasonably related to the findings of fact. 
(b)  If the owner, operator, licensee, lessor, lessee, manager, employee, or any other person participating in the operation of the establishment located within the city at which alcoholic beverages are offered for sale for consumption on the premises, shall violate or be in violation of any of the provisions of section 4-63, the city council shall revoke the liquor license for said establishment after giving reasonable notice thereof to the holder of said license and affording the holder an opportunity to be heard as to why the license should not be revoked. 
(Code 1994, § 6-187; Ord. of 11-6-2000; Ord. of 8-13-2014) 
Sec. 4-63. - Prohibition. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining, owning or operating an establishment located within the boundaries of the city at which alcoholic beverages are offered for sale for consumption on the premises: 
(1)  To suffer or permit any female person, while on the premises of said establishment, to expose to the public view that area of the human female breast at or below the top of the areola thereof. 
(2)  To suffer or permit any female person, while on the premises of said establishment, to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance of or simulate such portions of the human female breast as described in subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(3)  To suffer or permit any person, while on the premises of said establishment, to expose to public view his genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus, or anal cleft. 
(4)  To suffer or permit any person, while on the premises of said commercial establishment, to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance of or simulate the genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus, or anal cleft. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any female person, while on the premises of an establishment located within the city, at which alcoholic beverages are served or offered for sale for consumption on the premises to expose to public view that area of the human female breast at or below the top of the areola thereof, or to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance or simulate such areas of the female breast as described herein. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person, while on the premises of an establishment located within the city, at which alcoholic beverages are offered for sale for consumption on the premises, to expose to public view his genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or anal cleft. 
(Code 1994, § 6-185; Ord. of 11-6-2000; Ord. of 8-13-2014) 
State Law reference- Indecent exposure, G.L. 1956, § 11-45-1(a)(8). 
Chapter 6 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- General authority to regulate amusements, G.L. 1956, §§ 5-22-1, 5-22-5. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1-6-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GAMES OF CHANCE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Games of chances, G.L. 1956, § 11-19-30 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-19. - Definitions. 
    The definitions in G.L. 1956, § 11-19-30 apply to this article. 
Secs. 6-20-6-41. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 6-42. - Issuance. 
    All permitted game of chance licenses shall be issued by the city clerk upon granting of such license by the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 14-78; Code 1994, § 6-64) 
Sec. 6-43. - Fee. 
    There shall be no fee for a license carrying on or conducting a permitted game of chance. 
(Code 1973, § 14-77; Code 1994, § 6-65; Ord. of 6-4-2001) 
Secs. 6-44-6-74. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ENTERTAINMENT[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Shows and exhibitions, G.L. 1956, § 5-22-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-75. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Entertainment means any live production of music or sound by an individual, band, musician, any theatrical performance, show or exhibition or performance, including, but not limited to, karaoke, public roller skating in rinks or halls, dances and balls, wrestling, boxing or sparring matches, exhibition, activities of a palmist, phrenologist or fortuneteller or any other entertainment and amusements for a term not exceeding one year. Any music or sound provided by any mechanical, electronic or other means, such as a tape recorder, records or other audio or visual means. 
    Individual business or establishment means any person, corporation, limited liability company, club, partnership, association, society or any other organized group of persons, including officers, directors and trustees of a corporation, club, association or society. 
    Premises means any room, place or space in the city in which entertainment, as defined herein, is produced or provided to which the public may gain admission, either with or without the payment of a fee, including, but not limited to, any building, theater, hall or rink. 
(Code 1994, § 6-37; Ord. of 5-30-2001; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 4) 
Sec. 6-76. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of the city council in this article to adopt a specific distinguishable license for the operation of entertainment, as defined herein, as allowed by the laws of the state. It is the further purpose of this article to address the secondary effects of entertainment establishments and businesses that are referenced and defined herein. Secondary effects have been shown to include increased crime, which has adverse impacts on the quality of life in the community. All mentioned secondary effect impacts are adverse to the public health, safety, and general welfare of the city and its residents. 
(Code 1994, § 6-36; Ord. of 5-30-2001; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 4) 
Sec. 6-77. - Hours and posting of license. 
(a)  All individual or business establishments providing entertainment as defined herein, shall discontinue entertainment and be closed on or before 1:00 a.m. If said individual or business establishment does not have a liquor license, then the closing time will be set by the city council at the time the application is acted upon but shall not be later than 1:00 a.m. 
(b)  Each license issued hereunder shall be displayed in a conspicuous place at such location. 
(Code 1994, § 6-45; Ord. of 5-30-2001; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 4) 
Secs. 6-78-6-97. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 6-98. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any individual or business establishment to conduct, maintain, operate or engage in the business of conducting entertainment as described herein without first obtaining a license in the manner prescribed herein. 
(Code 1994, § 6-38; Ord. of 5-30-2001; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 4) 
Sec. 6-99. - Application and fees. 
(a)  Application form . The license shall be granted by the city council. Application for said license shall be made on a form containing such information as determined by the city clerk to be pertinent. 
(b)  Exclusions . Public and private schools, churches and/or religious functions in the form of entertainment as described herein and held on a school or church property are excluded from the application and license process. 
(c)  Fee . The fee for each license, or the renewal, if applicable, granted to the individual or business establishment shall not exceed $100.00 per occurrence. 
(d)  Exceptions . The fee for such license as described herein may be waived, when the entertainment provided is sponsored by a religious, charity or nonprofit group. 
(Code 1994, § 6-40; Ord. of 5-30-2001; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 4) 
Sec. 6-100. - Issuance. 
(a)  All petitions for licenses shall be heard and determined by the city council. A license shall be issued to an individual or business establishment, for either an individual event or for a period of up to one year, only after the city council is satisfied that the applicant is a fit and proper person or business enterprise and shall have complied with all requirements set forth herein and set forth in the Rhode Island General Laws that apply including, but not limited to, an inspection to be made of the premises to be licensed and is satisfied that such premises complies with all laws, rules and regulations of the building official and fire division. As evidence of this, written certification is issued to the applicant by the building official and fire division. Said certification must be issued prior to final action of applicant's application. A license shall be effective for a term commencing on December 1 of a given year through November 30 of the following year or for the time approved by the city council. 
(b)  No license authorized by this division shall be issued or renewed unless the building official of the city and the fire division of the city shall inspect the premises and certify that the premises comply with all state and local requirements. 
(Code 1994, § 6-39; Ord. of 5-30-2001; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 4) 
Sec. 6-101. - Capacity. 
    If only certain rooms within the premises are to be utilized for entertainment, said applicant shall be required to indicate on the application the location of each and every room or space which is to be used for such purpose and the determination as to the maximum capacity of patrons shall be determined by the city fire division. 
(Code 1994, § 6-41; Ord. of 5-30-2001; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 4) 
Sec. 6-102. - Compliance with zoning ordinance. 
    In order to be granted a license, the applicant must obtain a certificate of zoning compliance from the code enforcement officer which states that the type of entertainment proposed is permitted in the zoning district where the premises is located. 
(Code 1994, § 6-42; Ord. of 5-30-2001; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 4) 
Sec. 6-103. - Transferability. 
    No license issued under the provisions of this division shall be transferred or assigned to any individual or business establishment or used by any individual or business establishment other than the licensee to whom it was issued, nor shall such license be used on any premises other than the premises stated in such license. 
(Code 1994, § 6-43; Ord. of 5-30-2001; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 4) 
Sec. 6-104. - Changes in corporate licenses. 
    If, during the term of the licensing period, one or more directors, stockholders, or officers of a corporate or members of a limited liability company license are substituted or added, each substituted or added director, stockholder, or officer shall, within five days of such change, file with the city clerk, an application for an approval of the change on such forms as are prescribed by the city clerk. 
(Code 1994, § 6-44; Ord. of 5-30-2001; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 4) 
Sec. 6-105. - Suspension or revocation. 
    After reasonable notice and a hearing, the city council shall have the right and authority to impose a fine, suspend or revoke any license granted under this division. Cause shall include but not be limited to, instances when an establishment is shown to have become disorderly or to have otherwise adversely affected the quiet enjoyment or quality of life of residents or when state or local law has been violated. 
(Code 1994, § 6-46; Ord. of 5-30-2001; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 4) 
Secs. 6-106-6-123. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MECHANICAL AND ELECTRONIC AMUSEMENT DEVICES AND AMUSEMENT CENTERS, BILLIARD OR POOL ROOMS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Bowling alleys, billiard tables and shooting galleries, G.L. 1956, § 5-2-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-124. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Amusement game means any mechanical, electric, video and electronic machine or device used or designed to be operated for entertainment or as a game by the insertion of money, tokens or other articles or by paying money to have it activated; such term shall include but not be limited to marble machines, pinball machines, skill ball, mechanical grab machines, video or computer type games, electronically operated or displayed games, air games and all operations similar thereto; such term shall not include any rides, bowling alleys, pool tables or any device maintained within a residence for the use of occupants thereof and their guests. 
    Game room means any structure or portion of a structure or place containing four or more amusement games. 
    Pool/billiard table means any oblong cloth-covered table with raised cushioned edges with or without side pockets on which the game commonly known as billiard or pool is played. 
    Pool or billiards room means any building or room where four or more tables are kept for the use and entertainment of the public. 
(Code 1994, § 6-86; Ord. of 9-13-1982, § 2; Ord. of 6-4-2001; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 4) 
Sec. 6-125. - Operation of game rooms, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards rooms. 
    Standards for the operation of game rooms, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards rooms shall be as follows: 
(1)  The owner and operator of any game room, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards room shall comply with all provisions of law, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to the conduct of business and the use and maintenance of the premises. 
(2)  The owner and operator of any game room, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards room shall cause the game room, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards room license to be posted at all times in a conspicuous place on the premises. 
(3)  The owner and operator of any game room, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards room shall not permit such premises to be overcrowded. 
(4)  The owner and operator of any game room, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards room and the members, officers, directors and holders of ten percent or more of the stock of any corporation, partnership or association owning or operating a game room, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards room shall not have been convicted of any crime that has a reasonable relationship to fitness to own or operate any game room, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards room. 
(5)  The owner and operator of any game room, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards room shall maintain good order on the premises at all times. The lack of good order on the premises of a game room, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards room shall include but shall not be limited to the following: 
a.  Fighting and rowdy behavior; 
b.  Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages, except within premises licensed for on-premises consumption of those beverages; 
c.  Gambling; 
d.  Permitting the use of marijuana or any controlled substance, the possession of which is prohibited by law. 
(6)  The owner or operator of any game room, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards room shall not permit an amusement game, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards room therein to be played or operated after 10:00 p.m. by a person under the age of 16 years unless accompanied by and under the supervision of a parent or other guardian over the age of 18. 
(7)  The owner or operator of a game room, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards room shall not allow it to be open or used unless it is under the control of and supervision by a person at least 18 years of age who shall ensure that it is operated in compliance with law. 
(8)  The owner and operator of a game room, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards room shall not allow it to be open or the amusement games, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards room therein played on any day between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. during the months of July and August; except that, when school is in session, such prohibited hours will become 10:00 p.m. to 2:30 p.m. 
(9)  The owner and operator of a game room, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards room shall not allow more amusement games, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards room than the number permitted in the license to be located therein at any time. 
(Code 1994, § 6-88; Ord. of 9-13-1982, § 5(f); Ord. of 6-4-2001; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 4) 
Sec. 6-126. - Operation of amusement games, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards room. 
    Standards for the operation of amusement games, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards room shall be as follows: 
(1)  The owner of any amusement game, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards room within the city shall comply with all provisions of law, ordinance, rule or regulation applicable thereto and relating to the conduct of the business in connection with which the game, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards room is used and the use and maintenance of the premises where it is located. 
(2)  The owner of the game, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards room shall maintain good order on the premises at all times. The lack of good order on the premises shall include but not be limited to the following: 
a.  Fighting and rowdy behavior; 
b.  Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages, except upon premises licensed for on-premises consumption thereof; 
c.  Gambling; 
d.  Permitting the use of marijuana or any controlled substance, the possession of which is prohibited by the law. 
(3)  The owner of an amusement game, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards room shall not permit it to be played or operated after 10:00 p.m. by a person under the age of 16 years unless accompanied by and under the supervision of a parent or other guardian over the age of 18. 
(4)  The owner of an amusement game, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards room shall not allow it to be available for use or used unless it is under the control of and supervision by a person at least 18 years of age, who shall ensure that it is operated in compliance with law. 
(5)  No cash awards shall be offered or given in any contest, tournament, league or individual play on any amusement game, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards room, and no such game, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards room shall be permitted to operate if such game, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards room delivers or may readily be converted to deliver to the player any piece of money, coin, slug or token. 
(6)  No credit, allowance, check, slug, token or anything of value shall be offered or given to any player of any amusement game, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards room as a result of plays made thereon. 
(Code 1994, § 6-89; Ord. of 9-13-1982, § 5(g); Ord. of 6-4-2001; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 4) 
Sec. 6-127. - Inspections. 
    The premises of all game rooms, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards room in the city shall be subject to inspection by any peace officer acting pursuant to his special duties, or any police officer. Any other premises in the city containing amusement games, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards room shall be subject to inspection by any peace officer acting pursuant to his special duties, or any police officer. 
(Code 1994, § 6-90; Ord. of 9-13-1982, § 5(h), (i); Ord. of 6-4-2001; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 4) 
Sec. 6-128. - Gambling devices prohibited. 
    No machine or device, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards room which would constitute a gambling device as defined by G.L. 1956, § 11-19-18, or any other section of the general laws, shall be licensed by the city. 
(Code 1994, § 6-106; Ord. of 9-13-1982, § 5(e); Ord. of 6-4-2001; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 4) 
Secs. 6-129-6-154. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 6-155. - Required. 
    Every person maintaining or operating a game room or amusement device, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards room shall first obtain an annual license from the city. 
(Code 1994, § 6-101; Ord. of 9-13-1982, § 3; Ord. of 6-4-2001; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 4) 
Sec. 6-156. - Application requirements. 
(a)  Types of establishments that may apply for mechanical and electronic amusement device, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards room licenses include any businesses whose primary business is entertainment or recreation during their regular business hours. 
(b)  An application form for amusement game or game room, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards room licenses shall require the following information: 
(1)  Name, age and address of applicant; and names and addresses of officers if a corporation or association; 
(2)  The place where each machine or device, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards room is to be displayed or operated and the business conducted at such place; and 
(3)  A description of the machine or machines, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards room to be covered by the license, the mechanical features and the serial numbers thereof. 
(Code 1994, § 6-103; Ord. of 9-13-1982, § 5(a), (b); Ord. of 6-4-2001; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 4) 
Sec. 6-157. - Qualifications of licensee. 
    No license under this division shall be issued to any individual unless he is over the age of 18 years and not an illegal alien. 
(Code 1994, § 6-102; Ord. of 9-13-1982, § 5(c); Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 4) 
Sec. 6-158. - Term; fee. 
    Licenses granted under this division shall continue for a term not exceeding one year upon payment of the currently required amount for the license for a game room or amusement game, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards room and any renewal thereof. 
(Code 1994, § 6-104; Ord. of 9-13-1982, § 4; Ord. of 6-4-2001; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 4) 
Sec. 6-159. - Display. 
    Every machine, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards room on display or operated under the terms of this division shall require a license, and such license shall be displayed on each machine, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards room so licensed or in a conspicuous place at such location. 
(Code 1994, § 6-105; Ord. of 9-13-1982, § 5(d); Ord. of 6-4-2001; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 4) 
Sec. 6-160. - Payment of property tax prerequisite to issuance. 
    No license under this division shall be issued or renewed until such times as the personal property tax assessed against the game room or amusement game, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards room owned or kept according to the provisions of this division have been paid. 
(Code 1994, § 6-107; Ord. of 9-13-1982, § 8; Ord. of 6-4-2001; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 4) 
Sec. 6-161. - Issuance; effective and expiration dates. 
    All applications for licenses under this division shall be made to the city clerk and shall become effective on December 1, and shall expire on November 30 of each year. All such licenses shall be issued by the city clerk after the application for such license shall have been approved by the city council and upon payment of the required fees and provided that all state and city requirements have been made. 
(Code 1994, § 6-108; Ord. of 9-13-1982, § 6; Ord. of 6-4-2001; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 4) 
Sec. 6-162. - Suspension or revocation. 
    If the licensee shall permit the place where any game room or amusement game, pool tables, billiards tables, pool rooms and billiards room is located to become disorderly so as to annoy and disturb reasonable persons of ordinary sensibilities inhabiting, working or residing in the neighborhood thereof, or shall permit any of the laws of the state or the city to be violated therein, in addition to any punishment or penalty which may be prescribed by statute for such offense, the licensee may be summoned before the city council, where the licensee and the witnesses for and against the licensee may be heard, and if it shall be made to appear to the satisfaction of the city council hearing such charges that the licensee has permitted to be done any of the things hereinbefore in this division mentioned, the city council may suspend or revoke such license or enter other orders thereon. 
(Code 1994, § 6-109; Ord. of 9-13-1982, § 5(j); Ord. of 6-4-2001; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 4) 
Secs. 6-163-6-192. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MOTION PICTURE THEATERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 6-193-6-222. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 6-223. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a theater for the purpose of exhibiting moving pictures without a license from the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 14-79; Code 1994, § 6-176; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 4) 
Sec. 6-224. - Application; issuance. 
    Application may be made and the city council may grant a license under this division at the first regular meeting of the council in December of each year or as soon thereafter as may be deemed practical. 
(Code 1973, § 14-80; Code 1994, § 6-177; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 4) 
Sec. 6-225. - Fee. 
    The fee for the license required by this division shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council and may be paid in quarterly installments. 
(Code 1973, § 14-81; Code 1994, § 6-178; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 4) 
Sec. 6-226. - Term. 
    Licenses under this d ivision shall be issued for a period of one year from January 1 to December 31. 
(Code 1973, § 14-82; Code 1994, § 6-179; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 4) 
Chapter 8 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Animals generally, G.L. 1956, § 4-1-1 et seq.; municipal regulation of dogs, G.L. 1956, § 4-13-1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal control officer means the person employed by the city as its enforcement officer, and shall include any police officer of the city. 
    At large means any dog that is off the property of its owner and not under restraint as hereinafter defined. 
    Collared means a dog that wears around its neck a collar with license attached and the name of the owner or keeper distinctly impressed thereon. 
    Dog pound means any premises designated by action of the town for the purpose of impounding and caring for all animals found running at large in violation of this chapter. 
    Exposed to rabies means a dog that has been bitten by or been exposed to any animal known to have been infected with rabies. 
    Kennel means any person engaged in the commercial business of breeding, buying, selling or boarding dogs. 
    Leashed means a dog that has a cord or chain attached to its collar or harness and such cord or chain of not more than six feet is held in the hand by the owner or competent person leading the dog. 
    Owner means any person owning, keeping or harboring a dog. 
    Restraint means a dog that is leashed or that is on or within a vehicle being driven or parked on the streets or that is within the property limits of its owner or keeper. 
(Code 1973, § 4-8; Code 1994, § 8-31; Ord. No. 96-006-O, 3-13-1996; Ord. of 12-14-1998; Ord. of 4-11-2005(2); Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
Sec. 8-2. - Penalties. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person convicted of violating any provision of this chapter pertaining to animals may be punished by the payment of a fine as follows: 
(1)  First offense, a fine not exceeding $10.00. 
(2)  Second offense within a year, a fine not exceeding $15.00. 
(3)  Third and each subsequent offenses within a year, a fine not exceeding $25.00. 
Such fines shall be recovered for the use of the city; and if such violation is continued, each day's violation may constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The animal control officer may issue citations to the owners of the animals for the violation of this chapter, which may be paid by mail. The fines may be paid by mail at the city police station within seven days from notification of such violation. Thereafter, failure to dispose of such citation shall cause the owner's appearance before the municipal court or state district court for trial. 
(Code 1973, § 4-13; Code 1994, § 8-36; Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 4-13-1. 
Sec. 8-3. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Hospitals, clinics and other premises operated by licensed veterinarians for the care and treatment of animals are exempt from the provisions of this chapter, except where expressly stated. 
(b)  The licensing and vaccination requirements of this chapter shall not apply to any dog belonging to a nonresident of the city and kept within the city for no longer than 30 days, provided that all such dogs shall at times while in the city be kept within a building enclosure or vehicle or be under restraint by the owner or other competent person. 
(Code 1994, § 8-41; Ord. of 12-14-1998; Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
Sec. 8-4. - Complaint procedure. 
    All complaints made under the provisions of this chapter shall be made to the animal control officer and may be made orally, provided that such complaint is reduced to writing on forms provided by the animal control officer and signed by the complainant showing his address and telephone number, if any, within 48 hours. 
(Code 1994, § 8-10.1; Ord. of 12-14-1998; Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
Sec. 8-5. - Nuisance abatement. 
(a)  The following acts shall be declared to be public nuisances: 
(1)  To keep or harbor any dog or other animal, whether licensed or not, which by unreasonable and habitual howling, yelping, barking or other noise disturbs or annoys two or more persons having separate residences or tenements, as reported to and determined by the animal control officer or any police officer of this city. 
(2)  To allow or permit any animal to trespass on private or public property so as to damage or destroy any property or thing of value. 
(b)  Any such animal may be impounded by the animal control officer whenever it shall be alleged in writing by two or more persons having separate residences or tenements or regularly employed in the neighborhood that any animal is a nuisance by reason of barking, howling, yelping or other noise, trespassing, causing damage to property or is vicious or in any manner causing undue annoyance. The animal control officer, if he finds such nuisance to exist, shall serve notice upon the owner or custodian that such nuisance must be abated. 
(c)  If the nuisance is not abated, the animal control officer may impound the animal and notify the owner to appear before the district court for a hearing to determine if there has been a violation of this section. Each day that such nuisance shall exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1973, § 4-7; Code 1994, § 8-10; Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
Sec. 8-6. - Cattle running at large. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any horse, sheep, hog, goat or cattle to allow the same to go at large, loose or unfastened in any public street or highway within the limits of the city or on any land therein thrown open as a way for public travel and used by the public for travel, although such way is not legally a public street or highway, or to go at large elsewhere in the city. 
(Code 1973, § 4-1; Code 1994, § 8-3; Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
State Law reference- Animals at large, G.L. 1956, §§ 4-15-1 et seq.; estrays, G.L. 1956, §§ 4-16-1 et seq. 
Sec. 8-7. - Keeping of animals. 
(a)  Raising or breeding of animals prohibited. The raising or breeding of any animals is prohibited in the city by the City Zoning Ordinance, Appendix A to this Code. Any person who violates this section shall be subject to fines as enumerated in this Code. 
(b)  Keeping of certain animals restricted. No owner or keeper or occupant of any dwelling shall keep or permit to be kept any sheep, hogs, goats, cattle, horses, geese, ducks, chickens, rabbits or other fowl in any dwelling house, cellar or garage, or shall have any such animals kept within the city except under such special conditions as may be prescribed by the animal control officer. 
(Code 1973, § 4-2; Code 1994, § 8-4; Ord. of 10-20-2008; Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
Sec. 8-8. - Keeping swine. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any swine within the limits of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 4-3; Code 1994, § 8-5; Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
Sec. 8-9. - Fowl not to be kept in dwelling house. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any dwelling house to keep or permit to be kept any live fowl, geese or ducks in such dwelling house or in the cellar of any such house; provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to parakeets, canaries and similar fowl kept as pets. 
(Code 1973, § 4-4; Code 1994, § 8-6; Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
Sec. 8-10. - Wild animals. 
    No wild animal may be kept within the city limits, except under such conditions as shall be fixed by the animal control officer; provided, however, that wild animals may be kept for exhibition purposes by circuses, zoos and educational institutions, in accordance with such regulations as shall be established by the animal control officer. Any wild animal which escapes and is found at large may be destroyed by the animal control officer or any police officer of this city. 
(Code 1973, § 4-11(f); Code 1994, § 8-7; Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
Sec. 8-11. - Dead animals-Disposition. 
    Every person residing or being in the city who shall have any dog, cat or other animal die in the city shall remove or cause to be removed or bury or cause to be buried the carcass within 24 hours after the death of such animal, so that every part of such animal shall be at least three feet below the natural surface of the ground where such animal shall be buried. 
(Code 1973, § 4-5; Code 1994, § 8-8; Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
Sec. 8-12. - Same-Bringing into city. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to bring or cause to be brought into the city the dead body of any animal and leave or cause such dead animal to be left within the city, unless such dead animal and every part and portion thereof shall be buried at least three feet below the natural surface of the ground and in conformity with the requirements of the director of public health. 
(Code 1973, § 4-6; Code 1994, § 8-9; Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
Sec. 8-13. - Domestic animal waste and its removal. 
(a)  "Domestic animal" defined. For the purpose of this section, the term "domestic animal" means dog, cat or ferret. 
(b)  Duties to dispose. It shall be the duty of each person who owns, possesses or controls a domestic animal to remove and dispose of any feces left by his domestic animal on any sidewalk, street, park or other public area, or any other property owned by the city. 
(c)  Method of removal and disposal. For the purpose of this regulation, the means of removal shall be any tool, implement or other device carried for the purpose of picking up and containing such feces, unexposed to said person or the public. Disposal shall be accomplished by transporting such feces to a place suitable and regularly reserved for the disposal of human feces. 
(d)  Fines for violation. Violation of this regulation shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $10.00 for the first offense, $15.00 for the second offense within a year, and $25.00 for the third and any subsequent offense within a year. 
(Code 1994, § 8-11; Ord. of 6-27-1997; Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
Sec. 8-14. - Reasonable accommodation for disabilities. 
    For any restrictions in this chapter, the city shall make reasonable accommodation, upon request, based on a disability in conformity with relevant city, state and federal law. 
(Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
Secs. 8-15-8-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 8-45. - Animal control officer. 
(a)  Defined. For the purpose of this section, the term "animal control officer" shall be defined as any individual who provides service authorized by subsection (b) of this section to carry out the duties of animal control. 
(b)  Appointment; term; filling of vacancies; refusal. 
(1)  After due application process, the mayor, with the approval of a majority of the members of the city council, shall appoint a part-time animal control officer, who shall hold office during two current municipal years for which he was appointed or elected and until his successor is appointed and qualified, unless the services of such officer are deemed unnecessary by the mayor and a majority of the council. All vacancies in such office shall be filled for the remainder of the term by an appointment of the mayor and approval of a majority of the members of the city council. 
(2)  If the council shall refuse to approve the appointment of an animal control officer at any time, the mayor, within two weeks thereafter, shall submit to the council another appointee to be animal control officer and shall continue to do so until an appointment is approved; provided, however, that the mayor shall not resubmit any appointee whose approval has been refused more than once. 
(Code 1973, § 4-9; Code 1994, § 8-1; Ord. of 1-6-1993(1), §§ A, B; Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
Sec. 8-46. - Interference with animal control officer. 
    No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest the animal control officer or any regular police officer in the performance of his duties or seek to release any animal in the custody of the animal control officer or any regular police officer, except as provided in this article. 
(Code 1994, § 8-1.1; Ord. No. 96-005-O, 5-13-1996; Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
Sec. 8-47. - Authority of animal control officer. 
    The animal control officer is empowered to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article, and the animal control officer is empowered to seize and impound any aggressive dog whose owner or keeper fails to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1994, § 8-1.2; Ord. of 12-14-1998; Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
Sec. 8-48. - Right of entry of officers. 
    In the discharge of the duties imposed by this article, the animal control officer accompanied by any police officer of the city shall have the authority at all reasonable times to enter upon any premises to examine a dog or other animal that is allegedly in violation of a provision of this article. Such authority shall not include the right to enter any residence on the premises. Such officer shall have further authority to take possession of any such dog or other animal and remove it from such premises. 
(Code 1994, § 8-1.3; Ord. of 12-14-1998; Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
Sec. 8-49. - Records of animal control officer. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to keep or cause to be kept, in an accurate and detailed manner, the following records: 
(1)  The impoundment and disposition of all animals coming into his custody; 
(2)  All bite cases reported to him and his investigation of the same; 
(3)  All impoundments and keeping fees received by the city. 
(b)  Such records shall be open to inspection at reasonable times by such persons responsible for similar records of the city and shall be audited by the city annually in the same manner as other city records are audited. 
(Code 1994, § 8-1.4; Ord. of 12-14-1998; Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
Sec. 8-50. - Enforcement of chapter. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the animal control officer and any police officer of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 4-9; Code 1994, § 8-2; Ord. of 1-6-1993(1), § C; Ord. of 12-14-1998; Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
Secs. 8-51-8-73. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 8-74. - Impoundment; harboring fierce, dangerous or vicious animals. 
(a)  Any dog found running at large not under restraint as defined in section 8-1, or uncollared, shall be taken up by the animal control officer and impounded in the shelter designated as the city dog pound, and there confined in a humane manner for a period of not less than five days, and may thereafter be disposed of in a humane manner if not claimed by its owner. Dogs not claimed by their owners before the expiration of five days may be disposed of at the discretion of the animal control officer, except as provided in this article in the cases of certain dogs. 
(b)  The animal control officer may transfer title to any dog held at the dog pound to the society for the prevention of cruelty to animals after the legal detention period has expired and such dog has not been claimed by its owner. 
(c)  When dogs are found running at large and their ownership is known to the animal control officer, such dogs need not be impounded; but such officer may cite the owners of dogs to appear in court to answer to charges of violation of this article. 
(d)  Immediately upon impounding dogs, the animal control officer shall make every possible reasonable effort to notify the owners of such dogs so impounded, and inform such owners of the conditions whereby they may regain custody of such dogs. 
(e)  Any animal, other than a dog, found running at large within the city limits may be impounded or disposed of according to law when such action is required either to protect the animal or to protect the residents of the city. 
(f)  Any owner, custodian or person harboring any fierce, dangerous at vicious animal that shall bite or otherwise inflict any injury on any person shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1973, § 4-12; Code 1994, § 8-34; Ord. of 12-14-1998; Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
State Law reference- Impoundment and disposition of uncollared dogs, G.L. 1956, § 4-13-15; vicious dogs, G.L. 1956, § 4-13.1-1 et seq. 
Sec. 8-75. - Warrant for seizing dog. 
    If the owner or keeper of the dog refuses to surrender the animal to the animal control officer, the animal control officer may request a police officer to obtain a search warrant from a justice of the district court and to seize the dog upon execution of the warrant. 
(Code 1994, § 8-36.1; Ord. of 12-14-1998; Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
Sec. 8-76. - Redemption of impounded dogs. 
(a)  The owner shall be entitled to regain possession of any impounded dogs, except as provided in this article in the cases of certain dogs, upon the payment of the currently required impoundment fees. Proof of ownership might include a license receipt, affidavit of neighbors, a photograph, etc. 
(b)  Any other animal impounded under the provisions of this article may be reclaimed by the owner upon the payment of the currently required impoundment fees. 
(c)  Any dog or other animal impounded under the provisions of this article and not reclaimed by its owner within five days may be humanely destroyed by the animal control officer, have its title transferred to the society for the prevention of cruelty to animals as provided in section 8-74(b), or be placed in the custody of some person deemed to be a responsible and suitable owner and who will agree to comply with the provisions of this article and such other regulations as shall be fixed by the city. Provided, however, that if the animal is one as to which the respective rights of the owner and the person in possession or custody are determined by the state, such law shall be complied with. 
(Code 1973, § 4-12.5; Code 1994, § 8-35; Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
Secs. 8-77-8-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RABIES CONTROL 

Sec. 8-96. - Vaccinations. 
(a)  Vaccination required for dogs over six months old. No dog over six months old shall be permitted within the city limits unless such dog shall have been vaccinated or immunized, in the manner set forth in this article, within a period of 12 months, if such dog shall have been vaccinated or immunized with the one-year vaccine, or within a period of 24 months, if such dog shall have been vaccinated or immunized by the three-year vaccine. 
(b)  Use of approved vaccine; certification. The vaccination or immunization referred to in subsection (a) of this article shall be by a vaccine approved by the state department of health and shall be certified to by a licensed veterinarian. Such certificate shall be dated as of the date of inoculation or vaccination, shall show the rabies tag number, the sex and breed of the dog, and the owner thereof, and whether the vaccine given is the one-year vaccine or the two-year vaccine, together with such other information as may reasonably be required by the health officer of the veterinarian administering the same. 
(c)  Certificate of vaccination prerequisite to license. No license shall be issued for any dog required to be licensed in the city unless the person making application thereafter shall first present to the city clerk a current certificate of vaccination or inoculation, as provided in this article for the dog for which such license in requested. Such certificate shall certify that the dog for which the license is to be issued has been properly vaccinated or inoculated in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1994, § 8-38; Ord. No. 96-003-O, 5-13-1996; Ord. of 12-14-1998; Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
Sec. 8-97. - Owning unvaccinated dog, cat or ferret. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or harbor any dog, cat or ferret over four months old within the city, unless such animal shall have been vaccinated or inoculated in accordance with the provisions of this article. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than $200.00 for each offense. 
(Code 1994, § 8-39; Ord. No. 96-004-O, 5-13-1996; Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
Sec. 8-98. - Impoundment of unvaccinated dogs. 
    Any dog over six months old found within the limits if the city without evidence that such dog has been vaccinated or inoculated in accordance with the provisions of this article shall be impounded by any police officer of the city or other authorized person for a period not exceeding five days, during which time such dog may be returned to its owner upon proof of ownership, vaccination of the dog and payment by such owner of the fees provided in this section. At the expiration of the five-day period, any dog not so claimed by its owner shall be disposed of in accordance with this section. 
(Code 1994, § 8-40; Ord. No. 96-008-O, 5-13-1996; Ord. of 12-14-1998; Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
Sec. 8-99. - Quarantine procedure. 
(a)  Every animal that bites a person shall be promptly reported to the animal control officer. Such animal shall thereupon be securely quarantined at the discretion of the animal control officer, for a period of ten days, and it shall not be released from such quarantine except by written permission of the animal control officer. At the discretion of the animal control officer, such quarantine may be on the premises of the owner, at the shelter designated as the dog pound or, at the owner's option and expense, in a veterinary hospital of his choice. In the case of stray animals or animals whose ownership is not known, such quarantine shall be at the shelter designated by the animal control officer. It shall be the duty of the animal owner to contact the animal control officer for a release from the quarantine. 
(b)  The owner, upon demand by the animal control officer, shall forthwith surrender any animal that has bitten a human or is suspected as having been exposed to rabies for supervised quarantine, the expense of which shall be borne by the owner. Such animal may be reclaimed by the owner if it is adjudged free of rabies, upon payment of fees as established by the city. 
(c)  When rabies has been diagnosed in an animal under quarantine or is suspected by a licensed veterinarian and the animal dies while under such observation, the animal control officer shall immediately send the head of such animal to the state health department for pathological examination and shall notify the director of environmental control of reports of human contacts and the diagnosis. 
(d)  When one or both reports indicate a positive diagnosis of rabies, the animal control officer shall recommend an area-wide quarantine for a period of 90 days. During such quarantine period no animal shall be taken into the streets or permitted to be in the streets, nor shall any animal be taken or shipped from the city without written permission of the animal control officer. 
(e)  During the quarantine period and as long afterward as the animal control officer decides it is necessary to prevent the spread of rabies, the city shall require all dogs three months of age end older to be vaccinated against rabies with a canine rabies vaccine approved by the biologies control section of the U.S. Department of Agriculture. The types of approved canine antirabies vaccine to be used and the recognized duration of immunity for each shall be established by the city. All vaccinated dogs shall be restricted (leashing or confinement on enclosed premises) for 30 days after vaccination. During the quarantine period, the city shall be empowered to provide for a program of mass immunization by the establishment of temporary emergency canine rabies vaccination clinics strategically located throughout the city. 
(f)  No dog that has been impounded by reason of its being a stray, unclaimed by its owner, is allowed to be claimed during the period of the rabies emergency quarantine, except by special authorization of the animal control officer. 
(g)  Dogs or other animals bitten by a known rabid animal shall be immediately destroyed or, if the owner is unwilling to destroy the exposed animal, strict isolation of the animal in a kennel for six months shall be enforced. If the dog or other animal has been previously vaccinated within the time limits established by the city, based on the kind of vaccine used, revaccination and restraint (leashing and confinement) for 30 days shall be carried out. 
(h)  If there are additional positive cases of rabies occurring during the period of quarantine, such period of quarantine may be extended for an additional six months. 
(i)  No person shall kill or cause to be killed any rabid animal, any animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies or any animal having bitten a human, except as provided in this article, nor shall such animal be removed from the city limits without written permission from the animal control officer. 
(j)  The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall, upon demand, be surrendered to the animal control officer. The animal control officer shall direct the disposition of any animal found to be infected with rabies. 
(k)  No person shall fail or refuse to surrender any animal for quarantine or destruction as required in this section when demand is made therefor by the animal control officer. 
(Code 1994, § 8-42; Ord. of 12-14-1998; Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
Sec. 8-100. - Reports of bite cases. 
    It shall be the duty of every physician or other medical practitioner to report to the animal control officer at the police department the names and addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted by animals, together with such other information as will be helpful in rabies control. 
(Code 1994, § 8-43; Ord. of 12-14-1998; Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
Sec. 8-101. - Veterinarians to report rabies suspects. 
    It shall be the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report to the animal control officer any animal considered to be a rabies suspect. 
(Code 1994, § 8-43.1; Ord. of 12-14-1998; Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
Secs. 8-102-8-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DOGS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal regulation of dogs, G.L. 1956, § 4-13-1. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-131. - Restraint; at large dogs; bites. 
    The owner of a dog shall keep his dog under restraint at all times and shall not permit such dog to be at large, off the premises or property of the owner, unless under restraint and properly collared. Any bite inflicted by any such dog at large or not restrained, as required by this section shall, in addition to any violation for dogs at large or unrestrained, constitute a violation of this division by the owner of such dog. 
(Code 1994, § 8-32.1; Ord. of 12-14-1998; Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
Sec. 8-132. - Dog license fees. 
(a)  Every owner or keeper of a dog who resides in the city shall in the month of April cause such dog to be licensed from the first day of the ensuing May, in the office of the city clerk and shall pay to the city clerk for the license issued $20.00 plus a spay and neuter fee of $1.00, with the exception of senior citizens, who shall upon proof that they have attained the age of 65 years of age be exempt from this licensing fee. Four dollars of each license fee collected by the city clerk shall be used exclusively by the city for the enforcement of laws pertaining to animals as provided for by G.L. 1956, § 4-13.1-9. 
(b)  All licenses issued under the provisions of this section shall be valid in every city or town during the then current year; provided that any person who shall become the owner or keeper of a dog shall cause the same to be licensed as aforesaid within 30 days after he becomes such owner. 
(c)  Every owner or keeper of any dog found to be in violation of this section shall be fined $25.00. 
(d)  Any person who fails to license his dog after April 30, shall in addition to the animal license fee, pay a late charge of $3.00. 
(Code 1994, § 8-37; Ord. No. 96-007-O, 5-13-1996; Ord. of 12-14-1998; Ord. of 12-13-2004; Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
Sec. 8-133. - Dog license; fees; penalty. 
    Every person, owner or keeper of a dog not licensed and/or not collared according to the provisions of this division shall be fined $10.00 to be applied to the support of the city, and that fine shall be in addition to all other lawful fees. 
(Code 1994, § 8-37.1; Ord. of 12-14-1998; Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
Sec. 8-134. - Vicious dogs and females in heat. 
(a)  Every female dog or other animals in heat shall be kept confined in a building or secure enclosure or in a veterinary hospital or boarding kennel or under control of a competent agent in such a manner that such female dog or other animals cannot come in contact with another dog or animal, except for intentional breeding purposes. 
(b)  Any animal described in subsection (a) of this section found at large shall be impounded by the animal control officer and may not be reclaimed by owners unless such reclamation is authorized by any court having jurisdiction. 
(c)  Any dog or other animal may, the first time it is impounded for being a public nuisance, be reclaimed as provided in section 8-74, but may not be reclaimed when so impounded on the second or subsequent occasions unless such reclamation is authorized by a court having jurisdiction in the matter. 
(d)  When in the judgment of the animal control officer or any police officer in this city an animal should be destroyed for humane reasons, such animal may not be reclaimed. 
(Code 1973, § 4-11; Code 1994, § 8-33; Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
State Law reference- Order to confine or kill vicious dogs, G.L. 1956, § 4-13-19. 
Sec. 8-135. - Sanitary conditions for the keeping of dogs. 
(a)  The owner or person in control of any building, kennel or premises in which a dog is kept and maintained shall keep the building and/or premises clean and free from decaying food, dirt, fur, stagnant water, and fecal matter. 
(b)  The owner or keeper of any dog that is kept out of doors, or in a kennel, shall provide the dog with appropriate shelter from the weather. Appropriate shelter shall be defined as a dog house. 
(c)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for an owner or keeper to: 
(1)  Keep any dog on a permanent tether that restricts movement of the tethered dog to an area less than 113 square feet, or less than a six-foot radius at ground level. 
(2)  Tether a dog with a choke-type collar or prong-type collar. 
(3)  Keep any dog tethered for more than ten hours during a 24-hour period or keep any dog confined in a pen, cage or other shelter for more than 14 hours during any 24-hour period. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply: 
(1)  If the tethering or confinement is authorized for medical reasons in writing by a veterinarian licensed in Rhode Island, the authorization is renewed annually, and shelter is provided; 
(2)  If tethering or confinement is authorized in writing by an animal control officer; 
(3)  To a training facility, grooming facility, commercial boarding kennel, licensed pet shop, animal shelter, municipal pound or veterinary facility, 
(e)  Any person in violation of this section shall be given a warning for a first violation. Second and subsequent violations of this subsection can be considered a violation, subject to penalty. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1994, § 8-44; Ord. of 12-14-1998; Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
Sec. 8-136. - Presence on school or store property prohibited; exceptions; limitation on number to be kept. 
(a)  No dog shall be allowed in school yards or a school property, whether at large or under restraint, except seeing-eye dogs. 
(b)  No dogs shall be allowed in any stores or eating places within the city, whether at large or under restraint, except seeing-eye dogs. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to keep more than three licensed dogs at the same residence, provided that this provision shall not apply to licensed kennels or commercial locations keeping dogs for purpose of security. 
(Code 1994, § 8-45; Ord. of 12-14-1998; Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
Sec. 8-137. - Spaying or neutering required. 
(a)  No person shall own or harbor, within the City of Central Falls, any cat over the age of six months which has not been spayed or neutered, unless such person obtains an "intact" permit issued by the animal control officer to an individual upon request. Intact permits shall be issued only for: 
(1)  Medical/health reasons. 
(2)  A cat that the owner certifies to be a purebred show cat. 
(3)  An unaltered cat if the owner signs a written statement that such animal will not be allowed to breed. 
(b)  An annual fee for an intact permit shall be $100.00 per cat and shall be deposited in an account used exclusively by the city for the enforcement of laws pertaining to animals. 
(c)  Cats exempted because of medical/health reasons are not required to pay the intact permit fee. 
(d)  Any permit issued may be revoked if the animal control officer has reasonable cause to believe any of the following to be true: 
(1)  The permittee has failed to comply with any condition or requirement of the permit or has failed to pay any fee imposed under this article; 
(2)  The permittee refuses to allow inspection, upon 48 hours' written notice, of any cat covered by the permit or the premises on which the animal is kept; 
(3)  The permittee has transferred, sold or otherwise disposed of the cat for which the permit was issued; 
(4)  The permittee is in violation of any state health or safety law or regulation regarding animal care or control; 
(5)  The permittee has violated the provisions of Chapter 4-19 of the General Laws of the State of Rhode Island entitled "Animal Care" or any other state or local ordinances relating to the keeping, care or use of any animal. 
(e)  If, after investigation, the animal control officer concludes that it is probable that one or more of the above grounds for revocation has occurred, he/she shall cause written notice thereof to be transmitted by mail to the address of the permittee. Said notice shall specify the grounds of possible revocation of the permit and shall specify a date and time for an informal hearing to be held before an animal control officer. Said date shall be not less than five days subsequent to the date the notice is mailed. After the informal hearing, the animal control officer may modify the terns of the permit or revoke the permit; provided, further, that if the health or well-being of the animal is in danger, the animal control officer of the city may take custody and control of the animal until time that a hearing is conducted pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
Sec. 8-138. - Abandonment of dogs or cats. 
    If any dog or cat is abandoned, as determined by the animal control officer or a police officer, in a car, in a public place or on private property, by its owner or any person having charge or custody of that dog or cat, the officer(s) may take reasonable measures to rescue said dog or cat and that person shall, for each offense, be punished pursuant to § 4-1-2 of the General Laws of the State of Rhode Island, as follows: be imprisoned not exceeding 11 months or be fined not less than $50.00 nor exceeding $500.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
Sec. 8-139. - Breeding of dogs and cats prohibited. 
    The breeding of dogs and cats is prohibited in the City of Central Falls, unless provided a written exemption by the animal control officer. 
(Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
Sec. 8-140. - False information. 
    Any person who intentionally gives false information to the animal control officer either verbally or in writing to evade the enforcement of the laws prescribed in this chapter shall be fined in an amount not less than $125.00, subject to trial and appeal in the municipal court. 
(Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
Secs. 8-141-8-155. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - AGGRESSIVE DOGS 

Sec. 8-156. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Aggressive dog means any dog which by the nature of its breeding and/or any combination of breeds would be considered to be a threat to the public safety by not being properly confined. 
(Code 1994, § 8-47; Ord. of 9-13-1993, § 2A) 
Sec. 8-157. - Declaration of purpose; nuisance declared; registration. 
(a)  It is hereby declared that dogs possessing an aggressive nature are becoming a widespread threat to the safety and welfare of citizens of the city in that aggressive dogs have in recent years assaulted without provocation and injured numerous individuals, particularly children, and have killed numerous other animals. Many of these attacks have occurred in public places as well as on private property. The number of these attacks is attributable to the failure of owners to register, confine and properly control aggressive dogs. 
(b)  It is further declared that the necessity for the regulation and control of aggressive dogs is a governmental problem, requiring governmental regulation, and that existing ordinances are inadequate to deal with the threat to public health and safety posed by aggressive dogs. 
(c)  It is further declared that the owning, keeping or harboring of aggressive dogs is a nuisance. 
(d)  The city council hereby finds that the regulation and control of American pit bull dogs, staffordshire terrier dogs, pit bull mixes (pit bull) and rottweiler dogs and rottweiler mixes (rottweilers) in the city is a matter of vital concern affecting the public health, safety and welfare of all city residents. Experience from the city and all across the country has demonstrated that while most dogs make suitable pets, these are exceptionally dangerous and unpredictable dogs. Once provoked, they become uncontrollable and lethal weapons, posing significant dangers to unsuspecting and innocent people. In the past two years, 82 residents of the city have been attacked, hurt and maimed by pit bulls and rottweilers. 
(e)  This division seeks to remedy this dangerous situation by regulating the ownership of pit bulls and rotweillers in the city. Given the population of the city, the council believes that such a division is necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of its residents. 
(f)  Any person having the custody, ownership or control of any pit bull or rotweiller must register (license) said dog by the age of six months, by filing the rabies certificate which is provided to the owner upon vaccination, with the city clerk. Said certificate shall require the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the dog's owner; 
(2)  Said owner shall inform the clerk of the address where the dog is harbored, if different from owner's address; 
(3)  Dog's sex, color and rabies certificate tag number and other distinguishing physical characteristics of the dog, as well as proof of liability insurance of not less than $50,000.00 for such registration. 
The fee for registration (license) shall be $12.00. 
(g)  Any person found in violation of this article shall be fined $10.00 for the first offense, $15.00 for the second offense within a year and $25.00 for each subsequent offense within a year. 
(h)  The animal control officer or any police officer is hereby empowered to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1994, § 8-46; Ord. of 9-13-1993, § 1; Ord. of 3-27-2000) 
Sec. 8-158. - Enforcement of article. 
(a)  The animal control officer or any police officer is hereby empowered to seize and to impound any aggressive dog whose owner or keeper fails to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Any violations of the provisions of this article are punishable in accordance with section 1-12 after the owner or keeper of any animal regulated under this article is adjudged guilty by the municipal court. 
(c)  When an aggressive dog is not in its enclosure, the animal must be in the control of an adult while muzzled and restrained by a choke-chain leash. 
(Code 1994, § 8-51; Ord. of 9-13-1993, § 4) 
Sec. 8-159. - Enclosure required. 
    The owner or keeper of an aggressive dog shall, on or prior to the time of placement of such animal on his property, have in place an enclosure approved by the animal control officer. Such enclosure shall consist of a chain link fence of eight feet in height, four feet in width and ten feet in length forming or causing a barrier suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and suitable to confine the animal. The enclosure shall be securely locked and be designed to prevent the animal from escaping. This enclosure shall have a cement patio type floor which will ensure that the animal will not be able to burrow out of its confinement, and which will also act as an exercise run. Such enclosure will also have a complete roof covering of suitable material so as to prevent the animals from jumping over and out of such enclosure. 
(Code 1994, § 8-48; Ord. of 9-13-1993, §§ 2B, 3(b)) 
Sec. 8-160. - Sign required. 
    The owner or keeper of an aggressive dog shall display a sign on his premises warning that there is an aggressive dog or a guard dog on the property. The sign shall be of a size and coloring that will be easily visible to the public and easily readable from the public roadway. 
(Code 1994, § 8-49; Ord. of 9-13-1993, § 3(a)) 
Sec. 8-161. - Notice requirements of owner or keeper. 
    The owner or keeper of an aggressive dog shall notify the animal control officer, police department, and the licensing authority, within one hour of the event, that the animal is on the loose, has attacked a human being, has died, been sold or been given away. If the animal has been sold or given away, the owner shall notify in writing the animal control officer with all of the pertinent information as to the new owner's name, address and a phone number where such new owner may be reached to verify all of this information. 
(Code 1994, § 8-50; Ord. of 9-13-1993, § 3(c)) 
Sec. 8-162. - Pit bulls unlawful. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Keeper means any person who possesses, keeps, exercises control over, maintains, harbors, transports or sells a pit bull, whether or not that person is the owner. 
    Owner means any person who owns, possesses, keeps, exercises control over, maintains, harbors, transports or sells a pit bull. 
    Pit bull means any dog that is an American pit bull terrier, American Staffordshire terrier, Staffordshire bull terrier; or any dog of mixed breed displaying the majority of physical traits of any one or more of the breeds mentioned in this section, or any dog exhibiting those distinguishing characteristics which substantially conform to the standards established by the American Kennel Club or the United Kennel Club for any of the breeds mentioned in this section, the characteristics being identifiable even if there are technical deficiencies in any particular dog's conformance thereto; or any dog identifiable by a licensed veterinarian, animal control officer or any other knowledgeable person whose identification is deemed credible by the public safety director or the animal control officer, as having any American pit bull terrier, American Staffordshire terrier, Staffordshire bull terrier as any element of its breeding. 
    Secure temporary enclosure means a secure enclosure used for purposes of transporting a pit bull terrier and which includes a top and bottom permanently attached to the sides except for a door for removal of the pit bull. Such enclosure must be of such material, and such door closed and secured in such a manner, that the pit bull cannot exit the enclosure on its own. 
(b)  Restrictions. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, keep, exercise control over, maintain, harbor, transport, or sell within the city any pit bull dog. 
(c)  Exceptions. The prohibition of this section shall not apply in the following enumerated circumstances: 
(1)  The owner or keeper of a pit bull that is registered and licensed with any city clerk on the date of passage of the ordinance from which this section is derived may apply for a pit bull license to be renewed annually. After that date no pit bull licenses will be issued. Any owner or keeper, who has applied for and received a pit bull license in accordance with subsection (d) of this section, and who maintains the pit bull at all times in compliance with the pit bull license requirements of subsection (d) of this section and all other applicable requirements of this section, may keep a pit bull within the city. Notwithstanding the prohibition of subsection (a) of this section, in the event of the death of a licensed pit bull that was registered and licensed with the city clerk on the date of the passage of the ordinance from which this section is derived, the owner or keeper may own another pit bull and must apply for an annual pit bull license, provided that the owner or keeper has not at any time violated any provision of this article. 
(2)  The city municipal animal shelter may temporarily harbor and transport any pit bull for purposes of enforcing the provisions of this section. (Municipal animal shelter shall also mean any contracted animal shelter.) 
(3)  Any humane society operating an animal shelter which is registered and licensed by the city may temporarily hold any pit bull that is received or otherwise recovered, but only for so long as it takes to contact the city's municipal animal shelter and either turn the pit bull over to the animal shelter employees or receive permission to destroy or have destroyed the pit bull pursuant to the provisions of subsection (e) of this section. 
(4)  A person may temporarily transport into and hold in the city a pit bull only for the purpose of showing such a pit bull in a place of public exhibition, contest or show sponsored by a dog club association or similar organization. However, the sponsor of the exhibition, contest, or show must receive written permission from the city council, must be provide protective measures adequate to prevent pit bulls from escaping or injuring the public. The person who transports and holds a pit bull for showing shall, at all times when the pit bull is being transported within the city to and from the place of exhibition, contest, or show, keep the pit bull confined in a secure temporary enclosure as defined in subsection (b) of this section. 
(5)  Failure by the owner or keeper to comply and remain in compliance with all of the terms of any applicable exception shall subject the pit bull to immediate impoundment and/or disposal pursuant to subsection (e) of this section and shall operate to prevent the owner or keeper from asserting such exception as a defense in any prosecution under subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  Pit bull license requirements. The owner or keeper of any pit bull which had been licensed on or before the date of passage of the ordinance from which this section is derived, and that is allowed to apply for annual pit bull license shall at the time of the application for the annual pit bull license comply with or otherwise provide sufficient evidence that the owner or keeper is in compliance with all of the following regulations: 
(1)  The owner or keeper of the pit bull shall keep current the license for such pit bull through annual renewal. Such license is not transferable and shall be renewable only by the holder of the license. A pit bull license tag will be issued to the owner or keeper at the time of the issuance of the license. Such license tag shall be attached to the pit bull by means of a collar or harness, and shall not be attached to any other pit bull other than the pit bull for which it was issued. If the pit bull tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate tag may be issued upon the payment of a $3.00 fee. 
(2)  The owner or keeper must be at least 21 years of age. 
(3)  The owner or keeper shall present to the city clerk proof that the owner or keeper has procured liability insurance in the amount of at least $100,000.00, covering any damage or injury which may be caused by a pit bull during the 12-month period covered by the pit bull license. The policy shall contain a provision requiring the insurance company to provide written notice to the city clerk not less than 15 days prior to any termination of the policy and not less than five days subsequent to cancellation or expiration of the policy. 
(4)  The owner or keeper, at the owner's or keeper's own expense shall have had the pit bull spayed or neutered and shall present to the city clerk documentary proof from a licensed veterinarian that this sterilization has been performed. This requirement shall be waived upon a written statement from a licensed veterinarian that the procedure should not or cannot be performed for reasons of the health or age of the animal. If funds are available through the animal control office spay/neuter account, the animal control officer will assist owners or keepers who are residents of the city seeking assistance for the spay/neuter of their dogs. 
(5)  The animal control officer and the city clerk shall each maintain a file containing the license numbers, pit bull tag numbers, and the names and addresses of the owners and keepers. The owner or keeper shall notify the animal control officer and the city clerk in writing of any change of address. 
(6)  At all times when a pit bull is at the property of the owner or keeper, the owner or keeper shall keep the pit bull confined, either in a secure, temporary enclosure, or within the premises of the owner or keeper or shall keep the pit bull securely leashed and muzzled. 
(7)  The owner or keeper shall not sell or otherwise transfer the pit bull to any person except a member of the owner's or keeper's immediate family who will then become the owner or keeper and shall notify the city clerk within five days in the event that the pit bull is lost, stolen or dies, or has a litter. In the event of a litter, the owner or keeper must deliver the puppies to the city animal shelter for destruction or permanently remove the puppies from the city and provide sufficient evidence of such removal by the time the puppies are weaned, but in no event shall the owner or keeper be allowed to keep in the city a pit bull puppy born after the date of passage of the odinance from which this section is derived, that is more than eight weeks old. Any pit bull puppies kept contrary to the provisions of this subsection are subject to immediate impoundment and disposal pursuant to subsection (e) of this section. 
(8)  The owner or keeper shall have posted at each possible entrance to the owner's or keeper's property where the pit bull is kept a conspicuous and clearly legible pit bull sign. Such pit bull signs must be at least eight inches by ten inches in rectangular dimensions and shall contain only the words "PIT BULL DOG" in lettering not less than two inches in height. 
(e)  Impoundment and disposal of unlicensed pit bull. Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter, the animal control officer is authorized to immediately impound any pit bull found in the city which does not fall within the expectations listed in subsection (c) of this section, and the municipal animal shelter may house or dispose of such pit bull in such manner as the animal control officer may deem appropriate, except as the procedures in subsection (f) of this section otherwise require. 
(f)  Appeal procedure; pit bull classification. 
(1)  When the animal control officer has impounded any pit bull dog pursuant to this section, and the owner or keeper of such dog disputes the classification of such dog as pit bull, the owner or keeper of such dog may appeal the decision by filing a written petition with the animal control officer for a hearing concerning such classification no later than seven days after impoundment. Such petition shall include the name and address, including mailing address, of the petitioner. The animal control officer will then issue a notice of hearing date by mailing a copy to the petitioner's address no later than ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Where the animal control officer receives no written request from the owner or keeper for a hearing within seven days of impoundment, the pit bull shall be destroyed. 
(2)  The hearing, if any, will be held before the panel regarding dogs created by G.L. 4-13.1-11. Any facts which the petitioner wishes to be considered shall be submitted under oath or affirmation in writing or orally at the hearing. The panel shall make a final determination whether the dog is a pit bull as defined in subsection (b) of this section. Such final determination shall be considered a final order of the city council, subject to review under the state rules of civil procedure. 
(3)  If the dog is found to be a pit bull, it shall be destroyed, unless the owner or keeper produces evidence deemed sufficient by the city council that the pit bull is to be permanently taken out of the city and the owner or keeper pays the cost of impoundment. If the dog is found not to be a pit bull, the dog shall be released to the owner or keeper, with no impoundment fees imposed, unless the animal was impounded as a result of being at large. The procedures in this section shall not apply to any dog which was impounded as the immediate result of an attack or bite. In those instances, the dog shall be handled and the procedures governed by the provisions of G.L. 1956, § 4-13.1-1 et seq. 
(g)  Enforcement penalties. 
(1)  The animal control officer shall receive the assistance of the police department in carrying out the enforcement provisions of this section. 
(2)  Upon warrant issued by the district court, the animal control officer may enter any residence or business for the enforcement of this section. 
(3)  Any pit bull, after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, which is found by the animal control officer not to be licensed as defined in subsection (c) of this section, or kept according to the provisions of subsection (d) of this section, is subject to immediate impoundment. 
(4)  The owner or keeper of any pit bull which is not subject to the prohibition of subsection (a) of this section, whose dog is found in violation of any part of this section, shall be subject on a first offense to a fine of not more than $250.00; on a second offense to a fine of not more than $500.00; and on a third offense to a fine of not more than $1,000.00. 
(5)  The owner or keeper of any pit bull which is subject to the prohibition of subsection (a) of this section, and which is found in violation of any part of this section, shall, on a first offense be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00; on a second or subsequent offense to a fine of not more than $1,000.00, and the dog shall be subject to immediate impoundment pursuant to subsection (e)of this section. 
(6)  The owner or keeper of any pit bull which is found in violation of any part of this section shall be subject to a term of imprisonment of not more than 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 2708, § 8-52, 12-11-2003; Ord. of 5-12-2008(3), § 8-52; Ord. of 9-15-2008) 
Secs. 8-163-8-192. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PIGEONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 8-193-8-222. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 8-223. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain pigeons in the city without a license therefor granted by the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 4-14; Code 1994, § 8-81; Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
Sec. 8-224. - Application. 
    Application for a license to keep pigeons in the city may be made annually to the city clerk in the month of November and shall be accompanied by the currently required license fee. 
(Code 1973, § 4-15; Code 1994, § 8-82; Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
Sec. 8-225. - Issuance, denial and revocation. 
(a)  The city council shall grant or deny a license to keep pigeons at its first regular meeting in December or as soon thereafter as it deems reasonably practical. In granting or denying such license, the city council shall take into consideration the character of the applicant, his past performance in the keeping and control of pigeons, the effect of such keeping on the health and property of residents of the city, the complaint of neighbors, the number of pigeons intended to be kept, and the sanitary facilities of the coop or loft in which the pigeons are to be kept. 
(b)  In no instance shall a license under this division be granted to a person who keeps pigeons in a building also used for living purposes. 
(c)  The council shall have the right in granting a license to limit the number of pigeons to be kept, and may deny or revoke a license when it is satisfied that the licensee has not kept or will not keep or control his pigeons in a manner that will prevent damage to the health or property of residents of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 4-16; Code 1994, § 8-83; Ord. of 9-29-2014(1)) 
Chapter 10 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- State building code, G.L. 1956, § 23-27.3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Building permit fees. 
(a)  All building permits, whether for new structures, repairs or alterations, shall be based upon the estimated cost of such construction, repair or alteration, and the fees for such permits shall be set from time to time by ordinance. 
(b)  All building permit fees shall be collected by the code enforcement division and transferred to the office of the finance director. 
(Code 1973, § 6-1; Code 1994, § 10-1) 
State Law reference- Permit fees authorized, G.L. 1956, § 23-27.3-118.0; fee computation, G.L. 1956, § 23-27.3-119.0. 
Sec. 10-2. - Attaching objects to impede egress or access to residential units prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to install and maintain any object or device which impedes egress or access to residential units by their attachment across the frame opening of the means of egress or access. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction for the first violation, be fined $250.00. For the second and all subsequent violations a fine of $500.00 shall be imposed. 
(Code 1994, § 10-2; Ord. of 12-9-1991) 
Sec. 10-3. - Drainlaying certificate. 
    There is hereby established within the city a drainlaying certificate to be executed and certified by the division of code enforcement. 
(1)  The division of code enforcement, in conjunction with the department of public works and state agencies, shall establish rules, regulations and conditions in conformance with the state's general law and city ordinance in the issuance of said certificate. Failure to comply with these regulations will subject the holder of said certificate to a fine no greater than $500.00 as provided for by section 1-12. 
(2)  The applicant of said certificate shall be required to file with the division of code enforcement a bond in the amount of $5,000.00 to lay drains and appurtenances and to connect the same with public sewers. 
(3)  The certificate holder must receive an in-ground inspection from the plumbing inspector prior to backfilling and is responsible for obtaining all necessary N.B.C., D.O.T. and/or D.E.M. permits (wetlands) where applicable. 
(4)  The fee for the said certificate shall be $50.00 and shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be revoked at any time, for cause, at the discretion of the director of code enforcement. 
(Code 1994, § 10-3; Ord. of 9-16-2002) 
Secs. 10-4-10-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE STANDARDS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted September 9, 2014, § 1, repealed Ch. 10, Art. II., §§ 10-25-10-28, 10-61-10-72, 10-101-10-111, 10-135-10-151, 10-171-10-182, 10-203-10-209, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Ch. 10, Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 12-12-2005. 
State Law reference- State housing and property maintenance code, G.L. 1956, § 23-27.3-100.1.5.1; minimum housing standards, G.L. 1956, § 45-24.2-1 et seq.; Rhode Island Housing Maintenance and Occupancy Code, G.L. 1956, § 45-24.3-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-25. - Statement of policy. 
    It is hereby declared that there exists in the city numerous dwellings, and dwelling premises and structures which are substandard in one or more important features of structural safety, sanitary facilities and maintenance, and healthful occupancy and hot water facilities; and that these conditions together with the inadequate provision for light and air, insufficient protection against fire, insanitary conditions, lack of proper heating, overcrowding of dwellings and structures, deterioration and disrepair of dwellings and structures and dwelling premises and the occupancy of unfit dwellings and structures, endanger the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the community, and give impetus to the continuation, extension and aggravation of urban blight and decay. It is further declared that the establishment and enforcement of minimum standards for dwellings, dwelling premises and structures, and the rehabilitation of housing are essential to the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014(1), § 1; Ord. of 7-10-2017(1) , § 3) 
Sec. 10-26. - Purpose of chapter. 
    The purpose of this chapter shall be to protect the public health, safety and welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the condition and maintenance of all dwellings, dwelling premises and structures; establishing minimum standards governing utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to make dwellings and structures safe, sanitary, and fit for human habitation; fixing certain responsibilities and duties of owners, operators, and occupants of dwellings, dwelling premises and structures; and fixing the conditions whereby certain dwellings and structures may be declared unfit for occupancy and condemned for human habitation; and fixing penalties for violations of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014(1), § 1; Ord. of 7-10-2017(1) , § 3) 
Sec. 10-27. - Conflict of chapter with other ordinances. 
    In any case where a provision of this chapter or of any regulation adopted pursuant thereto is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance or any regulation adopted pursuant thereto, or any other ordinance, code or regulation of the city, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014(1), § 1; Ord. of 7-10-2017(1) , § 3) 
Sec. 10-28. - Enforcement of Rhode Island Property Maintenance Code. 
    The city shall follow and enforce the state property maintenance code codified by the property maintenance code for the state, hereinafter referred to as SBC-6, and administered by R.I.G.L. 1956 § 23-27.3-100 et seq. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014(1), § 1; Ord. of 7-10-2017(1) , § 3) 
Sec. 10-29. - Minimum housing standards division-Created. 
    There is hereby created within the executive department a division of minimum housing standards, hereinafter referred to as "the division," for the purposes of enforcing the provisions of this chapter and such other matters as may be appropriately assigned to it. The division of minimum housing standards shall be operated under the general direction of the director of code enforcement, as provided in section 2-230 and section 2-231. The director may delegate any of his or her powers or duties under the provisions of this chapter to any properly qualified employee of the division. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014(1), § 1; Ord. of 7-10-2017(1) , § 3) 
Sec. 10-30. - Appointment and duties of hearing officer. 
    The director shall serve as the hearing officer of the division of minimum housing standards and as such shall be responsible for the scheduling, conduct and recording of hearings as provided for in sections 101.1 through 107.6 of the SBC-6; except that the director may delegate these duties to any other qualified employee of the division. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014(1), § 1; Ord. of 7-10-2017(1) , § 3) 
Sec. 10-31. - Personnel of division of minimum housing standards. 
    The personnel of the division of minimum housing standards shall consist of the aforementioned director and such other inspectors, clerks and other personnel as may be necessary for the proper organization of the division and for the proper enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014(1), § 1; Ord. of 7-10-2017(1) , § 3) 
Sec. 10-32. - Conflict of permits and licenses with chapter. 
    All departments, officials and employees of the city which have the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses in regard to the construction, installation, repair, use or occupancy of structures, dwellings, dwelling premises or dwelling equipment or facilities shall conform to the provisions of this chapter, and no permit or license for any construction, installation, repair, use or occupancy shall be issued if such would be in conflict with the provisions of this chapter. Any permit or license issued in conflict with the provisions of this chapter shall be null and void. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014(1), § 1; Ord. of 7-10-2017(1) , § 3) 
Sec. 10-33. - Application to zoning board of review for variance, exception. 
    Whenever a compliance order issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter requires an extension of a building or structure into a required rear yard or side yard, or the execution of any compliance order will result in any violation of the zoning ordinance, the director is authorized to apply to the zoning board of review for a variance or exception. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014(1), § 1; Ord. of 7-10-2017(1) , § 3) 
Sec. 10-34. - Referral of housing violations not covered by chapter but by standards of other codes. 
    Whenever the director determines that the condition of a structure, dwelling or dwelling premises or any part thereof is in violation of any zoning, building, fire or health ordinance or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, or any other ordinance, or code or regulation of the city governing the condition and improvement of housing, which is not provided for by this chapter, or which is provided for by a higher standard of such other ordinance, code or regulation, according to section 10-27 of this chapter, he shall refer such violation to the appropriate authority. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014(1), § 1; Ord. of 7-10-2017(1) , § 3) 
Sec. 10-35. - Prosecution of existing violations. 
    This chapter shall not affect violations of any other existing ordinance, code or regulation of the city, and such violations shall be governed and shall continue to be punishable to the full extent of the law under the provisions of those ordinances, codes or regulations in effect at the time the violation was committed. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014(1), § 1; Ord. of 7-10-2017(1) , § 3) 
Sec. 10-36. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, or any provision of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to authority granted by this chapter shall be punished pursuant to SBC-6, R.I.G.L. 1956 § 23-27.3-100 et seq., and chapter 1, section 1-12 of this Code. 
(b)  The city solicitor shall, upon complaint of the director, institute injunction, abatement or other appropriate actions or proceedings at law or in equity to restrain, prevent, enjoin, abate, correct or remove such violations. 
(c)  The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014(1), § 1; Ord. of 7-10-2017(1) , § 3) 
Sec. 10-37. - Recording notices and orders; liability of persons having notice of proceedings. 
    Whenever a notice of violation or a compliance order has been issued for a violation of this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, the director may file in the office of the recorder of deeds a copy of the notice or order. Such notice or order shall be recorded in the same manner as "lis pendens" notices, and such recording shall be constructive notice to any purchaser or encumbrancer of the real property affected thereby. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, any person purchasing or otherwise acquiring any interest in any real property and having actual or constructive notice of any proceedings instituted under the provisions of this chapter shall be immediately subject to and bound by any such proceedings and to any compliance order entered with respect to the real property. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014(1), § 1; Ord. of 7-10-2017(1) , § 3) 
Sec. 10-38. - Transfer of ownership. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure who has received a compliance order or upon whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or structure to another until the provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation have been complied with, or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation issued by the code official and shall furnish to the code official a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for making the corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or notice of violation. 
(b)  Pursuant to R.I.G.L. § 42-128.1-8, if a property was constructed prior to 1978, that property must have a lead certificate prior to receiving a certificate of occupancy from the city department of code enforcement and zoning. 
(c)  If a property is vacant and abandoned at the time of sale, transfer, mortgage, or lease, the property owner must obtain a certificate of occupancy from the city department of code enforcement and zoning. This will require an inspection by a city building inspector, which can be requested by the property, and will be completed at a cost of $200.00 per inspection. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2017(1) , § 3) 
Secs. 10-39-10-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- See editor's note at Art. II. 

Secs. 10-61-10-202. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- See editor's note at Art. II. 

Secs. 10-203-10-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-241. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this article pertain to floodplain management, and have the same meaning as they have in common usage and to give this article it's most reasonable application. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
    Area of shallow flooding (for a community with AO or AH zones only) means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of special flood hazard. See Special flood hazard area. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also referred to as the 100-year flood, as published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) as part of a flood insurance study (FIS) and depicted on a flood insurance rate map (FIRM). 
    Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation of the crest of the base flood or 100-year flood. The height in relation to mean sea level expected to be reached by the waters of the baseflood at pertinent points in the floodplains of coastal and riverine areas. 
    Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Building. See Structure. 
    Cost, as related to substantial improvements. The cost of any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, alteration, repair or other improvement of a structure shall be established by a detailed written contractor's estimate. The estimate shall include, but not be limited to: the cost of materials (interior finishing elements, structural elements, utility and service equipment); sales tax on materials, building equipment and fixtures, including heating and air conditioning and utility meters; labor; built-in appliances; demolition and site preparation; repairs made to damaged parts of the building worked on at the same time; contractor's overhead; contractor's profit; and grand total. Items to be excluded include: cost of plans and specifications, survey costs, permit fees, outside improvements such as septic systems, water supply wells, landscaping, sidewalks, fences, yard lights, irrigation systems, and detached structures such as garages, sheds, and gazebos. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to the construction of buildings or structures; the construction of additions, alterations or substantial improvements to buildings or structures; the placement of buildings or structures; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment; the storage, deposition, or extraction of materials; and the installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities. 
    Dry floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural protection measures incorporated in a building that is not elevated above the base flood elevation that keeps water from entering the building to prevent or minimize flood damage. Note: For insurance purposes, a dry floodproofed, nonresidential structure is rated based on the elevation of its lowest floor unless it is floodproofed to one foot above the BFE. 
    Existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision means a manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured home are to be affixed (including, as a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or existing manufactured home subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufacturing homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) means the federal agency that administers the national flood insurance program (NFIP). 
    Finished living space means fully enclosed areas below the base flood elevation (BFE) that are not considered a basement cannot have finished living space and needs to be designed to be exposed to flood forces. These spaces can only to be used for parking, building access or limited storage. Finished living space can include, but is not limited to, a space that is heated and/or cooled, contains finished floors (tile, linoleum, hardwood, etc.), has sheetrock walls that may or may not be painted or wallpapered, and other amenities such as furniture, appliances, bathrooms, fireplaces and other items that are easily damaged by floodwaters and expensive to clean, repair or replace. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from either the overflow of inland or tidal waters, or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM) means the official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated the limits of the regulatory floodway and 100-year floodplain. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means the official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated both the special flood hazard areas (100-year floodplain) and the insurance risk premium zones applicable to a community. FIRM published after January 1990 may also show the limits of the regulatory floodway. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS) means the official study of a community in which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has conducted a technical engineering evaluation and determination of local flood hazards, flood profiles and water surface elevations. The flood insurance rate maps (FIRM), which accompany the FIS, provide both flood insurance rate zones and base flood elevations, and may provide the regulatory floodway limits. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. For the purposes of these regulations, the term "regulatory floodway" is synonymous in meaning with the term "floodway." 
    Functionally dependent use or facility means a use or facility that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair facilities. The term does not include seafood processing facilities, long-term storage, manufacturing, sales or service facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade (HAG) (only for community with AO/AH zones) means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historic significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational vehicles and other similar vehicles or transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
    Manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision means a parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Market value means the price of a structure that a willing buyer and seller agree upon. This can be determined by an independent appraisal by a professional appraiser; the property's tax assessment, minus land value; the replacement cost minus depreciation of the structure; the structure's actual cash value. 
    Mean sea level (MSL) means average height of the sea for all stages of the tide, usually determined from hourly height observations over a 19-year period on an open coast or in adjacent waters having free access to the sea. The National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum where specified) to which base flood elevations shown on a community floodinsurance rate map (FIRM) are referenced. 
    New construction means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain regulations, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision means a manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain regulations adopted by the community. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Regulatory floodway. See Floodway. 
    Sand dunes means naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach. 
    Sheet flow area (for community with AO, AH, or VO zones only). See Area of shallow flooding. 
    Special flood hazard area (SFHA) means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. SFHAs are determined utilizing the base flood elevations (BFE) provided on the flood profiles in the flood insurance study (FIS) for a community. BFEs provided on flood insurance rate map (FIRM) are only approximate (rounded up or down) and should be verified with the BFEs published in the FIS for a specific location. SFHAs include, but are not necessarily limited to, the land shown as zones A, A1-30, AE, AO, AH, and the coastal high hazard areas shown as zones V, V1-30, and VE on a FIRM. The SFHA is also called the area of special flood hazard. 
    Start of construction, for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, substantial improvement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does in include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erections of temporary forms; not does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building which is principally above ground, including a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank, or other manmade facilities or infrastructures. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure, whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its predamaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, rehabilitation, alterations, additions or other improvements to a structure, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure as determined at the beginning of such ten-year period. This term includes structures that have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. For purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic" structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
    Variance means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of the floodplain management ordinance that allows construction in a manner otherwise prohibited and where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. 
    Violation means failure of a structure or other development to be fully complaint with the community's floodplain management ordinance. A structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, floodproofing certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is resumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
    Wet floodproofing means measures designed to minimize damage to a structure or its contents by water that is allowed into a building. 
(Ord. of 2-27-2009, § 17.03; Ord. of 9-14-2015(2) , § 1) 
Sec. 10-242. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to ensure public safety; minimize hazards to persons and property from flooding, to protect watercourses from encroachment and to maintain the capability of floodplains to retain and carry off floodwaters. 
(Ord. of 2-27-2009, § 17.01; Ord. of 9-14-2015(2) , § 1) 
Sec. 10-243. - Applicability. 
(a)  The city elects to comply with the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended). The national flood insurance program, established in the aforesaid act, provides that areas of the city having a special flood hazard be identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and that floodplain management measures be applied in suchflood hazard areas. The requirements of this article shall apply to any construction or other development which lies wholly or partly within an area of special flood hazard, as identified as zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-30, A99, V, V1-30, VE on the flood insurance rate map and flood hazard boundary map prepared by Federal Emergency Management Agency dated October 2, 2015. Said flood map, including any amendments adopted after the date hereof, is hereby made part of this article. The exact boundaries of the district may be defined by the 100-year baseflood elevations shown on the FIRM and further defined by the flood insurance study booklet revised October 2, 2015. 
(b)  The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable but does not imply total flood protection. If any section, provision, or portion of this article is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court, the remainder of this article shall control. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, the term "other development" shall be defined as any action exclusive of that which requires the issuance of a building permit under the state building code. Such other development shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Earth, gravel or mineral removal or extraction. 
(2)  Alteration of the topography by cutting, filling or grading. 
(3)  Storage of bulk materials outside of a structure. 
(4)  Construction or placement of facilities or improvements not normally requiring a building permit. 
(d)  The requirements set forth in this article shall be in addition to any applicable requirements in this chapter and in any other regulation which may be applicable. Additionally, more stringent requirements shall apply to coastal high-hazard areas which are defined as those special flood hazard areas along the city's coastline which are subject to high-velocity waters from hurricane wave wash and wave run-up as designated as zone V1-30 on the flood map (hereinafter referred to as the "V-zone"). 
(Ord. of 2-27-2009, § 17.02; Ord. of 9-14-2015(2) , § 1) 
Secs. 10-244-10-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 10-271. - Enforcement. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the building official or designee to enforce the provisions of this article. If the code enforcement officer finds that any provisions of this article are being violated, he shall notify, in writing, the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. 
(b)  When the above action does not result in the correction or abatement of the violation, the municipal officers, upon notice from the code enforcement officer, are hereby authorized and directed to institute any and all actions, whether legal or equitable, necessary to the enforcement of this article. Any person who continues to violate any provision of this article after receiving notice of such violation shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter and subject to a fine of $500.00 for each violation. Each day such a violation is continued is a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 2-27-2009, § 17.10; Ord. of 9-14-2015(2) , § 1) 
Sec. 10-272. - Permit. 
(a)  Required. 
(1)  Except where construction is covered by a building permit or by approval of a subdivision plat by the city planning board, any other development shall require the issuance of a development permit by the building official or designee. Said permit shall be in a form authorized by the city council. 
(2)  The application for a flood hazard development permit shall be submitted to the code enforcement officer and shall include: 
a.  The name and address of the applicant; 
b.  An address or a map indicating the location of the construction site; 
c.  A site plan showing location of existing and proposed structures, sewage disposal facilities, water supply facilities, areas to be cut and filled, and the dimensions of the lot; 
d.  A statement of the intended use of the structure; 
e.  A statement as to the type of sewage system proposed; 
f.  Specification of dimensions of the proposed structures; 
g.  The elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor, including basement, and if the lowest floor is below grade on one or more sides, the elevation of the floor immediately above; 
h.  Base flood elevation data for all new, relocated or substantially improved structures; 
i.  The elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure will be floodproofed; 
j.  The description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development. 
(3)  Prior to the issuance of a building or development permit, the applicant shall submit evidence that all necessary permits and approvals have been received from all government agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law. 
(b)  Review of permit applications. The building official or designee shall: 
(1)  Review all applications for flood hazard development permits to determine that all pertinent requirements as described in section 10-301 have been or will be met; 
(2)  Utilize, in the review of all flood hazard development permit applications, the base flood data contained in the "Flood Insurance Study-City of Central Falls, Rhode Island, Providence County," as described in section 10-243; 
(3)  Make interpretations of the location of boundaries of special flood hazard areas shown on maps described in section 10-243; 
(4)  In A zones, in absence of FEMA BFE data and floodway data, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize other BFE and floodway data as a basis for elevating residential structures to or above the base flood level, and for floodproofing or elevating nonresidential structures to or above the base flood level; 
(5)  In review of flood hazard development permit applications, determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state and local government agencies from which prior approval is required; 
(6)  Notify adjacent municipalities, the state department of environmental management and the state bureau of civil emergency preparedness prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and maintain carrying capacity of altered watercourse; and 
(7)  Maintain, as a permanent record, copies of all flood hazard development permits issued and data relevant thereto, including reports of the zoning board of review on variances. 
(c)  Permit fee. A permit fee (based on the cost of the construction) may be required to be paid to the city and a copy of a receipt for the same shall accompany the application. An additional fee may be charged if the code enforcement officer and/or board of appeals needs the assistance of a professional engineer. 
(Ord. of 2-27-2009, §§ 17.04-17.06; Ord. of 9-14-2015(2) , § 1) 
Sec. 10-273. - Variance. 
(a)  The zoning board of review may hear and grant a variance as prescribed in this section subject to the prerequisites contained therein. In addition to applying the criteria and requirements of said section, the board shall undertake the following in granting a variance from the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Describe in its decision the exact extent of the variance granted. 
(2)  Indicate in its decision that the granting of such variance may affect the flood insurance rates as they apply to the subject property up to amounts as high as $25.00 per $100.00 of insurance coverage, and further, that construction or other development below the base flood elevation may increase risk to life and property. 
(3)  Forward a copy of its written decision and findings to the applicant, the building official or designee, the Rhode Island Statewide Planning Program and the Federal Insurance Administration in the annual report of the city to the administration. 
(b)  No variance may be granted which will result in any increase in flood levels. 
(Ord. of 2-27-2009, § 17.09; Ord. of 9-14-2015(2) , § 1) 
Secs. 10-274-10-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 10-301. - Development standards. 
    The following standards shall apply to any construction or other development located wholly or partly within an area of special flood hazard as defined in section 10-241. Please also refer to the current Rhode Island State Building Code, One and Two Family Dwelling Code, Plumbing Code, Mechanical Code, and Electrical for state standards. The Coastal Resource Management Council (CRMC) may also require special permits for development on the coastal feature. 
(1)  No watercourse may be altered in a manner which will, in the opinion of the building official or designee, result in any decrease in the capacity of the watercourse, and no land shall be graded or altered in such a manner as to increase the base flood elevation within the city. Where any alteration is permitted, the building official or designee will notify the adjacent communities, the Rhode Island Statewide Planning Program and the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(2)  In a regulatory floodway, any encroachment is prohibited which would cause any increase in the base flood level unless hydrologic and hydraulic analyses prove that the proposed encroachment would not increase flood levels during the base flood discharge. 
(3)  The filling or excavation of land may be permitted only under the following conditions: 
a.  Said action will not encroach upon a watercourse. 
b.  Said action will not result in an increase in the potential flood level. Where it is determined that said action may result in an increase in the potential flood level, the building official or designee shall require appropriate measures to offset the potential increase. Adequate drainage shall be provided so as to reduce the exposure of the site or any other land to flood hazard. 
(4)  No outdoor storage of materials or equipment which is likely to cause damage to property, create a potential obstruction to floodwaters, create a potential fire hazard or pollute the waters during flood periods shall be permitted in any special flood hazard area. Such materials or equipment shall include but not necessarily be limited to: lumber and other buoyant materials, water-soluble materials, volatile or flammable materials, acids or poisons. 
(5)  Provision shall be made for anchoring facilities, equipment or yard features which are capable of movement or flotation in floodwaters. Such items shall include but shall not necessarily be limited to: fences, sheds, animal shelters, tanks, storage boxes, planters, vehicles, boats and other items normally positioned or stored on a site outside of a structure. 
(6)  The use of flood-resistant materials shall be used for structures within an area of special flood hazard as defined in section 10-241. 
(7)  Construction methods and practices shall be used that minimize flood damage. 
(8)  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located to prevent water entry to accumulation. 
(9)  Onsite waste disposal systems shall be designed to avoid impairment or contamination of the floodway. 
(10)  New and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration. 
(11)  Base flood elevation data is required for subdivision proposals or other development greater than 50 lots or five acres. 
(12)  In addition to the foregoing, in a V-zone, the following requirements shall apply to any proposed development: 
a.  The alteration of sand dunes, where existing, is prohibited. 
b.  All new construction shall be located landward of the reach of mean high tide. 
(Ord. of 2-27-2009, § 17.07; Ord. of 9-14-2015(2) , § 1) 
Sec. 10-302. - Specific Standards. 
(a)  Construction standards in special flood hazard areas (SFHA), zones A, A1-30, AE. 
(1)  Residential construction. All new construction, substantial improvements, and repair to structures that have sustained substantial damage shall have the bottom of the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation (BFE). 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. All new construction, substantial improvements, and repair to structures that have sustained substantial damage which are commercial, industrial or nonresidential structures shall: 
a.  Have the bottom of the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation (BFE); or 
b.  In lieu of being elevated, nonresidential structures may be dry floodproofed to one foot above the BFE provided that together with all attendant utilities and sanitary facilities the areas of the structure below the required elevation are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and provided that such structures are composed of structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. A state-registered professional engineer or architect shall review and/or develop structural design specifications and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with acceptable standards of practice or meeting the provisions of this section. Such certification shall be provided to the building official or designee. 
(3)  Fully enclosed areas below the base flood elevation of elevated buildings. All new construction, substantial improvements, or repair of substantial damage to residential or nonresidential structures that include fully enclosed areas formed by a foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood elevation (BFE) of an elevated building, shall be designed to preclude finished living space and be designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls (wet floodproofing). Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a state-registered professional engineer or architect, or meet the following minimum criteria listed in sections (a)(3)a. to (a)(3)g. below: 
a.  Provide a minimum of two openings (hydraulic flood vents) having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. These hydraulic openings must be located on at least two different walls. Only the area (square footage) that lies below the BFE can be used in the calculation of net area of vents required. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. At least one side of the structure's fully enclosed area must be at or above grade. Fill placed around the foundation walls must be graded so that the elevation inside the enclosed area is equal to or higher than the adjacent outside elevation on at least one side of the building. The foundation slab of a residential structure, including the slab of a crawlspace, must be set equal to the outside finished grade on at least one side of the building. 
c.  The openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters in both directions without any external influence or control such as human intervention, including the use of electrical and other nonautomatic mechanical means. Other coverings may be designed and certified by an engineer or approved by the building official or designee. 
d.  The area cannot be used as finished living space. Use of the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary and shall only be used for the parking of vehicles, building access or limited storage. Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for the parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). The enclosed area shall not be used for human habitation or partitioned into separate rooms. 
e.  All interior walls, floor, and ceiling materials located below the BFE shall be unfinished and resistant to flood damage. 
f.  Electrical, plumbing, machinery or other utility equipment that service the structure (furnaces, oil or propane tanks, air conditioners, heat pumps, hot water heaters, ventilation, washers, dryers, electrical junction boxes, circuit breaker boxes and food freezers) are prohibited in the fully enclosed area below the BFE. Utilities or service equipment located in this enclosed area, even if elevated above the BFE in the space, will subject the structure to increased flood insurance rates. 
g.  A residential building with a structurally attached garage having the floor slab below the BFE is considered an enclosed area below the BFE and must meet the standards of this subsection (a)(3). A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with the garage floor slab below the BFE, must be designed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters in both directions. Flood openings or vents are required in the exterior walls of the garage or in the garage doors. The human intervention necessary to open garage doors when flooding occurs is not an acceptable means of meeting the openings requirements. In addition to the automatic entry of floodwaters, the areas of the garage below BFE must be constructed with flood-resistant materials. Garages attached to nonresidential structures must also meet the aforementioned requirements or be dry floodproofed as per the requirements of subsection (a)(2) of this section. 
(4)  Manufactured (mobile) homes and recreational vehicles (RVs) . 
a.  In all special flood hazard areas (SFHA), any manufactured (mobile) homes to be newly placed, substantially improved or repaired as a result of substantial damage, shall be elevated so that the bottom of the lowest floor is at or above the base flood elevation (BFE). This includes SFHAs outside a manufactured home park or subdivision, in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or on a site in an existing park which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood. 
b.  All manufactured (mobile) homes within a SFHA shall be placed on a permanent foundation which itself is securely anchored and to which the structure is securely anchored so that it will resist flotation, lateral movement and hydrostatic pressures. Anchoring may include, but not be limited to, the use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. 
c.  All manufactured (mobile) homes within a SFHA shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. Adequate access and drainage should be provided. Elevation construction standards include piling foundations placed no more than ten feet apart, and reinforcement is provided for piers more than six feet above ground level. 
d.  Recreational vehicles placed on sites within a SFHA shall either be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, and be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or be elevated and anchored. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
e.  Public utilities and facilities in manufactured (mobile) homes or subdivisions with a SFHA shall be constructed so as to minimize flood damage. 
(5)  Accessory structures. Detached accessory structures in zones A, AE, A1-30, AO, and AH (i.e., garages, sheds) do not have to meet the elevation or dry floodproofing requirement if the following standards are met: 
a.  The structure is no more than 500 square feet and has a value less than $3,000.00. 
b.  The structure has unfinished interiors and must not be used for human habitation. An apartment, office or other finished space over a detached garage is considered human habitation and would require the structure to be elevated. 
c.  The structure is used solely for parking of vehicles and/or limited storage. 
d.  The accessory structure must be wet floodproofed and designed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
e.  The accessory structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
f.  Service facilities such as electrical, mechanical and heating equipment must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the base flood elevation. 
g.  The structure must comply with the floodway encroachment provision in section 10-301(2). 
(b)  Additional construction standards in coastal V-zones. 
(1)  Residential and nonresidential construction. In V1-30, VE, and V-zones, the elevation of the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowers floor of all new and substantially improved structures shall be obtained and maintained. Further, all new construction, substantial improvements: 
a.  Shall be elevated and secured to anchored pilings or columns so that the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member is at or above the base flood elevations (BFE). 
b.  Shall be certified by a registered professional engineer/architect that the design and methods of construction meet elevation and anchoring requirements. 
c.  Shall have space below the lowest floor either free of obstruction or constructed with breakaway walls. Any enclosed space shall be used solely of building, building access, or storage. 
d.  Shall not utilize fill for structural support. 
(2)  Manufactured homes. Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved within V1-V30, VE, and V-zones, which meet one of the following criteria, shall meet the V-zones standards. 
a.  Outside a manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision; 
b.  In a new manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision; 
c.  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision; 
d.  On a site in an existing park which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood. 
In V1-30, VE, and V-zones, manufactured homes shall be placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park to be elevated so that the lowest floor is at or above the base flood elevations; the chassis is supported by reinforced piers no less than 36 inches in height above grade and securely anchored. 
(3)  Recreational vehicles. In V1-30, VE, and V-zones, all recreational vehicles to be placed on a site must: 
a.  Be elevated and anchored; 
b.  Be on the site for less than 180 consecutive days; or 
c.  Be fully licensed and highway ready. 
(Ord. of 2-27-2009, § 17.08; Ord. of 9-14-2015(2) , § 1) 
Chapter 12 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Businesses and professions, G.L. 1956, § 5-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Registration of business names. 
(a)  Required . All retail, wholesale, commercial, professional, personal and contracting services and manufacturing businesses and establishments and any other enterprises, partnerships, corporations or proprietorships doing business in the city, except for those entities in subsection (b), shall, prior to their commencement of business within the city, register their trade, corporate agent, company or office name, home address and telephone number with the city clerk and the city assessor. 
(b)  Exceptions . This section shall in no way affect or apply to any corporation or limited partnership duly organized under the laws of the state, or to any corporation or limited partnership organized under the laws of any other state and lawfully doing business in this state, or to any partnership or joint venture, the name or designation of which includes the true or real surname of at least one individual who is a partner or joint venturer. 
(c)  Fee; certificate . The annual registration fee shall be $10.00 and a certificate shall be issued containing the following information: 
(1)  The trade name of the business, if held under a corporate name other than the name of the officers, and their addresses shall also be listed. 
(2)  The name of the operator of the business shall also be indicated. 
(3)  The type of business to be conducted. 
(4)  The name and address of the registered agent and/or the business owner. 
(d)  Display, term and issuance of certificate . The certificate shall be placed in a conspicuous location in each firm or business location. For businesses that operate within city limits, no certificate shall be issued without proof of all taxes being paid to date and a certificate of occupancy issued by the building inspector. Home based occupations shall require a zoning determination issued by the department of code enforcement, prior to issuance of certificate. The certificate period shall begin on December 1 and end on November 30 of the succeeding year. 
(e)  Restriction on use of same trade name . No other firm or business of the same trade name shall be allowed to register without the approval of the prior registrant in writing. 
(f)  Renewal . All firms and businesses shall be required to submit a renewal form from year to year. 
(g)  Transfer of certificate . No firm or business shall transfer this certificate unless he submits a request to the city clerk and that the person receiving such transfer adheres to all provisions of this section prior to issuance of the certificate of transfer. 
(Code 1994, § 12-7; Ord. of 4-9-1990(2); Ord. of 6-9-2014; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 1) 
Sec. 12-2. - Business hours restricted. 
    No shop, store, place of trade or entertainment or place of business in the city shall be kept open between 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. unless otherwise provided or as approved by the city council; however, pharmacists and assistant pharmacists may open their shops at any time for the purpose of selling medicines for the use of the sick. 
(Code 1973, § 18-8; Code 1994, § 12-3; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 1) 
Sec. 12-3. - Automobile body shops; closing time. 
    Pursuant to R.I.G.L § 23-19.2-7, no holder of an automobile body shop license shall do or suffer to be done automobile body repairs after 9:00 p.m. 
(Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 1) 
State Law reference- Motor vehicle repair shops, G.L. 1956, § 5-38.3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 12-4. - Chronic nuisances properties. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Abate means to repair, replace, remove, destroy, or otherwise remedy a condition which constitutes a violation of this chapter by such means and in such a manner and to such an extent as the director of public safety determines is necessary in the interest of the general health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(2)  Director of public safety means the director of public safety or his or her designees. 
(3)  Control means the power or ability to direct or determine conditions, conduct, or events occurring on a property. 
(4)  Chronic nuisance property means: 
a.  A property on which nuisance activities exist or have occurred during any six-month period; or 
b.  A property on which a search warrant has been issued and/or executed within a 24-month period related to the illegal possession, manufacture or delivery of a controlled substance or related offenses as defined in R.I.G.L. 21-28. 
(5)  Nuisance activity includes the following: 
a.  Any homicide pursuant to R.I.G.L. 11-23; or 
b.  Any illegal possession, manufacturing or delivery of a controlled substance or related offense pursuant to R.I.G.L. 21-28; or 
c.  Any prostitution, permitting prostitution, or promoting, advancing or profiting from prostitution pursuant to R.I.G.L. 11-34-1; or 
d.  Any weapons violations pursuant to R.I.G.L. 11-47; or 
e.  Any organized criminal gambling pursuant to R.I.G.L. 11-51; or 
f.  Criminal activity directly relating to domestic violence, dating violence, or stalking, engaged in by a member of a person's household or any guest or other individual under the person's control, shall not be considered "nuisance activity" for the purpose of declaring a property a "chronic nuisance property," if the person or immediate member of the person's family is a victim of that domestic violence, dating violence, or stalking. 
(6)  Owner means any person who, alone or with others, has title or interest in any property. 
(7)  Person means an individual, group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, club, company, business trust, joint venture, organization, or any other legal or commercial entity or the manager, lessee, agent, officer or employee of any of them. 
(8)  Person in charge of a property means the owner and, if different than the owner, any other person in actual or constructive possession of a property, including but not limited to, a lessee, tenant, occupant, agent, or manager of a property under his or her control. 
(9)  Property means any land and that which is affixed, incidental or appurtenant to land, including but not limited to any business or residence, parking area, loading area, landscaping, building or structure or any separate part, unit or portion thereof. 
(b)  Violation. Any property within the city that is a chronic nuisance property is in violation of this chapter and subject to its remedies. Owners and other persons in charge who permit property to be a chronic nuisance property shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to its remedies. Any owner who fails to comply with section (d) is in violation of this chapter and is subject to penalties pursuant to section (f). 
(c)  Declaration of chronic nuisance property and procedure. 
(1)  The director of public safety may declare that a property is a chronic nuisance property, as defined in this section. The director of public safety will provide written notice of this declaration to the person in charge of the property. The notice shall be sent by first class mail or personally served, and a copy shall be sent by certified mail. The notice will contain the following: 
a.  The street address or a legal description sufficient for identification of the property; and 
b.  A declaration that the director of public safety has determined the property has become a chronic nuisance property with a concise description of the nuisance activities that exist or that have occurred; and 
c.  A notice that the persons in charge of the property are subject to monetary penalties as set forth in section (f); and 
d.  A demand that the owner and other persons in charge respond to the director of public safety within seven days of service of the notice to discuss a course of action to correct the nuisance; and 
e.  A notice that, if the person in charge does not respond to the director of public safety as required in this section, or if the matter is not voluntarily corrected to the satisfaction of the director of public safety, the city may file an action to abate the property as a chronic nuisance property pursuant to section (g) and/or take other action against the property or person in charge. 
(2)  When a notice is issued pursuant to this section to a person in charge, other than an owner or an owner's agent, who has permitted a property to become a chronic nuisance property, a copy of such notice shall also be sent to any relevant tenant or business owner by first class mail or personally served on the owner of the property, and a copy shall be sent by certified mail. 
(3)  If the owner or person in charge responds as required by the notice and agrees to a course of action to abate the nuisance activities, a written correction agreement conforming to the requirements of section (e) shall be executed. 
(4)  If the agreed course of action does not result in the abatement of nuisance activities to the satisfaction of the director of public safety within 30 days of issuance of the notice, or within such longer period as permitted by the director of public safety in writing or the person in charge fails to respond as required by the notice, the director of public safety may refer the matter to the city solicitor's office for initiation of proceedings pursuant to section (g). 
(d)  Owner cooperation. An owner who receives a copy of a notice pursuant to section (c) shall promptly take all reasonable steps requested in writing by the director of public safety to assist in abatement of the nuisance property. Such reasonable steps may include the owner taking all acts and pursuing all remedies, including pursuing eviction of the person in charge, that are (1) available to the owner pursuant to any lease or other agreement, and (2) consistent with state and local laws. 
(e)  Corrections agreement. A correction agreement is a contract between the city and the owner and/or person in charge of the chronic nuisance property in which the owner and/or person in charge agree(s) to promptly take all lawful and reasonable actions, which shall be set forth in the agreement to abate the nuisance activities within a specified time and according to specified conditions. The agreement will be signed by the person in charge and, if different, the owner. The agreement will include the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner and/or person in charge of the property; and 
(2)  The street address or a description sufficient for identification of the property, building, structure, or land upon or within which the nuisance is occurring; and 
(3)  A description of the nuisance activities; and 
(4)  The necessary corrective action to be taken, and a date or time by which correction must be completed; and 
(5)  An agreement by the owner and/or person in charge that the city may inspect the property as may be necessary to determine compliance with the correction agreement; and 
(6)  An agreement by the owner and/or person in charge that the city may abate the nuisance and recover its costs and expenses and monetary penalties pursuant to this chapter from the person in charge for the nuisance if the terms of the correction agreement are not met; and 
(7)  When a person in charge, other than an owner or an owner's agent, has permitted a property to be a chronic nuisance property, an agreement by the owner to promptly take all acts and pursue all remedies requested by the director of public safety pursuant to section (d). 
(f)  Fines. Except as provided in this section, in addition to any other sanction or remedial procedure that may be available, from the time that notice is issued pursuant to section (c)(1), the person in charge will be subject to a penalty for the violation of this chapter of up to $500.00. Each and every day subsequent to the notice issued pursuant to section (c)(1) will constitute a new violation of this chapter until the director of public safety confirms that the property is no longer a chronic nuisance. If the agreed course of action results in the abatement of nuisance activities to the satisfaction of the director of public safety within 30 days of the notice issued pursuant to section (c)(1), or such longer period allowed by the director of public safety pursuant to section (c)(4), the matter will not be referred to the city solicitor and the person in charge will not be subject to any penalty pursuant to this chapter. An owner who fails to comply with section (d) is subject to a civil penalty of up to $500.00. All parties found to be in violation of this section shall be jointly and severally liable for all monetary penalties and/or fines. Proceeds from these fines shall be deposited in a restricted receipts account designated for nuisance abatement in the city. 
(g)  Enforcement. Upon referral pursuant to section (c) the city solicitor may initiate an action in the municipal housing court or any court of competent jurisdiction to abate a chronic nuisance property, to impose penalties pursuant to this chapter, to seek alternative remedies under city or state laws and seek any other relief authorized by law. 
(h)  Burden of proof. In an action against a person in charge to abate a chronic nuisance property or to recover penalties authorized by this chapter, the city will have the burden of proof to show by a preponderance of the evidence that the property is a chronic nuisance property pursuant to this chapter. In an action against an owner or person in charge to recover penalties authorized by section (f), the city will have the additional burden to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the owner failed to comply with section (d). Copies of police incident reports and reports of other city departments documenting nuisance activities shall be admissible in such actions. Additionally, evidence of a property's general reputation and the reputation of persons residing in or frequenting the property shall be admissible in such actions. 
(i)  Remedies. If the court determines a property is a chronic nuisance property pursuant to this chapter the court will order the person in charge to immediately abate nuisance activity from occurring on the property. The order may include damages as provided in this section and may include any of the following: Any order that will reasonably abate nuisance activities from occurring on the property, including authorizing the city to take action to abate nuisance activities from occurring upon the property if other court orders are not complied with or do not abate nuisance activity on the property and providing that the costs of such city action are to be paid for by the person in charge of the property; ordering the owner to make reasonable expenditures upon the property, including the installation of secure locks, hiring private security personnel, increasing lighting in common areas, and using videotaped surveillance of the property and adjacent alleys, sidewalks, or parking lots; ordering all rental income from the property to be placed in an escrow account with the court for up to 90 days or until the chronic nuisance is abated; ordering the property transferred to a receiver, to be appointed by the court, who will be empowered to use the rental income to make reasonable expenditures related to the property in order to abate the chronic nuisance; ordering the property vacated, sealed, or demolished; ordering that the director of public safety shall have the right to inspect the property to determine if the court's orders have been complied with; or any other appropriate remedy. The following damages may be included in order to effectuate the equitable remedy of abatement. A penalty for the violation of this chapter of up to $500.00 for each and every day subsequent to the notice issued pursuant to section (c)(1) until the director of public safety confirms that the property is no longer a chronic nuisance. If the court finds that an owner failed to take all reasonable steps requested in writing pursuant to section (d) the court may impose a civil penalty up to $25,000.00. Assessment of reasonable attorney fees and costs to the city. 
(j)  Additional remedies. In addition to the remedies authorized by section (i) if, as part of its order abating a chronic nuisance property, the court orders a person in charge to cease renting or leasing a property, the court may order the person in charge to pay relocation assistance not to exceed $3,300.00 to any tenant: 
(1)  Who must relocate because of the order of abatement; and 
(2)  The court finds not to have caused or participated in nuisance activities at the property. 
(k)  Suspension or revocation of license. In addition to any other remedy that is authorized by this chapter or other laws, upon the finding by a court that a property is a chronic nuisance property pursuant to this chapter, the person in charge is subject to the suspension or revocation of a business license or other license at such property issued by the city. 
(l)  Appeals. All appeals contesting municipal action pursuant to this article shall be heard in the municipal housing court or a court of competent jurisdiction 
(m)  Failure to pay any penalty in this section within 30 days may result in a lien being placed on the property. 
(Code 1994, §§ 18-26-18-27; Ord. of 12-16-2002; Ord. of 9-8-2014(1), § 2; Ord. of 7-10-2017(1) , § 1) 
Sec. 12-5. - [The Gender Equity In The Workplace Act.] 
(a)  Findings and intent. It is the intent of the City of Central Falls to combat pregnancy discrimination by requiring employers to provide reasonable accommodations to pregnant women and those with conditions related to pregnancy and childbirth. Such a reasonable accommodation may include more frequent or longer breaks, time off to recover from childbirth, acquisition or modification of equipment, seating, temporary transfer to a less strenuous or hazardous position, job restructuring, light duty, break time and private non-bathroom space for expressing breast milk, assistance with manual labor, or modified work schedules, among other things. It is not the intent of the City of Central Falls to require such accommodations if this provision would cause an undue hardship in the conduct of an employer's business. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  The term " reasonably accommodate " shall mean providing reasonable accommodations, including, but not limited to: more frequent or longer breaks, time off to recover from childbirth, acquisition or modification of equipment, seating, temporary transfer to a less strenuous or hazardous position, job restructuring, light duty, break time and private non-bathroom space for expressing breast milk, assistance with manual labor, or modified work schedules, provided that: 
a.  No employer shall be required by this section to create additional employment that the employer would not otherwise have created, unless the employer does so or would do so for other classes of employees who need accommodation, such as those who are injured on-the-job or those with disabilities and; 
b.  The employer shall not be required to discharge any employee, transfer any employee with more seniority, or promote any employee who is not qualified to perform the job, unless the employer does so or would do so to accommodate other classes of employees who need it, such as those who are injured on-the-job or those with disabilities. 
c.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require an individual with a need related to pregnancy, childbirth, or a related medical condition to accept an accommodation, which such individual chooses not to accept. 
(2)  The term " related conditions " includes, but is not limited to, lactation or the need to produce breast milk for a nursing child. 
(3)  The term " undue hardship " means an action requiring significant difficulty or expense, when considered in light of the factors set forth in subsection (1). 
a.  The employer shall have the burden of proving undue hardship. In making a determination of undue hardship, the factors that may be considered include but shall not be limited to: 
1.  The nature and cost of the accommodation; 
2.  The overall financial resources of the employer; the overall size of the business of the employer with respect to the number of employees, and the number, type, and location of its facilities; and 
3.  The effect on expenses and resources or the impact otherwise of such accommodation upon the operation of the employer. 
b.  The fact that the employer provides or would be required to provide a similar accommodation to other classes of employees who need it, such as those who are injured on-the-job or those with disabilities, shall create a rebuttable presumption that the accommodation does not impose an undue hardship on the employer. 
(c)  It shall be an unlawful employment practice for any employer licensed to do business in the City of Central Falls: 
(1)  To refuse to reasonably accommodate an employee's or prospective employee's condition related to pregnancy, childbirth, or a related medical condition, including, but not limited to, the need to express breast milk for a nursing child, if she so requests; unless the employer can demonstrate that the accommodation would pose an undue hardship on the employer's program, enterprise, or business. 
(2)  To require an employee to take leave if another reasonable accommodation can be provided to an employee's condition related to the pregnancy, childbirth, or a related medical condition. 
(3)  To deny employment opportunities to an employee or prospective employee, if such denial is based on the refusal of the employer to reasonably accommodate an employee's or prospective employee's condition related to pregnancy, childbirth, or a related medical condition. 
(d)  Notice of rights. An employer shall provide written notice of the right to be free from discrimination in relation to pregnancy, childbirth, and related medical conditions pursuant to this subdivision to: (i) new employees at the commencement of employment; and (ii) existing employees within 120 days after the effective date of the local law that added this subdivision. Such notice may also be conspicuously posted at an employer's place of business in an area accessible to employees. 
(e)  Violations. Employees and/or residents of Central Falls may file complaints with the city on a form established by the city clerk. The city solicitor shall investigate all such complaints within a period of 30 days and shall file a report on his or her findings to the city council. Upon a finding of three or more individual violations, the city council may revoke the license of any employer or may suspend any license for such time as they deem necessary or reasonable under the circumstances. No license shall be revoked or suspended until after a hearing before the city council wherein the employer will be given the opportunity to present testimony and be heard. 
(f)  This section shall not be construed to affect any other provision of law relating to sex discrimination or pregnancy, or to preempt, limit, diminish or otherwise affect any other law that provides greater protection or specific benefits with respect to pregnancy, childbirth or medical conditions related to childbirth. 
(Ord. of 4-14-2014) 
Sec. 12-6. - Loud or unruly gatherings-Public nuisance. 
(a)  In general. It shall be a public nuisance to conduct a gathering of five or more persons on any private property in a manner which constitutes a substantial disturbance of the quiet enjoyment of private or public property in a significant segment of a neighborhood, as a result of conduct constituting a violation of law. Illustrative of such unlawful conduct is excessive noise or traffic, obstruction of public streets by crowds or vehicles, illegal parking, public drunkenness, public urination, the service of alcohol to minors, fights, disturbances of the peace, and litter. 
(b)  Notice via posting. When the police department intervenes at a gathering which constitutes a nuisance under this chapter, the premises at which such nuisance occurred shall be posted with a notice stating that the intervention of the police has been necessitated as a result of a public nuisance under this section caused by an event at the premises, the date of the police intervention, and that any subsequent event within a six-month period there from on the same premises which necessitates police intervention, shall result in the joint and several liability of any guests causing a public nuisance, or any persons who own or are residents of the property at which the public nuisance occurred, or who sponsored the event constituting the public nuisance as more fully set forth below. The residents of such property shall be responsible for ensuring that such notice is not removed or defaced. It shall be an chapter violation carrying a penalty of a minimum, mandatory $100.00 fine in addition to any other penalties which may be due under this section if such notice is removed or defaced, provided, however, that the residents of the premises or sponsor of the event, if present, shall be consulted as to the location in which such notice is posted in order to achieve both the security of the notice and its prominent display. 
(c)  Notice via mailing. Notice of the intervention shall also be mailed to any property owner on the city property tax assessment records to advise the property owner that any subsequent such intervention within six months on the same premises shall result in liability of the property owner for all penalties associated with such intervention. 
(d)  Enforcement. Every time that the police department is required to respond to a gathering constituting a public nuisance on the premises within six months of the posting of the notice of police intervention, the following persons shall be jointly and severally liable for a mandatory minimum $500.00 fine. 
(1)  The person or persons who own the property where the gathering constituting the public nuisance took place, provided that notice has been mailed to the owner of the property as set forth herein and the gathering occurs at least two weeks after the mailing of such notice. 
(2)  The person or persons residing on or otherwise in control of the property where such a gathering took place. 
(3)  The person or persons who organized or sponsored such gathering. 
(4)  All persons attending such gatherings who engage in any activity resulting in the public nuisance. 
(5)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to impose liability on the resident or owners of the premises or sponsor of the gathering for the conduct of persons who are present without the express or implied consent of the resident or sponsor, as long as the resident and sponsor have taken all steps reasonably necessary to exclude such uninvited participants from the premises, including landlords who are actively attempting to evict a tenant from the premises. Where an invited guest engages in conduct which the sponsor or resident could not reasonably foresee and the conduct is an isolated instance of a guest at the event violating the law which the sponsor is unable to reasonably control without the intervention of the police, the unlawful conduct of the individual guest shall not be attributable to the sponsor or resident for the purposes of determining whether the event constitutes a public nuisance under this section. 
(6)  Proceeds from these fines shall be deposited in a restricted receipts account designated for nuisance abatement in the city. 
(e)  Appeals. All appeals contesting municipal action pursuant to this ordinance shall be heard in the municipal housing court or a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(f)  Failure to pay any penalty in this section within 30 days may result in a lien being placed on the property. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014(1), § 2(§ 12-5); Ord. of 7-10-2017(1) , § 1) 
Editor's note- Ord. of Sept. 8, 2014, set out provisions intended for use as § 12-5. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 12-6. 
Sec. 12-7. - Business licenses, nuisance. 
    Any business license issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended by the city council sitting as the board of license commissioners, for violations described in sections 12-4 and 12-6, for cause shown after a hearing of which the holder of the license receives notice and the opportunity to be heard. 
(Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 1) 
Sec. 12-8. - Holiday sales. 
    Pursuant to R.I.G.L. § 5-23-2, there shall be a holiday sales license for any retail establishment wishing to operate on holidays. 
(Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 1) 
Sec. 12-9. - Vacant or abandoned commercial storefronts. 
(a)  Findings. The city council hereby finds and determines that: 
(1)  Every commercial corridor in the city has longstanding and blighted vacant commercial storefronts. In addition to being eyesores, these vacant commercial storefronts have a detrimental impact on the economic viability of the commercial corridors in which they are located. Vacant storefronts often attract illegal activity, such as squatting, vandalism, and dumping. Such activity not only repels would-be customers and patrons from commercial corridors, but also places and undue burden on city agencies. The police department, fire department, and the department of public works drain their resources by routinely responding to the same vacant commercial storefront to remove trespassers, clean up graffiti, and remove illegally discarded refuse and debris. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Commercial storefront shall be any area within a building that may be individually leased or rented for any purpose other than solely for residential use. 
(2)  Vacant or abandoned commercial storefront is any commercial storefront that: 
a.  Has been unoccupied for over 30 days; 
b.  Is unoccupied and unsecured; 
c.  Is unoccupied and secured by boarding or other similar means; or 
d.  Is unoccupied, unsafe, and has multiple code violations. 
(3)  For purposes of this section, a building shall not be considered vacant of abandoned if: 
a.  There is a valid building permit for repair, rehabilitation, or construction of a building on the parcel and the owner completes the repair, rehabilitation, or construction within six months from the date the initial permit was issued; or 
b.  The building complies with all codes, does not contribute to blight as defined in this section, is ready for occupancy, does not contain inaccurate signage regarding a previous tenant, and is actively being offered for sale, lease, or rent. 
(4)  a.  Blight is defined as "blight." The presence of any one or more of the following conditions on property constitutes property blight: 
1.  Any condition that constitutes a chronic nuisance as defined in City Code section 12-4; 
2.  Any condition of deterioration or disrepair that creates a substantial adverse impact on neighboring properties; or 
3.  Any violation of the City Code or state housing maintenance code that is visible from the public way and creates a substantial adverse impact on neighboring properties. 
b.  Blight includes, but is not limited to, the following enumerated conditions: 
1.  Property, whether improved or not, which is not kept substantially clean and free from accumulations including, but not limited to, overgrown, dead or decayed trees, weeds or other vegetation, rank growth, rubbish, junk, garbage, litter, debris, flyers or circulars. 
2.  Buildings or structures which are unpainted, or the exterior paint is substantially worn off provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to require an owner to paint a building where the architectural style indicates it was intended to be unpainted, such as a natural shingle or masonry building. 
3.  Buildings or structures or significant sections thereof including, but not limited to, awnings, canopies, exterior stairs, roof, foundation, walls, fences, signs, retaining walls, driveways, or walkways which are substantially deteriorated or defaced, or windows which are missing or broken for the purposes of this section "defaced" includes, but is not limited to, writings, inscriptions, figures, scratches, or other markings commonly referred to as "graffiti." 
4.  Property which contains, in the outdoor area, any refrigerator, washing machine, sink, stove, heater, boiler, tank or any other household equipment, machinery, furniture, or item, appliance or appliances, boxes, lumber, dirt or debris, trash, garbage or refuse cans, or any items other than those commonly stored outdoors, or any parts of such items, for a period of time in excess of 72 consecutive hours. This subsection does not prohibit machinery installed in the rear setback areas for household or recreational use, furniture designed and used for outdoor activities, trash cans in the front yard during the 24-hour period allowed for garbage pick-up and garbage bins or debris boxes were for which a valid permit has been issued by the city. 
(c)  Registration. 
(1)  The owner of a vacant or abandoned commercial storefront shall, immediately after it has become unoccupied, register the commercial storefront with the department of planning and economic development on a form provided by the department. The form shall describe the methods by which the owner has secured the commercial storefront against unauthorized entry, declare any future plans for the commercial storefront, state whether there is fire liability insurance coverage, and provide such other information as the department may require. The department of planning and economic development shall share a list of registered vacant or abandoned commercial storefronts with the city clerk's office and department of code enforcement on a monthly basis. New business applications shall be shared with the department of planning and economic development monthly. The commercial storefront shall be removed from the department's registry immediately upon occupancy by a tenant in a manner that complies with all provisions of state and local law. 
(2)  The failure of an owner to register the vacant or abandoned commercial storefront with the department of planning and economic development in the manner provided in paragraph (a) of this section shall result in enforcement and penalties as provided in section (d), of this chapter. 
(d)  Enforcement and penalties. 
(1)  The department of code enforcement shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  The department of code enforcement upon inspection and discovery of a violation of this chapter shall take the following action(s): 
a.  First notice of violation. The department will serve a first notice of violation on the property owner via first class and first class certified mail to the property owner's last known address as well as to the address of the property deemed to be in violation of this chapter. The notice of violation will state in particularity the violation at the subject property, and allow the property owner 30 days from the date on the notice of violation to cure the violation(s) stated therein; 
b.  Second notice of violation. If the timeframe allotted by the first notice of violation expires and the violation(s) stated therein continue to exist, the department will issue a second notice of violation. The second notice of violation will be served on the property owner via first class and first class certified mail to the property owner's last known address as well as to the address of the property deemed to be in violation of this chapter. The second notice of violation will indicate the property owner's failure to comply with the first notice of violation, and will state in particularity the violation at the subject property, and allow the property owner 30 days from the date on the second notice of violation to cure the violation(s) stated therein; 
c.  Summons to municipal housing court. If the timeframe allotted by the second notice of violation expires and the violation(s) stated therein continue to exist, the department will summons the property owner to municipal housing court where the court may: 
1.  Impose a $500.00 for noncompliance with this chapter; 
2.  Enter an order stating with particularity the actions which must be taken by the property owner to improve the vacant or abandoned commercial storefront so that it no longer violates the provisions of this chapter, and a timeframe to rectify the violation(s); 
3.  Impose an ongoing $500.00 fine for each response of any city agency at the vacant or abandoned commercial storefront which results in an arrest, discovery of criminal activity, or the execution of a search warrant; the discovery of any code violation; or emergency assistance rendered by the city fire department; or 
4.  Enter any order which the court deems meet and just under the circumstances. 
(Ord. of 1-8-2018(2) ) 
Secs. 12-10-12-27. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of 10-14-2015 , amended Art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 12-28-12-33, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1994, §§ 12-10-12-15; Ord. of 12-14-1998; Ord. of 4-23-2014(1). 

Sec. 12-28. - Personal services license. 
    Pursuant to R.I.G.L § 23-19.2-7 and for the prevention, suppression, or abatement of any nuisance as is described in R.I.G.L. §§ 11-30-1 or 11-30-2, there shall be established in the city a personal services license for the operation of any business related to massage parlors, bodyworks establishment or any business as determined by the board of license commissioners upon which lewdness, assignation, or prostitution is conducted, permitted, continued, or exists or where intemperate, idle, dissolute, noisy, or disorderly persons are in the habit of resorting. 
(a)  Massage Parlors. 
(b)  Definitions . For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
(1)  Employee . Any person over 18 years of age, other than a massagist, who renders any service in connection with the operation of a massage business and receives compensation from the operator of the business or patrons. 
(2)  Licensee . The person to whom a license has been issued to own or operate a massage establishment as defined herein. 
(3)  Massage . Any method of pressure on or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of the external parts of the human body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical electrical apparatus or appliances with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointment or other such similar preparations commonly used in the practice of massage, under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that the person to whom the treatment is provided or some third person on his or her behalf will pay money or give any other consideration or any gratuity therefor. 
(4)  Massage establishment . Any establishment having a source of income or compensation derived from the practice of massage as defined in this section, and which has a fixed place of business where any person, firm, association or corporation engages in or carries on any of the activities described in the definition of "massage." For purposes of this chapter only, the term "massage establishment" shall not include any business engaged in the practice of massage on the same premises where other professional health care services including, but not limited to, optical or chiropractic services, are offered. 
(5)  Massagist, masseur or masseuse . Any person who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice of massage as defined in this section. 
(6)  Outcall massage service . Any business, the function of which is to engage in or carry on massages at a location designated by the customer or client rather than at a massage establishment as defined in this section. 
(7)  Patron . Any person over 18 years of age who receives a massage under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that he or she will pay money or give any other consideration therefor. 
(8)  Permittee . The person to whom a permit has been issued to act in the capacity of a massagist (masseur or masseuse) as herein defined. 
(9)  Person . Any individual, partnership, firm, corporation, joint stock company, corporation or combination of individuals of whatever form or character. 
(10)  Recognized school . Any school or educational institution licensed to do business as a school or educational institution in the state in which it is located, or any school recognized by or approved by or affiliated with the American Massage and Therapy Association, Inc., and which has for its purpose the teaching of the theory, method, profession or work of massage, which school requires a resident course of study of not less than 70 hours before the student shall be furnished with a diploma or certificate of graduation from such school or institution of learning following the successful completion of such course of study or learning. 
(11)  Sexual or genital area . Genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female. 
(c)  Violations and penalties . 
(1)  Every person, except those persons who are specifically exempted by this chapter, whether acting as an individual owner, employee of the owner, operator or employee of the operator, or whether acting as a mere agent or independent contractor for the owner, employee or operator, or acting as a participant or worker in any way directly or indirectly who gives massages or operates a massage establishment or any of the services defined in this chapter without first obtaining a license permit and paying a fee to do so from the city or shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(d)  Exemptions . This chapter shall not apply to the following individuals while engaged in the personal performance of the duties of their respective professions: 
(1)  Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths or physical therapists who are duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the state; 
(2)  Nurses who are registered under the laws of this state; and 
(3)  Barbers and beauticians who are duly licensed under the laws of this state, except that this exemption shall apply solely to the massaging of the neck, face, scalp and hair of the customer or client for cosmetic or beautifying purposes. 
(e)  Register of employees . 
(1)  The licensee or person designated by the licensee of a massage establishment shall maintain a register of all persons employed at any time as masseurs or masseuses and their permit numbers. Such register shall be available at the massage establishment to representatives of the city during regular business hours. 
(f)  Required facilities . 
(1)  No license to conduct a massage establishment shall be issued unless an inspection by the city reveals that the establishment complies with each of the following minimum requirements: 
a.  Construction of rooms used for toilets, tubs, steam baths and showers shall be made waterproof with approved waterproofed materials and shall be installed in accordance with the city building code. Plumbing fixtures shall be installed in accordance with the city plumbing code. 
b.  Steam rooms and shower compartments shall have waterproof floors, walls and ceilings approved by the city. 
c.  Floors of wet and dry heat rooms shall be adequately pitched to one or more floor drains properly connected to the sewer, when such sewer is available. (Exception: Dry heat rooms with wooden floors need not be provided with pitched floors and floor drains). 
d.  A source of hot water must be available within the immediate vicinity of dry and wet heat rooms to facilitate cleaning. 
e.  The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing non-disposable instruments and materials used in administering massages. Such non-disposable instruments and materials shall be disinfected after use on each patron. 
f.  Closed cabinets shall be provided and used for the storage of clean linen, towels and other materials used in connection with administering massages. All soiled linens, towels and other materials shall be kept in properly covered containers or cabinets, which containers or cabinets shall be kept separate from the clean storage area. 
g.  Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. When employees and patrons of different sexes are on the premises at the same time separate toilet facilities shall be provided for each sex. A single water closet per sex shall be provided for each 20 or more employees or patrons of that sex on the premises at any one time. Urinals may be substituted for water closets after one water closet has been provided. Toilets shall be designated as to the sex accommodated therein. 
h.  Lavatories or washbasins provided with both hot and cold running water shall be installed in either the toilet room or a vestibule. Lavatories or washbasins shall be provided with soap and a dispenser and with sanitary towels. 
i.  All electrical equipment shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of the city building code. 
(g)  Operating requirements . 
(1)  Every portion of the massage establishment, including appliances and apparatus, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary condition. 
(2)  Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the reception area in a location available to all prospective customers. 
(3)  All employees, including masseurs and masseuses, shall be clean and wear clean, nontransparent outer garments, covering the sexual and genital areas. A separate dressing room for each sex must be available on the premises with individual lockers for each employee. Doors to such dressing rooms shall be open inward and shall be self-closing. 
(4)  All massage establishments shall be provided with clean, laundered sheets and towels in sufficient quantity and shall be laundered after each use thereof and stored in a sanitary manner. 
(5)  No massage establishment granted a license under the provisions of this chapter shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be placed, published or distributed any advertisement, picture or statement which is known or through the exercise of reasonable care should be known to be false, deceptive or misleading in order to induce any person to purchase or utilize any professional massage services. 
(h)  Minors on premises . 
(1)  No person shall permit any person under the age of 18 years to come or remain on the premises of any massage business establishment as masseur, employee or patron, unless such person is on the premises on lawful business. 
(i)  Alcoholic beverages . 
(1)  No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide, keep or cause to be sold, given, dispensed, provided or kept, any alcoholic beverage on the premises of any massage business. 
(j)  Hours . 
(1)  No massage business shall be kept open for any purpose between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(k)  Employment of massagist . 
(1)  No person shall employ as a massagist any person unless said employee has obtained and has in effect a permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(l)  Inspection required . 
(1)  The chief of police or his authorized representatives shall be authorized to make inspections of each massage business establishment for the purposes of determining that the provisions of this chapter are fully complied with. If in the opinion of the chief of police or his authorized representative there is probable cause to enter a massage establishment for the purpose of making inspections and examinations pursuant to this chapter, he shall request the owner or occupant thereof to grant permission for such entry, and if refused, he shall inform the chief of police, and he, or his designee, a police officer, shall make application pursuant to the General Laws of Rhode Island, to a judge of the superior or district court for a search warrant showing the judge why the search warrant should be issued for the purposes set forth in this chapter. 
(m)  Unlawful acts . 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage parlor to place his or her hand or hands upon, to touch with any part of his or her body, to fondle in any manner or to massage, a sexual or genital part of any other person. Sexual or genital parts shall include the genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage parlor to expose his or her sexual or genital parts, or any portion thereof, to any other person. It shall also be unlawful for any person in a massage parlor to expose the sexual or genital parts, or any portions thereof, of any other person. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person, while in the presence of any other person in a massage parlor, to fail to conceal, with a fully opaque covering, the sexual or genital parts of his or her body. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating or managing a massage parlor, knowingly to cause, allow or permit in or about such massage parlor, any agent, employee or any other person under his control or supervision to perform such acts prohibited in this section. 
(5)  It shall be further unlawful for any permittee under this chapter to administer massage on an "outcall" basis. Such person shall administer massage solely within an establishment licensed to carry on such business under this chapter. Any violation of these provisions shall be deemed grounds for revocation of the permit granted hereunder. The restriction on outcall massage shall not apply to a permittee who performs outcall massage as defined herein upon a customer or client who, because of reasons of physical defects or incapacities or due to illness is physically unable to travel to the massage establishment. If any outcall massage is performed under this exception, a record of the date and hour of each treatment, and the name and address of the customer or client, and the name of the employee administering such treatment and the type of treatment administered, as well as the nature of the physical defect, incapacity or illness of said client or customer shall be kept by the licensee or person or employee designated by the licensee. Such records shall be open to inspection by officials charged with the enforcement of public health laws. The information furnished or secured as a result to any such inspection shall be confidential. Any unauthorized disclosure or use of such information by an employee of the business of the city shall be unlawful. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful for any massage service to be carried on within any cubicle, room, booth or any area within a massage establishment, which is fitted with a door capable of being locked. All doors or doorway coverings within a massage establishment shall have an unobstructed opening six inches in size capable of clear two-way viewing into and out of all cubicles, rooms or booths. The opening shall be not less than 41/2 feet from the floor of the establishment nor more than 51/2 feet from the floor. Toilets and cubicles used solely for the application of liquid and vapor baths shall have no such opening in the covering door or curtain, but shall be clearly marked as to purpose on the exterior door or curtain of said cubicle, room or booth. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to eliminate other requirements of statute or ordinance concerning the maintenance of premises, nor to preclude authorized inspection thereof, whenever the police or code departments deems such inspection necessary. 
(n)  Massage business license and permit required . 
(1)  Business license . No person shall engage in or carry out the business of massage unless he has a valid massage business license issued by the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for each and every separate office or place of business conducted by such person. 
(2)  Massagist's permit . No person shall practice massage as a massagist, employee or otherwise, unless he has a valid and subsisting massagist's permit issued to him by the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(o)  Application for massage business license . 
(1)  Every applicant for a license to maintain, operate or conduct a massage establishment shall file an application under oath with the city upon a form provided by the city clerk and pay a nonrefundable annual license fee, which shall be $250.00 per year or any part thereof. The application, once accepted, shall be referred to the Central Falls Police Department for investigation. Copies of the application shall within five days also be referred to the building inspector, the fire department and the state health department. The departments shall within 30 days inspect the premises proposed to be operated as a massage establishment and shall make written verification to the city council concerning compliance with the codes of the city that they administer. The application shall further be referred to the police department for investigation of the applicant's character and qualifications. Each application shall contain the following information: 
a.  A definition of service to be provided; 
b.  The location, mailing address and all telephone numbers where the business is to be conducted; 
c.  The name and residence address of each applicant. Hereinafter, all provisions which refer to applicant include an applicant which may be a corporation or partnership; 
1.  If applicant is a corporation, the names and residence addresses of each of the officers and directors of said corporation and of each stockholder owning more than ten percent of the stock of the corporation, and the address of the corporation itself, if different from the address of the massage establishment; 
2.  If applicant is a partnership, the names and residence addresses of each of the partners including limited partners, and the address of the partnership itself, if different from the address of the massage establishment; 
d.  The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant; 
e.  Proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age; 
f.  Individual or partnership applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and sex; 
g.  Copy of identification such as driver's license and social security card; 
h.  One portrait photograph of the applicant at least two inches by two inches and a complete set of applicant's fingerprints which shall be taken by the chief of police or his agent. If the applicant is a corporation, one portrait photograph at least two inches by two inches of all officers and managing agents of said corporation and a complete set of the same officers' and agents' fingerprints which shall be taken by the chief of police or his agent. If the applicant is a partnership, one front-face portrait photograph at least two inches by two inches in size of each partner, including a limited partner in said partnership, and a complete set of each partner or limited partner's fingerprints which shall be taken by the chief of police or his agents; 
i.  Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three years immediately preceding the date of application; 
j.  The massage or similar business license history of the applicant; whether such person, in previously operating in this or another municipality or state has had a business license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation; 
k.  A BCI check including all criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations, including the dates of convictions, nature of the crimes and place convicted; 
l.  The name and address of each massagist who is or will be employed in said establishment; 
m.  Applicant must furnish a diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school or other institution of learning wherein the method, profession and work of massage is taught; provided, however, that if the applicant will not himself engage in the practice of massage as defined herein, he need not possess such diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school or other institution of learning wherein the method, profession and work of massage is taught; 
n.  The name and address of any massage business or other establishment owned or operated by any person whose name is required to be given in subsection c. wherein the business or profession of massage is carried; 
o.  A description of any other business to be operated on the same premises or on adjoining premises owned or controlled by the applicant; 
p.  Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the permit; 
q.  Such other identification and information necessary to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application; 
r.  The names, current addresses and written statements of at least three bona fide permanent residents of the United States that the applicant is of good moral character. If the applicant is able, the statement must first be furnished from residents of the city, then the county, then the state and lastly from the rest of the United States. These references must be persons other than relatives and business associates. 
(2)  Upon the completion of the above provided form and the furnishing of all foregoing information the city council shall accept the application for the necessary investigations and consider whether to grant the license. The holder of a massage establishment license shall notify the city council of each change in any of the data required to be furnished by this section within ten days after such change occurs. 
(p)  Application for massagist's permit . 
(1)  An application for a massagist's business permit shall be made to the city council in the same manner as provided in this chapter for massage establishment licenses, accompanied by the annual nonrefundable massagist's permit fee of $75.00 per year or part thereof. The application shall contain but not be limited to the following: 
a.  The business address and all telephone numbers where the massage is to be practiced; 
b.  Name and residence address, and all names, nicknames and aliases by which the applicant has been known, including the two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant; 
c.  Social Security number, driver's license number, if any, and date of birth; 
d.  Applicant's weight, height, color of hair and eyes and sex. 
e.  Written evidence that the applicant is at least 18 years of age; 
f.  A BCI check including all criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations, including the dates of convictions, nature of the crimes and place convicted; 
g.  Fingerprints of the applicant taken by the police department; 
h.  Two front-face portrait photographs taken within 30 days of the date of application and at least two inches by two inches in size; 
i.  The name and address of the recognized school attended, the dates attended and a copy of the diploma or certificate of graduation awarded the applicant showing the applicant has completed not less than 70 hours of instruction; 
j.  The massage or similar business history and experience ten years prior to the date of application, including but not limited to whether or not such person in previously operating in this or another municipality or state under license or permit has had such license or permit denied, revoked or suspended and the reasons therefor, and the business activities or occupations subsequent to such action of denial, suspension or revocation; 
k.  The names, current addresses and written statements of at least five bona fide permanent residents, other than relatives, of the United States that the applicant is of good moral character. If the applicant is able, the statement must first be furnished from residents of the city, then the county, then the state and lastly from the rest of the United States; 
l.  A medical certificate signed by a physician, licensed to practice in the state, within seven days of the date of the application. The certificate shall state that the applicant was examined by the certifying physician and that the applicant is free of communicable disease. The additional information required by this subsection shall be provided at the applicant's expense; 
m.  Such other information, identification and physical examination of the person deemed necessary by the police chief in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore required to be set forth in the application; 
n.  Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the permit; and 
o.  Written and declaration by the applicant, under penalty of perjury, that the foregoing information contained in the application is true and correct, said declaration being duly dated and signed in the city. 
(q)  Issuance . 
(1)  The city may issue a license for a massage establishment or a permit for a masseur or masseuse after ratification by the city council, if all requirements for a massage establishment or massagist permit described in this chapter are met, unless if finds: 
a.  The correct permit or license fee has not been tendered to the city, and, in the case of a check or bank draft, honored with payment upon presentation; 
b.  The operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the city's building or zoning, and the state's health regulations; 
c.  Convictions. 
1.  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders holding more than ten percent of the stock of the corporation, any of the officers and directors, if the applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; or the holder of any lien, of any nature, upon the business and/or the equipment used therein; and the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business, have been convicted of any of the following offenses or convicted of an offense without the state that would have constituted any of the following offenses if committed within the state: 
A.  An offense involving the use of force and violence upon the person of another that amounts to a felony; 
B.  An offense involving sexual misconduct; or 
C.  An offense involving narcotics, dangerous drugs or dangerous weapons that amounts to a felony. 
2.  The city may issue a license or permit to any person convicted of any of the crimes described in subsection c.1.A. or C. of this section if it finds that such conviction occurred at least five years prior to the date of the application and the applicant has had no subsequent felony convictions of any nature and no subsequent misdemeanor convictions for crime mentioned in this section; 
d.  The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of fact in the permit application or in any document required by the city in conjunction therewith; 
e.  The applicant has had a massage business, masseur or other similar permit or license denied, revoked or suspended by the city or any other state or local agency within five years prior to the date of the application; or 
f.  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the officers and directors, if the applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business, is not over the age of 18 years. 
(r)  Approval or denial of application . 
(1)  The city shall act to approve or deny an application for a license or permit under this chapter within a reasonable period of time and in no event shall the city act to approve or deny said license or permit later than 90 days from the date that said application was accepted by the city council. Every license or permit issued pursuant to this chapter will terminate at the expiration of one year from the date of its issuance unless sooner suspended or revoked. 
(s)  Waiver of application requirements . 
(1)  The city shall waive the requirements of (p)(i) if the applicant furnishes satisfactory evidence that he or she attended not less than 70 hours of instruction in a school within or without this state or in any foreign country that provides education substantially equal to or in excess of the educational requirements of this chapter. 
(t)  Multiple massage establishments . 
(1)  Should any massage business have more than one location where the business of massage is pursued, then a permit, stating both the address of the principal place of business and of the other locations, shall be issued by the chief of police upon the tender of a license fee of $250.00. Licenses issued for other locations shall terminate on the same date as that of the principal place of business, regardless of the date of issuance. 
(u)  Posting . 
(1)  Every massagist shall post the permit required by this chapter in his working area. 
(2)  Every person licensed under this chapter shall display such license in a prominent place. 
(v)  Transfer . 
(1)  No license or permit issued under this chapter shall be transferable except with the consent of the city council. An application for such transfer shall be in writing and shall be accompanied by the $250.00 fee prescribed for in this chapter. The written application for such transfer shall contain the same information as requested herein for initial application for the license or permit. 
(w)  Revocation or suspension of massage establishment license . 
(1)  Any license issued for a massage establishment may be revoked or suspended by the city after notice and a hearing, where any of the provisions of this chapter are violated or where any employee of the licensee, including a masseur or masseuse, is engaged in any conduct which violates any of the state or local laws or ordinances at the licensee's place of business and the licensee has actual or constructive knowledge by due diligence. Such permit may also be revoked or suspended by the city after notice and hearing, upon the recommendations of the state health department that such business is being managed, conducted or maintained without regard to proper sanitation and hygiene. 
(x)  Revocation or suspension of massagist's permit . 
(1)  A masseur or masseuse permit issued under this chapter by the chief of police shall be revoked or suspended where it appears that the masseur or masseuse has been convicted of any offense which would be cause for denial of a permit upon an original application, has made a false statement on an application for a permit, or has committed an act in violation of this chapter. 
(y)  Name and place of business . 
(1)  No person granted a license pursuant to this chapter shall operate the massage establishment under a name not specified in his license, nor shall he conduct business under any designation or location not specified in his license. 
(z)  Sale, transfer or change of location . 
(1)  Upon the sale, transfer or relocation of a massage establishment, the license therefor shall be null and void; provided, however, that upon the death or incapacity of the licensee or any co-licensee of the massage establishment, any heir or devisee of a deceased licensee, or any guardian of an heir or devisee of a deceased licensee, may continue the business of the massage establishment for a reasonable period of time not to exceed 60 days to allow for an orderly transfer of the license. 
(Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 2) 
Sec. 12-29. - Automotive repair permit. 
    There shall be established in the city an automotive repair permit for the operation of any business related to automobile service stations, garage repair shop, lubrication shop, transmission shop, muffler and brake service, automobile upholstery shop, excluding automobile auto body shops. 
(Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 2) 
Sec. 12-30. - Laundries. 
    There shall be established in the city a permit to operate a public laundry. The permit shall be issued upon any terms and subject to any rules and regulations not inconsistent with law, that the city council, sitting as the board of license commissioners, prescribes for the purpose of protecting the public health and the suppression of unsanitary conditions. The fee to be paid for each permit which shall not exceed $10.00 for the term of one year or a pro rata sum for the unexpired portion of any year. Any permit issued may be revoked or suspended by the city council sitting as the board of license commissioners for cause shown after a hearing of which the holder of the permit receives notice and the opportunity to be heard. 
(Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 2) 
Sec. 12-31. - Instruction in jiu-jitsu or karate license. 
    There shall be established in the city a license for institutions offering instruction in jiu-jitsu and karate. The fee for this license shall not exceed $25.00; provided, that nonprofit organizations and governmental agencies shall be exempt from paying that fee. The city may impose a fine not in excess of $20.00 upon anyone convicted of offering instruction in jiu-jitsu or karate without that license. 
(Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 2) 
Sec. 12-32. - Private detective license. 
    There shall be established in the city a license for any person who wishes to be engaged as a private detective. The registration and license fee shall be $150.00 and shall be renewed each year. The applicant must conform with the practices and procedures as outlined by R.I.G.L. § 5-5-1 et seq. 
(Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 2) 
Sec. 12-33. - Employment agency license. 
    There shall be established in the city a license for suitable persons as keepers of intelligence or employment offices for the purpose of obtaining employment, or furnishing information concerning places of employment, of domestics, servants, laborers, and any other classes of employees, except seapersons, or for the purpose of procuring or giving information concerning those persons for or to employers, or for the purpose of procuring or giving information generally concerning employment in business. 
(Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 2) 
Secs. 12-34-12-54. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 12-55-12-81. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 12-82. - Classes. 
(a)  Victualling house licenses shall be classified as follows: 
(1)  Class A . Class A licenses shall apply to taverns, hotels, lunchrooms, restaurants, coffee shops, caterers, itinerant restaurants and traveling restaurants for the principal purpose to sell food and to serve food and such places of business shall be closed from 1:00 a.m. to 4:00 a.m. of the same day unless otherwise provided for by law. 
(2)  Class B . Class B licenses shall apply to such places only as are by law permitted to remain open to serve and sell food to 1:00 a.m., and such places of business shall be closed from 1:00 a.m. to 5:00 a.m. of the same day. 
(3)  Class C . Class C licenses shall apply to such places only as are by law permitted to remain open until 12:00 midnight of each day of business and shall apply principally to so-called variety stores. 
(4)  Class D . Class D licenses shall apply to such places whose principal purpose is to prepare and sell baked goods and such places of business shall be closed from 1:00 a.m. to 4:00 a.m. of the same day unless otherwise provided for by law. 
(b)  The license period for victualling house licenses shall begin on December 1 and end on November 30 of the succeeding year. The annual fee for such licenses shall be established by ordinance from time to time by the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 14-51; Code 1994, § 12-43; Ord. of 3-12-1990(3); Ord. of 1-11-1999; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3) 
Sec. 12-83. - Fees. 
    The fees for food establishment licenses issued under the provisions of this division shall be set from time to time by the council and a schedule of such fees is on file in the city offices. 
(Code 1973, § 14-52; Code 1994, § 12-44; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3) 
Sec. 12-84. - Termination; conditions; revocation; transfer. 
(a)  All victualling house licenses and tavern, hotel, lunchroom, lunch stand or lunch cart licenses granted under this division shall terminate on November 30 following the date thereof and shall be subject to such terms and conditions relating to the location and the manner and hours of conducting the business thereof, as the city council, sitting as board of license commissioners, shall, from time to time, generally or specially prescribe. Such licenses shall not be assigned or transferred without the approval of the city council, sitting as board of license commissioners. The city council, sitting as board of license commissioners may revoke any license for cause or may suspend any license for such time as they deem necessary or reasonable under the circumstances. No license shall be revoked or suspended until after a hearing before the city council, sitting as board of license commissioners, wherein the licensee has notice and the opportunity to be heard. 
(Code 1973, § 14-53; Code 1994, § 12-45; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3) 
Secs. 12-85-12-111. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HAWKERS AND PEDDLERS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Licensing of hawkers and peddlers, G.L. 1956, § 5-11-1.1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-112. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Hawker means any person selling or offering for sale any goods, wares or merchandise whatsoever, including any food or beverage, on any public street, highway or public right-of-way in the city from a stationary location. 
    Peddler means any person selling or offering for sale any goods, wares or merchandise whatsoever, including any food or beverage, from a vehicle, cart or any other conveyance which is not stationary. 
(Code 1994, § 12-56; Ord. of 9-9-1991(1), § A; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3) 
Sec. 12-113. - Fines. 
    Any person who offers for sale as a hawker or peddler any goods, wares, merchandise, ice cream, fruit, vegetables or other articles or substances within the city without having been issued a license pursuant to this article, or who fails to lawfully display a badge pursuant to section 12-147 shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $200.00. 
(Code 1994, § 12-72; Ord. of 5-31-1995(1); Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3) 
State Law reference- Authorized penalty, G.L. 1956, § 5-11-18. 
Sec. 12-114. - Noise provisions. 
(a)  No hawker or peddler shall ring or cause to be rung, any bell; or use or cause to be used any horn; or use or cause to be used any musical playing equipment; in any public street, highway or place in the city after 8:30 p.m. 
(b)  In addition, all hawkers and peddlers must be in accordance with sections 26-114 through 26-118. 
(c)  Penalties. 
(1)  First offense: $100.00. 
(2)  Second offense: $200.00. 
(3)  For each subsequent offense, it shall be a fine of no less than $200.00 and/or suspension of their hawker's/peddler's license. 
(Code 1994, § 12-57; Ord. of 8-3-1998; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3) 
Sec. 12-115. - Hours limited. 
    No holder of a hawker's or peddler's license shall do or suffer to be done any hawking or peddling on any city street between the hours of 8:30 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(Code 1994, § 12-58; Ord. of 8-31-2004(2); Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3) 
Sec. 12-116. - Sales prohibited in certain areas. 
    Hawkers and peddlers are prohibited from selling or offering for sale any goods, wares or merchandise whatsoever, including food or beverage from a vehicle, cart or any other conveyance, on Broad and Dexter streets within the city limits. 
(Code 1994, § 12-71; Ord. of 9-9-1991(1), § E) 
Secs. 12-117-12-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 12-146. - Prelicensing requirements. 
    All hawkers and peddlers are required to acquire the following before a license shall be issued: 
(1)  A state sales tax permit (where applicable). 
(2)  A state department of health certificate (where applicable). 
(3)  Recommendation from the chief of police. 
(Code 1994, § 12-67; Ord. of 9-9-1991(1), § B; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3) 
Sec. 12-147. - Badge. 
    The city clerk shall issue a badge for each peddler or hawker bearing the license number and signatures of the city clerk. Such badge shall be worn by the licensee at all times when he is conducting business. The currently required fee for the badge shall be paid to the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1994, § 12-68; Ord. of 9-9-1991(1), § B; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3) 
Sec. 12-148. - Fees; Sunday sales. 
(a)  Licensees issued a license under this division shall pay the currently required fee to the city clerk. No fee shall be charged for the sale of religious books, publications, etc. 
(b)  Provisions for selling on Sunday shall be the same as required by Sunday sales requirements as provided by ordinance. 
(Code 1994, § 12-69; Ord. of 9-9-1991(1), § C; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3) 
Sec. 12-149. - Maximum number of licenses to be issued. 
    The maximum number of hawker and peddler licenses which are authorized for issuance during the licensing year shall not exceed ten. 
(Code 1994, § 12-70; Ord. of 9-9-1991(1), § D; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3) 
Sec. 12-150. - One-day hawker license. 
    The city clerk shall issue a hawker license valid for one day. No licensee shall be issued more than four said licenses per calendar year. 
(Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3) 
Secs. 12-151-12-166. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ITINERANT RESTAURANTS, CATERERS AND TRAVELING RESTAURANTS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Itinerant vendors, G.L. 1956, § 5-15-1 et seq.; hawkers and peddlers, G.L. 1956, § 5-11-1.1 et seq.; taverns, cookshops, and oyster houses, G.L. 1956, § 5-24-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-167. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Caterers means establishments set up to prepare meals that will be transported and served at parties held on or off the premises. 
    Itinerant restaurant means a restaurant, such as a food truck, operating for a temporary period in connection with a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition or other similar gathering. 
    Traveling restaurant means a restaurant which moves from place to place, such as a food truck, to operate, dispensing sandwiches, hot dogs, box lunches, pastry, coffee, beverages, ice cream, etc. 
(Code 1973, § 14-54; Code 1994, § 12-81; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3) 
Secs. 12-168-12-187. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 12-188. - Required; suspension; revocation. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Jukebox means any music vending machine, contrivance or device which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or key into any slot, crevice or other opening, or by the payment of any price, operates or may be operated for the emission of songs, music or similar amusement. 
    Mechanical amusement device means any machine which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, may be operated by the public generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a score. The term "mechanical amusement device" includes such devices as marble machines, pinball machines, skill ball, mechanical grab machines, mechanical pool tables and all games, operations or transactions similar thereto under whatever name they may be described. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any itinerant restaurant, traveling restaurant or catering service in the service in the city without first obtaining a license under this division from the city council and posting such license in a conspicuous place on the premises. 
(c)  The city council may at any time suspend any license for cause for such time as they may deem necessary or reasonable under the circumstances, not exceeding ten days. However, no license shall be revoked until after a hearing before the city council. 
(d)  Every person licensed under this division shall maintain good order in the building licensed and shall not allow any person in the licensed building to become intoxicated, nor shall he take in pawn or pledge any article whatsoever; neither shall he allow the licensed building to become frequented by any common drunkard or person addicted to the intemperate use of spirituous or intoxicating liquors, or by any person who is a disturber of the peace, or who is wasting his property or earnings and means of supporting himself and family, or by any person under lawful age. 
(Code 1973, § 14-55; Code 1994, § 12-91; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3) 
Sec. 12-189. - Term; fees. 
(a)  The license period for itinerant restaurants, traveling restaurants and caterers shall begin on December 1 and end on November 30 of the succeeding year. 
(b)  The annual fee for each itinerant restaurant, each traveling restaurant and caterers shall be set from time to time by the council and a schedule of such fees is on file in the city offices. 
(Code 1973, § 14-56; Code 1994, § 12-92; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3) 
Secs. 12-190-12-216. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - JUNK AND SECONDHAND DEALERS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Secondhand dealers, G.L. 1956, § 5-21-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-217. - Article not applicable to certain shopkeepers. 
    This article shall not apply to keepers of shops for the purchase, sale or barter of books, pamphlets, periodicals or household furniture. 
(Code 1973, § 14-48; Code 1994, § 12-106; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3) 
Sec. 12-218. - Hours of business. 
    No keeper of any junk shop, shop or storehouse shall do or suffer to be done any business therein between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; except, that a keeper in used and secondhand motor vehicle premises may do or suffer to be done business on such yard or premises for the purpose of buying, selling, trading or dealing at any and all reasonable times except between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Code 1973, § 14-45; Code 1994, § 12-107; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3) 
Sec. 12-219. - Dealing with minors. 
    No person licensed under this article shall, directly or indirectly, either purchase or receive in barter or exchange any junk, old metals, motor vehicles, parts, accessories or secondhand articles from any minor, unless such minor is licensed in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 14-47; Code 1994, § 12-110; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3) 
Sec. 12-220. - Record to be kept; information to be shown. 
    Every person licensed under this article, except licensed gatherers, shall keep in a book obtained from or under the direction of the city clerk a contemporaneous record, in ink and in the English language, of the business done by him, as follows: 
(1)  A description of every article purchased or sold by him, at the time of such purchase or sale. 
(2)  The name and residence of the person from whom or to whom each article was purchased or sold. 
(3)  The day and hour of each purchase or sale. 
(Code 1973, § 14-41; Code 1994, § 12-111) 
Sec. 12-221. - Inspections. 
    The book of record required to be kept by section 12-220 and every shop, storehouse, yard and premises, bag, wagon, cart, conveyance or foundry or place of business of any person licensed under this article shall be subject to the inspection and examination of the director of public safety and any member of the police division. 
(Code 1973, § 14-42; Code 1994, § 12-112) 
Sec. 12-222. - Daily reports to police. 
    Every person licensed under this article, except a gatherer, shall, every day except Sundays, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m., deliver to the chief of police at his office on blank forms to be prescribed by the chief a legible and correct transcript from the book kept by such licensed person as provided for in section 12-220 showing the business done by such person during the business day immediately preceding. 
(Code 1973, § 14-44; Code 1994, § 12-113) 
Sec. 12-223. - Property not to be sold for ten days; to be kept separate and distinct during such period; exceptions. 
    Every person licensed under this article shall keep any property purchased or received by him for a period of ten days from and after the report required to be made by him to the chief of police by section 12-222. During such period, such property shall be kept separate and distinct and shall not be disfigured or treated in any way by which its identity may be destroyed or affected; except, however, that any person licensed as a gatherer may at any time sell any such property to a keeper of a shop, yard, premises or storehouse or a foundryman within the city or other person licensed as provided in this article; and except that any keeper of a shop, yard, premises or storehouse or any foundryman or other person licensed under this article may dispose of, sell or melt such property within such period of ten days upon permission in writing from the chief of police or from such person as he shall designate to act for him. Such permission shall be given upon proof that the property is not stolen. 
(Code 1973, § 14-43; Code 1994, § 12-114; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3) 
Sec. 12-224. - Gatherer's badge. 
(a)  Every gatherer of junk or secondhand articles, when licensed by the city council, shall obtain from the city clerk a badge and shall at all times wear such badge conspicuously. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  Not to be worn after expiration or revocation of license. No person shall wear any gatherer's badge after the expiration or revocation of the license represented by it. 
(e)  Use by another. Any licensed gatherer who shall suffer any badge issued to him to be used by another person for a purpose similar to that for which the badge was issued to him shall forfeit the badge, together with the license represented by it. 
(Code 1973, §§ 14-35-14-39; Code 1994, § 12-133; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3) 
Secs. 12-225-12-241. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 12-242. - Required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of purchasing, selling, bartering, dealing or trading in junk, old metals, used and secondhand motor vehicles or any secondhand articles, whether as keeper of a shop, yard, premises or storehouse for the reception of the same or as a gatherer of the same in any bag, cart or conveyance, or as a foundryman or other person receiving the same for the purpose of melting the same or of converting the same into castings, or as a used parts dealer, or for the purpose of dismantling the same, unless such person shall be duly licensed by the city council by a license duly issued by the city clerk and subject to the conditions and restrictions provided in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 14-27; Code 1994, § 12-126; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3) 
Sec. 12-243. - Application. 
(a)  Every applicant for any license required by section 12-242 shall set forth, with full particulars upon a form to be furnished by the city clerk, the following information: 
(1)  Name and address, both of residence and of business, of the applicant. 
(2)  Age of the applicant. 
(b)  The application shall be referred to the chief of police for his approval or disapproval before being acted upon by the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 14-28; Code 1994, § 12-127; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3) 
Sec. 12-244. - Advertising application; hearing. 
    All applications for a license to keep a shop, yard, premises or storehouse regulated by this article shall be advertised, notice of hearing provided, and a hearing had thereon before the license shall be granted. The cost of such advertisement shall be paid by the applicant at the time of filing his application therefor. 
(Code 1973, § 14-29; Code 1994, § 12-128; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3) 
Sec. 12-245. - Fees. 
(a)  The fees for a junk or secondhand dealer's license shall be set from time to time by the council in accordance with state law and a schedule of such fees is on file in the city offices. 
(b)  No rebate shall be made from the license fee provided for in this section for any license term less than one year. 
(Code 1973, §§ 14-30, 14-31; Code 1994, § 12-129; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3) 
Sec. 12-246. - Display. 
    Every keeper of any junk shop or storehouse licensed under this division shall display, in a conspicuous place within his shop, yard, premises or storehouse, the license granted to him. 
(Code 1973, § 14-32; Code 1994, § 12-130; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3) 
Sec. 12-247. - Expiration. 
    All licenses granted under the provisions of this division shall expire on June 1 next succeeding the date of such license. 
(Code 1973, § 14-33; Code 1994, § 12-131; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3) 
Sec. 12-248. - Revocation. 
    The city council, sitting as board of license commissioners may revoke any license granted under the provisions of this division for any violation of the laws of the state or of this article or other ordinances of the city, or for any cause which the council considers to warrant such revocation. No such license shall be revoked, however, unless the holder thereof is given notice of the charge against him at least three days before the hearing thereon and the opportunity to be heard 
(Code 1973, § 14-34; Code 1994, § 12-132; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3) 
Secs. 12-249-12-274. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PALMISTRY, PHRENOLOGY AND FORTUNETELLING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 12-275-12-296. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 12-297. - Required. 
    No person shall offer his services as a palmist, phrenologist or fortuneteller without first having obtained a license as provided in this division. 
(Code 1973, § 14-63; Code 1994, § 12-156) 
Sec. 12-298. - Application. 
    Applications for licenses required by this division shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(Code 1973, § 14-64; Code 1994, § 12-158) 
Sec. 12-299. - Approval of application; issuance. 
    Upon application for licenses under this division being approved by the chief of police, the city clerk shall issue such licenses. 
(Code 1973, § 14-65; Code 1994, § 12-159) 
Sec. 12-300. - Duration; expiration. 
    All licenses issued under the provisions of this division shall be for the term of one year and shall expire on December 31; provided, however, that any license issued in the month of December shall expire on December 31 in the year next succeeding. 
(Code 1973, § 14-66; Code 1994, § 12-160) 
Sec. 12-301. - Fee. 
    The currently required annual fee for a license under this division shall be collected by the city clerk before issuing such license. 
(Code 1973, § 14-67; Code 1994, § 12-161) 
Sec. 12-302. - Not transferable. 
    No license issued under the provisions of this division shall be transferable. 
(Code 1973, § 14-70; Code 1994, § 12-162) 
Sec. 12-303. - Use by person other than licensee prohibited. 
    No license issued under the provisions of this division shall authorize any person other than the one named therein to act thereunder. 
(Code 1973, § 14-69; Code 1994, § 12-163) 
Secs. 12-304-12-324. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PARKING LOTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 12-325-12-351. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 12-352. - Required. 
    No person shall engage in the business or trade of parking motor vehicles for a fee, including the parking of such vehicles for temporary periods, unless such person shall be duly registered by the city council by a permit duly issued by the city clerk. 
(Code 1973, § 14-71; Code 1994, § 12-186; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3) 
Sec. 12-353. - Terms and conditions. 
    The permit required by section 12-352 shall be issued subject to such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 14-72; Code 1994, § 12-187; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3) 
Sec. 12-354. - Fee. 
    The currently required fee for the permit required by this division shall be paid to the city clerk before the issuance thereof. No rebate shall be made from the permit fee for any permit term less than one year. 
(Code 1973, § 14-74; Code 1994, § 12-189; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3) 
Sec. 12-355. - Expiration. 
    The permit granted under this division shall expire on June 1 next succeeding the date of such permit. 
(Code 1973, § 14-73; Code 1994, § 12-188; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3) 
Secs. 12-356-12-383. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - SOLICITORS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Solicitation by charitable organizations, G.L. 1956, § 5-53.1-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-384. - Article not applicable to local churches and pastors. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to any person organized and operated exclusively for religious or political advocacy purposes and not operated for the pecuniary profit of any such person, if the solicitations by such established person are conducted among the members thereof by other members or officers thereof voluntarily and without remuneration for making such solicitations, or if the solicitations are in form of collections or contributions at the regular assembly or services of any such person; provided further, however, that no person shall be deemed to be a member if such person is a member solely by reason of having made a contribution thereto. 
(Code 1973, § 14-62; Code 1994, § 12-211; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3) 
Secs. 12-385-12-411. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 12-412. - Required. 
    No solicitations of any type from house to house, including sales for cash, credit or future delivery, alms for charitable organizations or otherwise, shall be made by any person unless a permit therefor is first obtained from the city. 
(Code 1973, § 14-57; Code 1994, § 12-221; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3) 
Sec. 12-413. - Application. 
    Application for the permit required by this division shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(Code 1973, § 14-58; Code 1994, § 12-222; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3) 
Sec. 12-414. - Approval of application. 
    No permit required by this division shall be issued until the application therefor is approved by the chief of police. 
(Code 1973, § 14-59; Code 1994, § 12-223; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3) 
Sec. 12-415. - Term. 
    All permits issued under the provisions of this division shall be for the term of 30 days, and the expiration date thereof shall be clearly indicated on the face of any such permit so issued. 
(Code 1973, § 14-61; Code 1994, § 12-225; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3) 
Sec. 12-416. - Must be carried on person. 
    The permit required by this division must be carried upon the person of the solicitor at all times as a means of identification. 
(Code 1973, § 14-60; Code 1994, § 12-224; Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3) 
ARTICLE X. - TOBACCO DEALERS 

Sec. 12-417. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Characterizing flavor means a distinguishable taste or aroma, other than the taste or aroma of tobacco, menthol, mint, or wintergreen, imparted either prior to or during consumption of a tobacco product or component part thereof, including, but not limited to, tastes or aromas relating to any fruit, chocolate, vanilla, honey, candy, cocoa, dessert, alcoholic beverage, herb, or spice; provided, however, that no tobacco product shall be determined to have a characterizing flavor solely because of the use of additives or flavorings or the provision of ingredient information. 
    Cigar means any roll of tobacco other than a cigarette wrapped entirely or in part in tobacco or any substance containing tobacco and weighing more than four pounds per thousand. 
    Cigarette means: 
(1)  Any roll of tobacco wrapped in paper or in any substance not containing tobacco; and 
(2)  Any roll of tobacco wrapped in any substance containing tobacco which, because of its appearance, the type of tobacco used in the filler, or its packaging and labeling, is likely to be offered to, or purchased by, consumers as a cigarette described in clause (1) of this definition. 
    Component part means any element of a tobacco product, including, but not limited to, the tobacco, filter, and paper, but not including any constituent. 
    Constituent means any ingredient, substance, chemical, or compound, other than tobacco, water, or reconstituted tobacco sheet, which is added by the manufacturer to a tobacco product during the processing, manufacture, or packing of the tobacco product. Such term shall include a smoke constituent. 
    Consumer means a person who purchases a tobacco product for consumption and not for sale to another. 
    Coupon means any voucher, rebate, card, paper, note, form, statement, ticket, image, or other issue; whether in paper, digital, or other form; used for commercial purposes to obtain an article, product, service, or accommodation without charge or at a discounted price. 
    Distinguishable means perceivable by an ordinary consumer by either the sense of smell or taste. 
    Flavored tobacco product means any tobacco product, other than a cigarette, that contains a constituent that imparts a characterizing flavor. 
    Full retail price means the higher of the price listed for a tobacco product on its packaging or the price listed on any related shelving, posting, advertising, or display where the tobacco product is sold or offered for sale, plus all applicable taxes and fees if such taxes and fees are not included in the listed price, and before the application of any discounts or coupons. 
    Little cigar means any roll of tobacco other than a cigarette wrapped entirely or in part in tobacco or any substance containing tobacco and weighing no more than four pounds per thousand. "Little cigar" includes, but is not limited to, tobacco products known or labeled as "small cigar" or "little cigar." 
    Non-cigarette tobacco product means a tobacco product that is not a cigarette. 
    Package or packaging means a pack, box, carton, or container of any kind or, if no other container, any wrapping (including cellophane) in which a tobacco product is sold or offered for sale to a consumer. 
    Person means any natural person, partnership, firm, joint stock company, corporation, or employee thereof, or other legal entity. 
    Sale or sell means any transfer, exchange, barter, gift, offer for sale, or distribution for a commercial purpose, in any manner or by any means whatsoever. 
    Smoke constituent means any chemical or chemical compound in mainstream or sidestream tobacco product smoke that either transfers from any component of the tobacco product to the smoke or that is formed by the combustion or heating of tobacco, additives, or other component of the tobacco product. 
    Tobacco product means: 
(1)  Any product containing, made, or derived from tobacco or nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, and snuff; and 
(2)  Any electronic device that delivers nicotine or other substances to the person inhaling from the device, including, but not limited to, an electronic cigarette, cigar, pipe, or hookah. 
    Notwithstanding any provision of clauses (1) and (2) in this definition to the contrary, tobacco product includes any component, part, or accessory of a tobacco product, whether or not sold separately; tobacco product does not include any product that has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product or for other therapeutic purposes where such product is marketed and sold solely for such an approved purpose. 
    Vending machine means any mechanical, electric, or electronic self-service device which, upon insertion of money, tokens, or any other form of payment, dispenses tobacco products. 
(Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3; Ord. of 2-13-2017(2) , § 1) 
Sec. 12-418. - License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to sell or to possess with the intention of selling tobacco products within the city without having first obtained a tobacco dealer's license pursuant to this article. Such license shall be in addition to any other license required by state and/or federal law. A tobacco dealer's license is valid for one person at one location and may not be transferred from one person to another or from one location to another. Failure to obtain and maintain a valid license shall result in a fine of $500.00. The fee for the tobacco dealer's license shall be $100.00 per year. All licenses granted under the provisions of this article shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within the business so licensed. 
(b)  There shall be a maximum of one license per 1,000 city residents and, in no circumstance, shall the location of a license holder be located within 250 feet of the premises of any public, private, or parochial school. The number of city residents shall be determined and published annually by the city clerk based on data from the United States Census Bureau. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any holder of a license as of April 1, 2017 shall be entitled to annual renewal so long as the license is not abandoned, suspended or revoked prior to the renewal application; the right of entitlement for renewal cannot be forwarded or be assigned to another person or entity. 
(Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3; Ord. of 2-13-2017(2) , § 1) 
Sec. 12-419. - License eligibility. 
    Licenses shall only be granted to authorize the sale of tobacco products within the city at a fixed location. For example, the sale of tobacco products by persons on foot or from vehicles is prohibited. 
(Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3; Ord. of 2-13-2017(2) , § 1) 
Sec. 12-420. - License application; term. 
    Application for a license shall be submitted to the board of license commissioners together with an application fee of $100.00. A tobacco dealer's license shall be effective through the 30 th day of November of the calendar year for which it is issued. No license shall be granted without proof that the applicant has obtained all necessary state licenses for the sale of tobacco products. 
(Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3; Ord. of 2-13-2017(2) , § 1) 
Sec. 12-421. - Requirements and prohibitions applicable to licensees. 
(a)  Intent. No licensee, or employee or agent of such licensee, shall sell or possess with the intention of selling a tobacco product to another person who appears to be under the age of 27 years without first examining the identification of the recipient to confirm that the recipient is at least the minimum age under state law to purchase and possess the tobacco product. 
(b)  Display of price. The price of each tobacco product offered for sale shall be clearly and conspicuously displayed to clearly indicate the price of the product. 
(c)  Packaging and labeling. No licensee, or employee or agent of such licensee, shall sell any tobacco product unless such product: 
(1)  Is sold in the original manufacturer's packaging intended for sale to consumers; and 
(2)  Conforms to all applicable federal labeling requirements. 
(d)  Prohibition of tobacco coupons and discounts. No licensee, or employee or agent of such licensee, shall: 
(1)  Accept or redeem, or offer to accept or redeem, or cause or hire any person to accept or redeem or offer to accept or redeem any coupon that provides any tobacco product to a consumer without charge or for less than the full retail price; 
(2)  Sell any tobacco product to a consumer through a multiple-package discount (e.g., "buy-two-get-one-free") or otherwise provide any tobacco product to a consumer for less than the full retail price in exchange for the purchase of any other tobacco product; 
(3)  Provide any free or discounted item to a consumer in exchange for the purchase of any tobacco product. 
(e)  Sale of flavored tobacco products prohibited. No licensee, or employee or agent of such licensee, shall sell any flavored tobacco product to a consumer. A non-cigarette tobacco product is presumed to be a flavored tobacco product if a manufacturer or any of the manufacturer's agents or employees has: 
(1)  Made a public statement or claim that the non-cigarette tobacco product has or produces a characterizing flavor, including, but not limited to, text and/or images on the product's labeling or packaging that are used to explicitly or implicitly communicate information about the flavor, taste, or aroma of a non-cigarette tobacco product; or 
(2)  Taken action directed to consumers that would be reasonably expected to result in consumers believing that the non-cigarette tobacco product imparts a characterizing flavor. 
    Each licensee shall maintain on the premises the original labeling and packaging provided by the manufacturer for all tobacco products that are sold or offered for sale by the licensee separately from the original packaging designed for retail sale to the consumer. The original labeling and packaging from which the contents are sold separately shall be maintained during such time as the contents of the package are offered for sale, and may be disposed of upon the sale of the entire contents of such package. This subsection (e) shall not apply to a smoking bar as defined in G.L. 1956, § 23-20.10-2(15). 
(f)  [Underage sale/distribution prohibited.] The sale or distribution of any tobacco product to a person under the age of 21 is prohibited. 
(Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3; Ord. of 2-13-2017(2) , § 1) 
Sec. 12-422. - Suspension or revocation of license-Fines and costs. 
    The police department and the city solicitor shall enforce the provisions of this article. All licensees shall be subject to a compliance check at least two times a year; violators shall be checked more frequently until two consecutive compliance checks are completed without violation. If an alleged violation occurs, the police department shall issue a citation that will require the licensee to appear for a show cause hearing before the city council sitting as the board of license commissioners. If, after a hearing, the board finds that a violation has occurred, the board may impose a civil fine of $250.00 for the first offense, $350.00 for the second offense, and $500.00 for any subsequent offense. Additionally, the board may suspend or revoke the license or provide any other sanction authorized under the law. If a licensee maintains its license for 36 consecutive months without a violation, any new violation shall be treated as a first offense. It is the intent of this section that all fees and fines collected by the city hereunder shall be used by the police department for the purpose of conducting tobacco product and/or licensing compliance checks. 
(Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3; Ord. of 2-13-2017(2) , § 1) 
Sec. 12-423. - Use of premises during license suspension. 
    During the period of any suspension of a tobacco dealer's license, the licensee shall remove all tobacco products from the retail display area of the location and secure them in a locked area for the duration of the suspension. If, at any time during the suspension period, the licensee is found to be selling, distributing, or delivering any tobacco products, the license shall be revoked. 
(Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3; Ord. of 2-13-2017(2) , § 1) 
Sec. 12-424. - Vending machines. 
    Businesses which have vending machines shall be subject to the same fines and penalties as described in this article. In the event that a tobacco dealer's license is suspended or revoked, then the vending machine shall be removed from the licensed location for the period of suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3; Ord. of 2-13-2017(2) , § 1) 
Sec. 12-425. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this article, or application thereof to any person or circumstances, is held unconstitutional, illegal, or otherwise invalid, the remaining provisions of this article and the application of such provisions to other persons or circumstances, other than those to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. of 10-14-2015 , § 3; Ord. of 2-13-2017(2) , § 1) 
Chapter 14 - COURTS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1-14-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal Court for City of Central Falls authorized, G.L. 1956, § 45-2-27. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-19. - Established. 
    Pursuant to G.L. 1956, § 45-2-27, there is established a municipal court in the city. 
(Code 1994, § 14-1; Ord. of 8-3-1988, art. I, § 1; Ord. of 5-13-1991(3)) 
Sec. 14-20. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  The city council hereby confers on the municipal court original jurisdiction, notwithstanding any other provisions of the General Laws, to hear and determine causes involving violations of: 
(1)  Any ordinance or the Revised Ordinances of the city; 
(2)  Minimum housing ordinances of the city and any violation of the provisions of G.L. 1956, ch. 45-24.3 (G.L. 1956, § 45-24.3-1 et seq.); 
(3)  Any other jurisdiction conferred by state law. 
    Provided, however, that any defendant found guilty of any offense, excluding violations of the minimum housing ordinances or of said chapter 45-24.3 may, within seven days of such conviction, file an appeal from such conviction to the superior court and be entitled in the latter court to a trial de novo; and, provided further, that any defendant found guilty of any violation of a minimum housing ordinance or of said chapter 45-24.3 may, within seven days of conviction, file an appeal from such conviction to the fifth district court and be entitled to a trial de novo in accordance with G.L. 1956, §§ 8-8-3(a)(4) and 8-8-3.2. 
    (b) With respect to violations of municipal ordinances dealing with rubbish collection, housing or G.L. 1956, ch. 45-24.3 (G.L. 1956, § 45-24.3-1 et seq.), state housing maintenance and occupancy code, the city council hereby confers upon the municipal court, in furtherance of the aforesaid jurisdiction, the power to proceed according to equity: 
(1)  To restrain, prevent, enjoin, abate or correct a violation or nuisance, including, but not limited to, the following powers: 
a.  Enforce § 12-4 of the City of Central Falls Revised Ordinances; 
b.  Order that violators perform community service; 
c.  Order that violators complete landlord training classes; 
d.  Order that violators partake in approved methods of tenant screening; and to 
e.  Make any order that the court deems necessary to correct or abate a violation or nuisance, pursuant to the court's equitable powers. 
(2)  To order the repair, vacation or demolition of any dwelling existing in violation; 
(3)  To otherwise compel compliance with all the provisions of such ordinances and statutes; or 
(4)  To order a dwelling into receivership and to order the removal of any cloud on the title to the building or property which shall be binding upon all those claiming by, through, under, or by virtue of any inferior liens or encumbrances pursuant to Rhode Island General Laws § 34-44-1 et seq.; 
(5)  To impose fines not in excess of $500.00 per each instance of violation, which shall escalate in total for repeat offenders and shall vary in amount subject to the violation; and 
(6)  To punish persons for contempt. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the municipal court's equitable powers. 
(Code 1994, § 14-10; Ord. of 8-3-1988, art. II, § 6; Ord. of 9-12-1988, art. II, § 5; Ord. of 3-23-2015(1) ; Ord. of 3-14-2016(1) ) 
Sec. 14-21. - Charter provisions. 
    The provisions of the Charter shall apply to the municipal court to the extent that such provisions are not inconsistent with this chapter. To the extent that such provisions are inconsistent, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Code 1994, § 14-6; Ord. of 8-3-1988, art. III, § 2; Ord. of 3-23-2015(1)) 
Sec. 14-22. - Funding of the municipal court. 
    The mayor is authorized by the city council to appropriate such sums as are necessary for the operation of the municipal court. 
(Code 1994, § 14-5; Ord. of 9-12-1988, art. III, § 4; Ord. of 3-23-2015(1)) 
Sec. 14-23. - Witnesses, attendance; subpoenas. 
    The municipal court shall have the power to issue writs or summonses for witnesses, and compel their attendance, and to punish for contempt by fine or imprisonment. The court may also issue writs of habeas corpus ad testificandum, upon continuance of any complaint or proceeding before it, may take recognizance to the state, with surety in such sum as the court shall deem proper, with the condition to appear before the court and make further answer to such complaint or proceeding, and in the meantime to keep the peace, and, in want thereof, may commit the same to the state adult correctional institutions until such recognizance shall be given, or the parties lawfully discharged therefrom. 
(Code 1994, § 14-7; Ord. of 8-3-1988, art. II, § 1; Ord. of 3-23-2015(1)) 
Sec. 14-24. - Seals and oaths. 
(a)  The municipal court shall have a seal which shall contain such words and device as the city council shall adopt and approve. 
(b)  The judge and the municipal court clerk shall have the power to administer oaths and affirmations. 
(Code 1994, § 14-8; Ord. of 8-3-1988, art. II, § 4; Ord. of 9-12-1988, art. II, § 3; Ord. of 3-23-2015(1)) 
Sec. 14-25. - Sessions, time and place. 
    The municipal court shall be considered to be in session at all times, and at such place in the city as the court, or judge holding same, shall appoint, subject, however, to the provision that a regular court session shall be held in the City Hall Council Chambers every other Tuesday or at such additional sessions as deemed necessary. 
(Code 1994, § 14-9; Ord. of 8-3-1988, art. II, § 5; Ord. of 9-12-1988, art. II, § 4; Ord. of 3-23-2015(1)) 
Sec. 14-26. - Fines, penalties, imprisonment. 
    In all matters within the jurisdiction of the municipal court, the court, may impose a fine not in excess of $500.00 per violation or impose voluntary community service not to exceed 50 hours, or any combination thereof. 
(Code 1994, § 14-11; Ord. of 8-3-1988, art. II, § 7; Ord. of 9-12-1988, art. II, § 6; Ord. of 11-8-2004(1); Ord. of 3-23-2015(1); Ord. of 9-14-2015(3) , § 4) 
Sec. 14-27. - Complaints, warrants, writs. 
    It shall be lawful for the judge of the municipal court to prescribe and vary the form of all complaints, warrants, writs or other process so as to make the same consistent with the organization, style and jurisdiction of such court; and such complaints, warrants, writs and other process shall have the same effect, validity and extent, and be served, obeyed, enforced and returned, in the same manner and by the same officers as if issued from the district court; and they may be served by any constables of the city who are authorized to serve in civil or criminal cases. 
(Code 1994, § 14-12; Ord. of 8-3-1988, art. II, § 8; Ord. of 9-12-1988, art. II, § 7; Ord. of 3-23-2015(1)) 
Sec. 14-28. - Rules of evidence. 
(a)  Exclusions; admissibility; written form . Irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded from court hearings. The rules of evidence as applied in criminal cases before the district court of the state shall be followed, but when necessary to ascertain facts not reasonably susceptible of proof under those rules, evidence not admissible under those rules may be submitted if it is a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. When a hearing will be expedited and the interest of the parties will not be prejudiced substantially, any part of the evidence may be received in written form. 
(b)  Prima facie evidence of ownership . In all proceedings before the municipal court, evidence that at the time of the incident a motor vehicle was last registered in the name of the defendant shall be prima facie evidence that the defendant was the last owner. 
(Code 1994, § 14-13; Ord. of 1-9-1989, art. II, § 9; Ord. of 3-23-2015(1)) 
Sec. 14-29. - Costs. 
(a)  Costs taxed by the municipal court shall be set from time to time by ordinance of the city council. 
(b)  All payments of court costs shall be made in the office of the municipal clerk, then to be deposited in the general treasury of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 14-14; Ord. of 8-3-1988, art. III, § 1; Ord. of 3-23-2015(1)) 
Sec. 14-30. - Purpose of article. 
    This article shall be liberally construed to the end that all the people be housed in dwellings that are safe, sanitary and fit for human habitation; and that levels of residential environmental quality be achieved and maintained as will protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare of the people of the City of Central Falls. 
(Ord. of 3-23-2015(1)) 
Secs. 14-31-14-46. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - JUDGE AND OTHER PERSONNEL 

Sec. 14-47. - Judge. 
(a)  Appointment. The judge of the municipal court shall be appointed by the city council at its first regular meeting in January of each even-numbered year. 
(b)  Term. The municipal court judge shall serve for a period of two years, or until his successor shall be duly appointed and qualified, such term to commence at the first regular meeting of the city council in January of each even-numbered year. 
(c)  Qualifications. The judge of the municipal court shall be a practicing attorney with five years of experience and be admitted to practice law in the state by the state supreme court. 
(d)  Residence. Preference will be given to city residents in the appointment of the municipal court judge. 
(Code 1994, § 14-2; Ord. of 8-3-1988, art. I, § 2; Ord. of 1-6-1993(2), art. I, § 2) 
Sec. 14-48. - Clerk/associate judge. 
(a)  The municipal court clerk and associate judge shall be one and the same. 
(b)  The clerk of the court shall keep a regular docket of all cases disposed of; shall record the judgments, orders, and sentences of the court; and shall charge the same fees as are by law allowed to clerks of the superior court. The clerk's office shall be open to the public during the hours established by city ordinance. 
(c)  The city council shall authorize the mayor to provide the secretarial and administrative assistance necessary for the court to perform its duties and responsibilities. 
(d)  The city council shall appoint the municipal court clerk/associate judge, whose term shall run concurrently with that of the municipal court judge. The associate judge of the municipal court shall be a practicing attorney with three years of experience and be admitted to practice law in the state by the state supreme court. 
(e)  Preference for the position of municipal court clerk/associate judge will be given to city residents. 
(Code 1994, § 14-3; Ord. of 8-3-1988, art. II, § 2; Ord. of 9-12-1988, art. II, § 2; Ord. of 5-12-2008(1), § 14-3) 
Sec. 14-49. - Acting judge. 
(a)  In case of the sickness, absence from the city or other disability or ineligibility of the judge of the municipal court to serve and in the absence of an associate judge it is hereby declared that the probate judge shall perform the duties of said judge during the sickness, absence or other inability or ineligibility of the municipal court judge. 
(b)  In the event that the probate judge is not available, the council may appoint any member of the bar of the state with at least five years' legal experience for the time that the probate judge is not available. 
(c)  The acts of the acting judge in the performance of said duties shall have the same effect as if performed by the municipal court judge. 
(Code 1994, § 14-15; Ord. of 4-27-2001) 
Chapter 16 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Rhode Island Emergency Management Act, G.L. 1956, § 30-15-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1-16-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BURGLAR OR HOLD-UP ALARM SYSTEMS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Burglar and hold-up alarm businesses, G.L. 1956, § 5-57-1 et seq.; local regulation of alarm businesses, G.L. 1956, § 5-57-38. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 16-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm business means any business of any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity engaged in selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing any alarm system to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved or installed in or on any building, structure or facility. 
    Alarm permit means a permit issued by the city allowing the operation of an alarm system within the city. 
    Alarm system means any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical, arranged to signal the occurrence of an illegal entry or other activity requiring urgent attention and to which the police department is expected to respond, but does not include alarms installed in conveyances or fire alarms. 
    Alarm user means the person in control of any building, structure or facility or portion thereof wherein an alarm system is maintained. 
    Appeal officer means the director of public safety or an individual designated by the director of public safety to act in the capacity as an impartial arbitrator to review appeals related to the enforcement of this article. 
    Automatic telephone dialing alarm system means the automatic dialing of any automatic telephone dialing alarm system, and shall include any system which, upon being activated, automatically transmits by telephone or message or code signal indicating a need for emergency response; or a system which, upon activation, connects to an answering service whose function it is to transmit to the police department a need for emergency response. 
    False alarm means an alarm signal eliciting a response by police where a situation requiring a response by the police does not in fact exist; but this definition does not include an alarm signal caused by unusually violent conditions of nature, nor does it include other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm user. 
(Code 1994, § 16-26; Ord. of 1-6-1993(3), § 1) 
Sec. 16-20. - Requirements of alarm users. 
(a)  There shall be a list known as the alarm information list, which will consist of the following information for a security alarm system signal: 
(1)  The street address, apartment number if any, office, suite number or the exact location of the security alarm system. 
(2)  The name of the person protected by the alarm system. 
(3)  The entire name, street address, city/town and state of the subscriber as well as the area code and the telephone number. 
(4)  The entire names, street addresses, cities/towns and states as well as the area codes and telephone numbers of at least two separate individuals (aside from the subscriber as indicated in subsection (a)(3) of this section) who can be reached 24 hours a day and who are authorized to respond to an alarm signal, and who have access into the premises or location in which the alarm is located. 
(b)  All information obtained and maintained by the city pursuant to this section shall be confidential, a matter of public safety, and shall not be subject to disclosure to a third party unless specifically authorized in writing by the applicant or the public safety director for good cause shown or upon order of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  Every individual, partnership, corporation or other entity doing business in the city as an alarm service shall provide the director of public safety with an alarm information list, setting forth all of their security alarm subscribers in the city. Further, such companies shall notify the director of public safety, by certified mail, of any change in status or additions or deletions to the alarm information list within five working days. 
(d)  On January 1 of each year, alarm service companies doing business in the city shall file a notice with the director of public safety certifying the accuracy of the alarm information list. 
(e)  Every security alarm user must notify the director of public safety in writing at least two days but not more than 15 days in advance of testing of security alarm equipment. Failure to notify the director of public safety in advance of a testing, as established hereby, shall constitute a false alarm and be subject to the assessment schedule contained in section 16-22. 
(Code 1994, § 16-27; Ord. of 1-6-1993(3), § 6) 
Sec. 16-21. - Response to alarm; determination and validity. 
(a)  Whenever an alarm is activated in the city, thereby requiring an emergency response to the location by the police department, and the police department does respond, a police officer on the scene of the activated alarm system shall inspect the area protected by the system and shall determine whether the emergency response was in fact required as indicated by the alarm system or whether in some way the alarm system malfunctioned and thereby activated a false alarm. 
(b)  If the police officer at the scene of the activated alarm system determines the alarm to be false, such officer shall make a report of the false alarm, a notification of which shall be mailed or delivered to the alarm user at the address of the alarm system installation location, advising the alarm user of the false alarm. 
(c)  The chief of police or his designee shall have the right to inspect any alarm system on the premises to which a response has been made, and he may cause an inspection of such system to be made at any reasonable time thereafter to determine whether it is being used in conformity with the terms of this article. 
(Code 1994, § 16-28; Ord. of 1-6-1993(3), § 7) 
Sec. 16-22. - False alarm assessment schedule. 
(a)  After the chief of police or his designee has recorded three separate false alarms from a security alarm system, then the alarm user will be notified by the chief of police or his designee, via first class mail, of such facts and shall be required to submit, within ten working days, a report describing the alarm user's efforts to discover and eliminate the cause of the false alarms. This notice shall contain the dates and times of each alleged false alarm. If the chief of police or his designee determines that a report submitted in accordance with this section is unsatisfactory or that the alarm user has failed to show by the report that reasonable steps have been taken to eliminate or reduce false alarms, then the chief of police or his designee will inform the alarm user that subsequent false alarms will cause the alarm user to be assessed monetary charges as follows: 
(1)  For the fourth false alarm in a 12-month period, $75.00. 
(2)  For each subsequent false alarm thereafter in a 12-month period, $150.00. 
(3)  For failure to obtain and maintain a valid alarm permit within seven days subsequent to written notification by the chief of police or his designee, $50.00. 
(b)  All assessments/fines assessed under this section shall be paid by certified check or money order payable to the city within ten days of notification. 
(c)  If the alarm user submits a report as required by this section, and the chief of police determines that the action taken or to be taken within reasonable time constraints will substantially reduce the likelihood of false alarms, then the chief of police or his designee shall notify the alarm user, in writing, that no assessment/fine will be made at the time. The alarm user will, however, be subject to assessment/fine procedures on the next false alarm signal transmitted. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to security alarm systems owned and/or operated by agencies of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 16-29; Ord. of 1-6-1993(3), § 8; Ord. of 11-8-1999; Ord. of 3-15-2000) 
Sec. 16-23. - Appeals procedure; penalties. 
(a)  Any alarm user who is aggrieved by a decision of the director of public safety may, within five working days of notice receipt, appeal in writing to the director of public safety for consideration to be waived from the assessment. The director of public safety or his designee will review the appeal with the requested consideration of waiver. If still unsatisfied, the alarm user may, within 30 days of the final decision of the director of public safety, appeal to the city municipal court. 
(b)  Failure to pay any monetary charge under section 16-22 or to file an appeal to the municipal court following 30 days of the final decision of the director of public safety shall constitute a violation of this article, punishable by fines of two times the amount of the monetary charge. 
(Code 1994, § 16-30; Ord. of 1-6-1993(3), § 9) 
Secs. 16-24-16-49. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ALARM USER PERMITS 

Sec. 16-50. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an alarm system without a valid alarm user's permit. 
(b)  All alarm user permits shall be acquired from the city upon filing of an application with the office of public safety director or his designee. 
(c)  All alarm users shall report any changes on their permit to the public safety director or his designee in order to maintain a valid alarm permit. 
(d)  If a business has one or more alarm systems protecting two or more separate structures having different addresses, a separate permit will be required for each structure. 
(e)  Failure to obtain and maintain a valid alarm permit shall result in a fine of $50.00 for the first offense and $100.00 for each additional offense. 
(Code 1994, § 16-41; Ord. of 1-6-1993(3), § 2; Ord. of 11-8-1999) 
Sec. 16-51. - Application; emergency notification and reporting service information. 
(a)  Applications. Applications for alarm user permits shall be made on forms provided by the police department. Each application shall state the name, address and telephone number of the applicant's property to be serviced by the alarm, and the name, address and telephone number of the applicant's residence, if different. If the applicant's alarm is serviced by an alarm company, the application shall also include the name, address and telephone number of that company. 
(b)  Emergency notification. Each application for an alarm user permit shall list an emergency telephone number of the user or his representative to permit prompt notification of alarm calls and facilities assisting the police in the inspection of the property. Changes in emergency telephone numbers shall be kept current, and failure to provide updated information may constitute grounds for revocation of the permit. 
(c)  Reporting service information. Each holder of an alarm user permit shall immediately notify the police department in writing of any and all changes in the information filed with the city regarding such permit. Failure to do so shall constitute grounds for revocation of the permit. 
(Code 1994, § 16-42; Ord. of 1-6-1993(3), § 3) 
Sec. 16-52. - Issuance of permit decals. 
    A decal with the alarm user's permit number, name and permit address will be issued with the alarm user permit. This decal should be prominently posted on or near the front entrance to the premises so that the information provided on the decal is visible from the outside of the structure. If the alarm user does not wish to display a decal, then the alarm user has the option of using his address as the mode of identification for the permit. The alarm user shall signify this on his permit. 
(Code 1994, § 16-43; Ord. of 1-6-1993(3), § 4) 
Sec. 16-53. - Requirements for permit. 
    In order to qualify for an alarm user permit, the user's alarm system shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  All alarm systems shall have a backup power supply that will become effective in the event of a power failure or outage in the source of electricity from the utility company. 
(2)  All alarm systems which utilize an audible bell, horn, siren or other sound-emitting device shall be equipped with an automatic shutoff device which will deactivate the alarm system within 15 minutes after activation. 
(Code 1994, § 16-44; Ord. of 1-6-1993(3), § 5) 
Chapter 18 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Local health regulations, G.L. 1956, § 23-19.2-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1-18-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Order to remove refuse, G.L. 1956, § 23-19.2-4 et seq. 

Sec. 18-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Investigative body means the city fire division, division of code enforcement, the environmental action officer and any other person or department which is authorized by state law or city ordinance to conduct investigations of private property for the city. 
    Nuisance property means any property, both real and personal, within the city which is cited for two or more separate and unrelated violations during two or more separate inspections within a 12-month period by an investigative body of the city. 
    Public nuisance means any condition or use of premises or of building exteriors which is detrimental to the property of others or which causes or tends to cause substantial diminution in value of other property in the neighborhood in which such premises are located, or a building that is a menace to the public health, welfare or safety or that is structurally unsafe, unsanitary or not provided with adequate safe egress, or that constitutes a fire hazard, or is otherwise dangerous to human life, or is otherwise no longer fit and habitable, or that in relation to existing use constitutes a hazard to the public health, welfare or safety by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment. This includes, but is not limited to, the keeping or the depositing on or the scattering over the premises of any of the following: 
(1)  Lumber, junk, trash or debris. 
(2)  Abandoned, discarded or unused objects or equipment such as automobiles, trailers, buildings, furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans, or containers. 
(3)  Any compost pile which is of such a nature so as to spread or harbor disease, emit unpleasant odors or harmful gas or attract rodents, vermin or other disease-carrying pests, animals or insects, provided that the presence of earthworms in a compost pile shall not constitute a nuisance. 
(4)  The using of any part of the property or any public property adjacent thereto for the manufacture, sale, use or delivery of a controlled substance or from possessing on the property or any public property adjacent thereto with the intent to manufacture, sell, use or deliver a controlled substance classified in schedule I or schedule II of G.L. 1956, tit. 21, ch. 28 (G.L. 1956, § 12-28-1.01 et seq.). 
(5)  The using of any part of the property adjacent thereto, to receive or offer or agree to receive any person into any place, structure, house, building or room for the purpose of pandering or committing prostitution or for any other lewd or indecent act. 
(Code 1994, §§ 18-51, 18-54; Ord. of 6-1-2005(3)) 
Sec. 18-20. - Authority of director of public safety. 
(a)  The director of public safety shall have the authority to declare any building or property, be it real or personal, in the city as a public nuisance. 
(b)  The director of public safety shall issue a public nuisance declaration via regular and certified mail to the building or property owner and shall send a copy to the city nuisance task force. 
(c)  The city nuisance task force is constituted as a cross-departmental effort designed to create collaboration among city officials in identifying and abating nuisance properties. The mission of the nuisance task force is to address, in a holistic and systematic way, properties identified as nuisances that negatively impact city neighborhoods, the quality of housing available, and the health and life of city residents, businesses and visitors. The task force shall meet at least once a month and shall be composed of representatives from the following departments and organizations: law, fire, city clerk, police, code enforcement, finance, the mayor's office, the city council, the housing authority, Pawtucket Central Falls Development and the attorney general's office. The goals of the nuisance task force are as follows: create a system to document, track and report on nuisance properties; research and document best practices to address nuisance properties; develop and implement strategies for nuisance abatement that are individually tailored to targeted nuisance property; meet with and assist owners, neighbors and interested parties of nuisance properties in abating the nuisances; request prosecution for those liable for nuisance properties who fail or refuse to abate nuisances; facilitate the transfer of abandoned or otherwise severely neglected properties to responsible owners; identify potential urban redevelopment and neighborhood revitalization opportunities and to facilitate the coordinated and efficient realization of these opportunities; provide multilingual community education and awareness with respect to foreclosure, nuisance avoidance and abatement, responsible ownership, and landlord-tenant relations; complete a comprehensive review, identify improvements and propose revisions of city ordinances; and improve the overall quality of housing stock and quality of life in the neighborhoods in the city. 
(Code 1994, § 18-53; Ord. of 6-1-2005(3); Ord. of 7-10-2017(1) , § 2) 
Sec. 18-21. - Nuisance inspection fee. 
(a)  Any person who owns property in the city and upon declaration of said property as a nuisance property by the director of public safety will be subject to a penalty for the violation of this chapter of up to $500.00. Each and every day subsequent to the declaration received by the owner will constitute a new violation of this chapter until the director of public safety declares that the property is no longer a nuisance. 
(b)  Failure to pay said penalty within 30 days of the citation will result in a lien being placed on the property. 
(Code 1994, § 18-52; Ord. of 6-1-2005(3); Ord. of 7-10-2017(1) , § 2) 
Sec. 18-22. - Appeal to municipal housing court. 
    All appeals contesting municipal action pursuant to this article shall be heard in the municipal housing court or a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1994, § 18-55; Ord. of 6-1-2005(3); Ord. of 7-10-2017(1) , § 2) 
Secs. 18-23-18-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - JUNKED AND ABANDONED VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Abandoned motor vehicles, G.L. 1956, § 31-42-1 et seq. 

Sec. 18-48. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned motor vehicle means a motor vehicle that is inoperable and over eight years old and is left unattended on public property for more than 48 hours, or a motor vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for a period of more than three days, or a motor vehicle that has remained on private property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property for more than three days. 
    Abandoned motor vehicle of no value means a motor vehicle that is inoperable and over ten years old and is left unattended on public property for more than 48 hours, or a motor vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for a period of more than three days, or a motor vehicle that has remained on private property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property for more than three days and meets the following criteria: 
(1)  The vehicle has no evidence of current registration in or upon the vehicle; 
(2)  The vehicle has a fair market value of $500.00 or less; and 
(3)  The vehicle does not have a valid inspection sticker. 
    Motor vehicle means any vehicle which is self-propelled and designed to travel along the ground and shall include but not be limited to automobiles, busses, motorbikes, motorcycles, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf carts, campers, boats and trailers. 
    Nonoperational motor vehicle means a motor vehicle which is left unattended on private property for more than three days, which does not have lawfully affixed thereto both an unexpired plate or plates and a current motor vehicle safety inspection certificate and the condition of which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled or inoperative. 
    Private property means any real property within the city which is privately owned and which is not public property, as defined in this section. 
    Public property means any street or highway which shall include the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the purposes of vehicular travel and also any other publicly owned property or facility. 
    Vehicle survey report means a report printed in the form set forth in the General Laws of the state. 
(Code 1994, § 18-36; Ord. of 12-14-1987(1); Ord. of 9-30-2002(1)) 
Sec. 18-49. - Dismantled, unservicable, junked and abandoned vehicles not permitted. 
    No person shall deposit, store, keep or permit to be deposited, stored or kept in the open upon public or private property a dismantled, unserviceable, junked or abandoned vehicle or one legally or physically incapable of being operated. 
(Code 1994, § 18-37; Ord. of 12-14-1987(1), § A) 
Sec. 18-50. - Storage of vehicles restricted; declaration of nuisance; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall park, leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any motor vehicle of any kind which is abandoned or nonoperational upon any public or private property within the city for a period of time in excess of three days. 
(b)  The presence of an abandoned or nonoperational vehicle or parts thereof on private or public property is hereby declared a nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this article and those provisions of the General Laws of the state and relative to abandoned motor vehicles. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to any vehicle: enclosed within a building on private property, to any vehicle held in connections with a business enterprise, lawfully licensed by the city and properly operated in the appropriate business zone pursuant to the zoning laws of the city, or to any motor vehicle in operable condition specifically adopted or designed for operation on drag strips or raceways or any vehicle retained by the owner for antique collection purposes and registered for that purpose. 
(Code 1994, § 18-38; Ord. of 9-30-2002(1)) 
Sec. 18-51. - Authority to take possession of abandoned and nonoperational motor vehicles. 
(a)  The police department or the department of code enforcement, upon completion of a vehicle survey report or upon receipt of an order of the municipal court, may take into custody any motor vehicle found abandoned or nonoperational on public or private property. In such connection, the police department or the department of code enforcement may employ its own personnel, equipment and facilities or authorize persons, equipment and facilities for the purpose of removing, preserving and storing abandoned motor vehicles. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder or refuse to allow such person to enter private property for the purpose of removing a motor vehicle under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 18-39; Ord. of 9-30-2002(1)) 
Sec. 18-52. - Notice to remove summons to appear. 
(a)  Whenever it comes to the attention of the police department or the department of code enforcement that any abandoned motor vehicle or abandoned motor vehicle of no value is located on any property, public or private, in the city, or that a nonoperational motor vehicle is located on private property in the city without the consent of the property owner as defined in this chapter, the police department or the department of code enforcement shall post or attach to the vehicle, 48 hours prior to towing, a notification of abandoned or nonoperational vehicle indicating that the vehicle will be towed. 
(b)  Summons to appear. 
(1)  Whenever it comes to the attention of the police department or the department of code enforcement that any nonoperational motor vehicle as defined in this chapter exists on private property in the city with or without consent of the owner of said private property, a notice in writing shall be served upon the owner of the land where said motor vehicle is located and upon the vehicle's owner or last known owner notifying them of the existence of the violation and requesting its removal within three days. Said notice shall also include a summons to appear in the municipal court by certified mail or in person on a date certain, if the vehicle is not removed within the prescribed time. 
(2)  The notice and summons to appear may be served by any sheriff, deputy sheriff, constable, police constable, city sergeant or police officer. It shall also constitute sufficient notice and service of process when a copy of the same is posted in a conspicuous place upon the private property on which the vehicle is located and duplicate copies are sent by certified mail to the owner of the vehicle, if known, or the owner of the property at his last known address. 
(c)  Whenever it comes to the attention of the police department or the department of code enforcement that any abandoned motor vehicle, abandoned motor vehicle of no value or a nonoperational motor vehicle is located on any property, public or private, in the city, with or without the consent of the property owner, and said motor vehicle is leaking fuel or other harmful substance, or creates a substantial hazard which, if allowed to remain, is a detriment to the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city, the police department or the department of code enforcement shall immediately tow the motor vehicle in question without prior notification. However, the owner of said vehicle shall be entitled to a full and fair hearing in the municipal court within 14 days of the date that the owners and lienholders are given notice that the vehicle has been towed as set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 18-40; Ord. of 9-30-2002(1)) 
State Law reference- Notice on abandoned motor vehicles, G.L. 1956, § 31-42-2. 
Sec. 18-53. - Garagekeepers and abandoned motor vehicles. 
    Any motor vehicle left for more than ten days in a garage operated for commercial purposes after notice by registered mail, return receipt requested, to the owner to pick up the vehicle, or for more than ten days after the period when, pursuant to contract, the vehicle was to remain on the premises, and any motor vehicle left for more than ten days in such garage by someone other than the registered owner or left by a person authorized to have possession of the motor vehicle, shall be deemed an abandoned vehicle and shall be reported by the garagekeeper to the police department. Any garagekeeper who fails to report the possession of such a vehicle within ten days after it becomes abandoned within the meaning of this section shall no longer have any claim for storage of the vehicle. All abandoned vehicles left in garages may be taken into custody by the police department and sold in accordance with the procedures set forth in this division unless the motor vehicle is reclaimed and the garagekeeper is paid. The proceeds of the sale shall be first applied to the garagekeeper's charges for storage and any surplus proceeds shall be distributed in accordance with G.L. 1956, § 31-42-4. Except for the termination of claim for storage for failure to report an abandoned motor vehicle, nothing in this section shall be construed to impair any lien of a garagekeeper under the laws of the state, or the right of a lienholder to foreclose. For the purposes of this section, the term "garagekeeper" means any operator of a parking place establishment or motor vehicle storage facility. 
(Code 1994, § 18-42; Ord. of 12-14-1987(1), § F) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-42-5. 
Sec. 18-54. - Liability for loss or damage. 
    Neither the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises from which any disabled, junked or abandoned vehicle or one legally or physically incapable of being operated shall be removed, nor shall his servant or agent or the city be liable for any loss or damage to such vehicle while being removed, while in the possession of the city, or as a result of any subsequent sale or other disposition. 
(Code 1994, § 18-43; Ord. of 12-14-1987(1), § G) 
Secs. 18-55-18-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SEWERS AND DRAINS 

Sec. 18-101. - Illicit discharges defined. 
    Illicit discharges to the municipal storm sewer system are comprised of nonstormwater discharges that are expressly prohibited from the municipal storm sewer system unless: 
(1)  The discharges have received all required federal, state and local permits, including the Rhode Island Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (RIPDES); or 
(2)  The discharges are included in one of the following categories of discharges: 
a.  Discharges which result from the washdown of vehicles at retail dealers selling new and used automobiles where no detergents are used and individual residential car washing. 
b.  External building washdown where no detergents are used. 
c.  The use of water to control dust. 
d.  Firefighting activities. 
e.  Fire hydrant flushing. 
f.  Natural springs. 
g.  Uncontaminated groundwater. 
h.  Dechlorinated pool discharges. 
i.  Air conditioning condensate. 
j.  Lawn watering. 
k.  Potable water sources, including water line flushing. 
l.  Irrigation drainage. 
m.  Pavement washwaters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous materials have not occurred (unless all spilled materials have been removed) and where detergents are not used. 
n.  Discharges from foundation or footing drains where flows are not contaminated with process materials such as solvents, or contaminated by contact with soils where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous materials have occurred. 
o.  Uncontaminated utility vault dewatering. 
p.  Dechlorinated water line testing water. 
q.  Hydrostatic test water that does not contain any treatment chemicals and is not contaminated with process chemicals. 
(Ord. of 6-25-2009, § 42-1) 
Sec. 18-102. - Right of entry. 
    To the extent permitted by state law, or if authorized by the owner or other party in control of the property, the director of public works and/or his/her designated representative may enter upon privately owned property for the purpose of performing their duties under this article and may make or cause to be made such examinations, surveys or sampling as the city deems reasonably necessary. 
(Ord. of 6-25-2009, § 42-2) 
Sec. 18-103. - Notification of spills. 
    Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation, has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in unauthorized discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the state from said facility, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of a hazardous material, said person shall immediately notify emergency response officials of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services (911). In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the authorized enforcement agency within five working days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Nothing in this section shall preclude any owner/lessee from compliance with relevant provisions of the Rhode Island Clean Water Act, G.L. 1956, § 46-12-1 et seq., or other applicable laws or regulations. 
(Ord. of 6-25-2009, § 42-3) 
Sec. 18-104. - Enforcement; violations and penalties. 
    If an illicit discharge to the municipal storm sewer system is detected, the owner shall cease the discharge. If the discharge does not cease within seven calendar days, the owner may be summoned to appear before the municipal court and, after being given an opportunity to be heard, may be fined $100.00 per calendar day that the violation goes unrepaired, and the city may be authorized to take the available appropriate remedies it deems necessary to correct the violations and to assess a lien on the subject property in an amount equal to the cost of the remedial actions. The lien shall be enforced in the manner provided or authorized by law for the enforcement of common law liens on personal property. The lien shall be recorded in the land evidence records of the city and shall incur legal interest from the date of the recording. The imposition of any penalty shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the provisions of this article, including revocation of the performance bond or assessment of a lien on the property. 
(Ord. of 6-25-2009, § 42-4) 
Sec. 18-105. - Discharge of other wastes prohibited; violations penalties. 
    Any individual or other party is prohibited from discharging waste, including construction waste, building material, truck washout, chemicals, litter, sanitary wastes or other waste, into the city right-of-way, storm sewer system, or other city property. If such a violation occurs, the city may fine the violator $200.00 and require removal of the waste within ten calendar days at the violator's expense. The city may charge the violator any costs associated with removal or repair of damage resulting from the violation. 
(Ord. of 6-25-2009, § 42-5) 
Sec. 18-106. - Administrative hearing. 
    Any owner or responsible party, receiving a written notice of violation, shall be given an opportunity for a hearing before the city board of appeals to state his/her case. Application for said appeal shall be received by the board of appeals prior to the date of compliance stipulated by the written notice of violation. In exercising its powers in ruling, the board may, in conformity with the provisions of this article, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, and may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have the powers of the officer or agency from whom the appeal was taken. 
(Ord. of 6-25-2009, § 42-6) 
Secs. 18-107-18-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - POSTCONSTRUCTION STORMWATER CONTROL 

Sec. 18-141. - Findings; purpose. 
(a)  Unmitigated stormwater from areas altered by development may pose public health and safety threats. Potential contaminants in stormwater runoff may include suspended solids, nitrogen, phosphorus, hydrocarbons, heavy metals, pathogenic organisms (bacteria and viruses), and road salts. 
(b)  This article establishes the administrative mechanisms necessary for the city to ensure proper stormwater management. The article is written to work in conjunction with current state regulations. 
(Ord. of 6-25-2009, § 44-1) 
Sec. 18-142. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to all development occurring within the city that requires development plan review. No person shall engage in land development activities without receiving approval from the city planning commission or the department of planning and redevelopment. 
(Ord. of 6-25-2009, § 44-2) 
Sec. 18-143. - Technical standards. 
    All applicants are required to develop and submit a stormwater management plan. All stormwater management plans must address stormwater management on a site-by-site basis and all requirements of this article. All stormwater management practices shall be consistent with the state stormwater design and installation standards manual and the state soil erosion and sediment control handbook, as amended. 
(1)  Performance standards. Stormwater management plans shall incorporate best management practices for water quality control, which in combination are demonstrated to reduce the average annual total suspended solids in post-development runoff by 80 percent. Development in drinking water supply watersheds or watersheds where impaired waters as defined by the state's 303(d) list exist may be held to higher standards. 
(2)  Disallowed stormwater best management practices. The placement of detention basins and other stormwater structures within a floodplain shall be avoided. If there is no alternative, the applicant must show what effects, if any, the tail waters created by the floodplain will have on the outflow and effective storage capacity of the detention facility. 
(3)  Facilitation of maintenance. Facilities that require maintenance shall be designed to minimize the need for regular maintenance, facilitate required maintenance, and ensure accessibility of components that require maintenance. At a minimum, all stormwater management plans must incorporate best management practices with appropriate maintenance design in accordance with the state stormwater design and installation standards manual, as amended; or the state soil erosion and sediment control handbook, as amended. 
(4)  Flood protection. Stormwater management plans shall demonstrate that a proposed project provides for protection of life and property from flooding and flood flows. Water quantities must be controlled in accordance with the state stormwater design and installation standards manual, as amended, or a municipally approved regional stormwater management plan for the watershed in which the development site is located. Stormwater management plans shall demonstrate incorporation of the following standards into the proposed project: 
a.  Control and maintenance of post-development peak discharge rates from the two-year, ten-year, 25-year, and 100-year storm events and predevelopment levels. 
b.  Downstream analysis of the 100-year storm event and control of the peak discharge rate for the 100-year storm to mitigate significant downstream impacts. 
c.  Discharge from any stormwater facility must be conveyed through properly constructed conveyance system to provide for nonerosive flows during all storm events. The proposed stormwater conveyance system consisting of open channels, pipes, and other conveyance devices shall at a minimum accommodate the runoff from a 25-year storm event. The stormwater conveyance system must provide for nonerosive flows to receiving waters. 
(5)  Surface water and groundwater. Stormwater management plans shall demonstrate that during develop and post-development, all receiving waters will be recharged in a manner closely resembling predevelopment conditions and that the developed site will retain hydrological conditions that closely resemble those prior to disturbance. 
(Ord. of 6-25-2009, § 44-3) 
Sec. 18-144. - Maintenance requirements for best management practices. 
(a)  Routine maintenance and repair procedures. 
(1)  Preventative maintenance procedures are required to maintain the intended operation and safe condition of the stormwater management facility by greatly reducing the occurrence of problems and malfunctions. To be effective, preventative maintenance shall be performed on a regular basis and include such routine procedures as training of staff, periodic inspections, grass cutting, elimination of mosquito breeding habitats, and pond maintenance. Disposal of sediment and debris must occur on a regular basis (unless otherwise specified within an approved plan), at suitable disposal sites or recycling sites and comply with applicable local, state and federal regulations. 
(2)  Corrective maintenance procedures are required to correct a problem or malfunction at a stormwater management facility and to restore the facility's intended operation and safe condition. Based upon the severity of the problem, corrective maintenance must be performed on an as-needed or emergency basis and include such procedures as structural repairs, removal of debris, sediment and trash removal which threaten discharge capacity, erosion repair, snow and ice removal, fence repair, mosquito extermination, and restoration of vegetated and nonvegetated linings. 
(b)  General maintenance standards. 
a.  Maintenance design and maintenance procedures for all stormwater best management practices shall be in accordance with the state stormwater design and installation standards manual, as amended; or the state soil erosion and sediment control handbook, as amended. Stormwater management plans shall demonstrate appropriate maintenance design and procedures for each proposed best management practice. 
b.  A maintenance schedule for each type of BMP must be included in the stormwater management plan. These schedules shall list the frequency and type of maintenance operations necessary along with the legally responsible party's name, address, and telephone number. If the stormwater drainage system is to be deeded to the local municipality, the applicant must obtain a letter from the municipality acknowledging maintenance responsibility and intent of ownership. 
(Ord. of 6-25-2009, § 44-4) 
Sec. 18-145. - Stormwater management plans. 
(a)  Calculations. In addition to the information required for stormwater management plans, the following information must also be included with the application, where applicable: 
(1)  The area of each subbasin as identified on final site plans. 
(2)  The area of impervious surfaces (including all roads, driveways, rooftops, sidewalks, etc.) for each subbasin as identified in the state stormwater design and installation standards manual, as amended. 
(3)  Weighted curve numbers (CN), as determined by the SCS TR-55 method, for each subbasin as identified in the state stormwater design and installation standards manual, as amended. 
(4)  Invert elevations for all applicable BMPs. In addition, the elevations for permanent and/or flood pool stages, including peak discharge rates for each stage, within all basins are required. 
(5)  The total volume capacity for all flood control and water quality BMPs (e.g., infiltration basin, detention basins, wet ponds, etc.). Volumes must be segregated into permanent and flood pool stage volumes where applicable. Furthermore, the volumes of all sediment storage (basins, fore bays, etc.) areas must also be shown. 
(6)  Predevelopment and post-development peak discharge rates and runoff volumes for the two-year, ten-year, 25-year, and 100-year frequency storm events for each sub-watershed. The water quality volume must also be calculated for each sub-watershed. All relevant variables such as curve numbers and time of concentration, along with the supporting computations and worksheets, must be included. 
(b)  Narrative description. As part of the stormwater management plan, the applicant shall include a discussion of the protection of environmental resource functions and values. The following outline is provided as guidance for preparing a narrative description for the stormwater management plan. Depending on the size and scope of the proposed project, the amount of information required by the permitting agency may vary; therefore, it is advised to consult the appropriate permitting agency for specific requirements. 
(1)  Site description: general topography, soil types, current vegetative composition and relative abundance, existing infrastructure, and/or adjacent properties, identification of major resources (e.g., wetlands, groundwater, surface waters, etc.), name of receiving waters, potential water quality and/or hydrologic impacts on resources. 
(2)  Site input data: watershed characteristics, area of all impervious surfaces, total area of site, annual mean rainfall, runoff coefficients, curve numbers for various land uses, peak discharge rates. 
(3)  Land use planning and source control plan. 
(4)  Best management practices: identify the type of BMPs employed both during and post-construction and justification for selection, including any deviation from the state stormwater design and installation standards manual, as amended, and the potential effect on pollutant removal efficiency. 
(5)  Technical feasibility of BMPs, including sizing, location, hydraulic and environmental impacts. Alternatives, which were considered but determined not to be feasible, should also be discussed. 
(6)  Maintenance schedule of BMPs to be used, both during and post-construction, including frequency of inspection and maintenance. 
(Ord. of 6-25-2009, § 44-5) 
Sec. 18-146. - Maintenance agreements. 
    Maintenance agreements shall provide written, contractual documentation, which demonstrates compliance with this article and legal arrangements for the upkeep of stormwater facilities to ensure their functionality and safety in accordance with this article. Maintenance agreements, which describe all maintenance schedules and requirements, must be developed for each stormwater management facility unless the facility is dedicated to and accepted by the city. 
(1)  Recognition of municipal inspection requirements. Maintenance agreements shall include a reasonable and regular schedule for the city, or designee, to conduct on-site inspection of the functionality and safety of stormwater management facilities. Inspection schedules shall be based on the complexity and frequency of maintenance needs and shall be subject to the approval of the city. At a minimum, maintenance frequency should be in accordance with the state stormwater design and installation standards manual, as amended. 
(2)  Recordkeeping for maintenance activities. Maintenance agreements shall include provisions for maintenance recordkeeping. All activities conducted in accordance with a maintenance agreement must be recorded in a work order and inspection log. Timely updates of the log shall be the responsibility of the stormwater management facility owner or other responsible party pursuant to this article. Review of the maintenance and inspection log shall be completed by the city, or designee, to determine the effectiveness of operation, maintenance and safety activities. Reviews shall occur as part of each on-site inspection. Additional reviews may be made as deemed appropriate by the city or designee. 
(3)  Responsibility for maintenance to ensure functionality and safety. Appropriate maintenance to ensure functionality and safety of stormwater management facilities shall be the responsibility the owner or may be assumed by another party via a written contractual arrangement in accordance with this article. 
(4)  Alterations to maintenance agreements. Any alterations in maintenance responsibility or alterations to maintenance agreements must be reviewed and approved by the department of zoning and code enforcement. If portions of the land serviced by a stormwater management facility are to be sold, written contractual arrangements shall be made to pass all responsibility of the maintenance agreement to the purchaser and shall be subject to review and approval of the department of zoning and code enforcement. All alterations to maintenance agreements shall be recorded in accordance with this article. 
(5)  Recordation of maintenance agreements. All maintenance agreements and alterations to maintenance agreements shall be recorded in the land evidence records of the city. Copies of all maintenance agreements and alterations to maintenance agreements shall be included in stormwater management plans. Recordation of maintenance agreements in accordance with this article shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(Ord. of 6-25-2009, § 44-6) 
Sec. 18-147. - Application fees. 
    The city shall be empowered to collect fees from permit applicants which are commensurate with the cost of administering this article. 
(Ord. of 6-25-2009, § 44-7) 
Sec. 18-148. - Enforcement. 
    The city shall have the authority and discretion to invoke penalties and/or impose a lien, whenever a stormwater management facility is not implemented, operated, and/or maintained in accordance with its approval and this article. Any penalty invoked shall be in accordance with this article. 
(1)  Notification of violation. In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a danger to public safety or public health, or in need of maintenance or has not been maintained in accordance with the maintenance agreement, the city shall so notify the responsible person in writing by certified mail. Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall have five calendar days to temporarily correct the violations and 30 calendar days to complete maintenance and permanently repair the facility in a manner that is approved by the municipality. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform such maintenance and repair, the municipality may immediately summon the applicant/owner to appear before the municipal court. 
(2)  Enforcement of penalties and liens. Should the applicant/owner fail to take the corrective actions, the city shall then have the right to summon the applicant/owner to appear before the municipal court. The municipal court may issue an order authorizing the city to take the available appropriate remedies it deems necessary to correct the violations and may also order a fine of $100.00 per day that the violation goes unrepaired. The municipal court may also authorize the city to assert a lien on the subject property in an amount equal to the costs of remedial actions. The lien shall be enforced in the manner provided or authorized by law for the enforcement of common law liens on personal property. The lien shall be recorded in the land evidence records of the city, and shall incur legal interest from the date of recording. The imposition of any penalty shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the provisions of this article, including assessment of a lien on the property. 
(3)  Administrative hearing. Any owner or responsible party receiving a written notice of violation shall be given an opportunity for a hearing before the city board of appeals to state his/her case. Application for said appeal shall be received by the board of appeals prior to the date of compliance stipulated by the written notice of violation. In exercising its powers in ruling, the board may, in conformity with the provisions of this article, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, and may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have the powers of the officer or agency from whom the appeal was taken. 
(Ord. of 6-25-2009, § 44-8) 
Chapter 20 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- State fire safety code, G.L. 1956, § 23-28.1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Violations of chapter; enforcement. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, or any regulation, rule or order of the fire division, the penalty for which is not otherwise provided, shall be punished as provided by section 1-12 for each offense, and any police officer may forthwith arrest, without a warrant, and take to the police station, any person so offending. It is hereby made the duty of the chief of the fire division, and of all the members of the police division, to see that the provisions of this chapter are duly observed, and that all offenses against this chapter are promptly prosecuted. 
(Code 1973, § 9-8; Code 1994, § 20-31) 
Sec. 20-2. - Plan review fees. 
(a)  Every request for plan review, by the state fire marshal's office, under the provisions of the fire code shall be accompanied by the fee prescribed as follows: 
Cost of construction Required fee $500.00 or less $25.00 Over $500.00 but not over $1,000.00 $35.00 Over $1,000.00 but not over $2,000.00 $45.00 Over $2,000.00 but not over $500,000.00 (plus $6.00 per $1,000.00 or fraction thereof over $2,000.00) $45.00+ Over $500,000.00 (plus $4.00 per $1,000.00 or fraction thereof over ($500,000.00) $3,003.00+  
(b)  Plan review fees, not exceeding the amounts listed in subsection (a) of this section may be collected by the fire division as prescribed by said fire code. All such fees shall be utilized exclusively for supporting the operations of the city fire prevention bureau. Said fees shall be set aside in an account or designated by a method (planned by the chief of the fire division and the director of finance) to be used exclusively for fire inspections, fire education and training of personnel to carry out fire prevention duties. 
(Code 1994, § 20-8; Ord. of 2-9-2004) 
Sec. 20-3. - Fire prevention fee. 
(a)  The fire division shall charge an inspection fee of $100.00 per inspection for any inspection performed by the department pursuant to the provisions of this Code or any provision of the state fire code, or rules and regulations of the state fire marshal. 
(b)  The fee shall be waived if, after inspection, no violation of any provision of the ordinances or the state fire code including any rule or regulation of the state fire marshal has been found. 
(c)  Each subsequent reinspection shall constitute an inspection for which a separate fee of $100.00 shall be payable. The foregoing fee waiver provision shall not apply in the case of any inspection required by the city council or board of license commissioners (liquor board) for the issuance or transfer of any license under its jurisdiction. No inspection fee shall be charged for any department, board or commission of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 20-9; Ord. of 11-29-2004) 
Sec. 20-4. - Outdoor fires. 
    No person shall kindle or maintain, or authorize to be kindled or maintained, any outdoor fire on any public or private land in the city unless the fire is kindled and maintained solely for the purpose of outdoor cooking. 
(Code 1973, § 10-1; Code 1994, § 20-1) 
State Law reference- Outdoor fires, G.L. 1956, §§ 2-12-6-2-12-10. 
Sec. 20-5. - Hazardous materials, permit to store and use. 
(a)  All storage of hazardous materials, other than motor vehicles, within the legal limits of the city shall require a permit to store, issued by the chief of the fire division. Such permit shall be issued annually and shall list the type and quantity of the hazardous material on the property. 
(b)  The chief of the fire division shall conduct a hazard analysis of the requested storage and may require as a condition of approval of the permit that safety measures be employed to ensure handling and storage of the permitted hazardous materials not inconsistent with state or federal law. Such a permit shall be issued upon a showing that public health and public safety will not be endangered. 
(c)  There shall be a required fee for a permit under this section. 
(d)  The term "hazardous material" as used in this section shall be defined as those materials listed in the Federal Superfund Reauthorized Act of 1987 hazardous material list. 
(e)  The permit required by this section does not alter in any way other federal and/or state regulations regarding the storage and/or transportation of hazardous materials, as may be required. 
(Code 1973, § 10-17; Code 1994, § 20-2; Ord. of 5-13-1991(5)) 
State Law reference- Storage and handling of liquefied petroleum gas, G.L. 1956, § 23-28.20-1 et seq.; explosives, G.L. 1956, § 23-28.28-1 et seq. 
Sec. 20-6. - Transporting hazardous materials restricted. 
    The city prohibits the use of all city streets except certain public roadways by motor vehicles transporting hazardous materials as defined by the United States Department of Transportation. The restriction shall not apply to vehicles carrying hazardous materials engaged in pick-up and local delivery within the legal limits of the city. The schedule of such streets is on file and available in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1973, § 10-18; Code 1994, § 20-3; Ord. of 5-13-1991(6), § 1) 
Sec. 20-7. - Maintaining a fire hazard. 
    No person shall maintain a fire hazard in a residential type structure or place of assembly or school. A fire hazard includes the storage, handling or use of materials that presents a danger or risk of injury to life or property, such as: 
(1)  Category I; combination of residential type structures, schools and places of assembly. 
a.  Charcoal and gas grills used inside buildings or on porches; 
b.  Flammable gas or liquid powered equipment inside structures; 
c.  Welding, cutting and other hot work inside a structure. 
(2)  Category II; schools and places of assembly. 
a.  Flammable liquids in non-OSHA-approved cabinets; 
b.  Flammable liquids used as a cleaning solvent inside cabinets inside a structure; 
c.  Welding, cutting and other hot work inside a structure. 
(Code 1973, § 10-19; Code 1994, § 20-4; Ord. of 5-13-1991(2)) 
Sec. 20-8. - Portable heaters. 
    Portable heaters must be UL approved and not altered. The chief of the fire division may prohibit the use of portable heaters in occupancies or situations in which such use or operation would present a danger to life or property. 
(Code 1973, § 10-20; Code 1994, § 20-5; Ord. of 5-13-1991(1)) 
Sec. 20-9. - Fire hydrants. 
    The location of hydrants shall be under the direction of the chief of the fire division, and the erection and maintenance of hydrants under the direction of the director of public works. The expense incurred in so locating, erecting and maintaining such hydrants shall be paid out of the department of public works appropriation. 
(Code 1973, § 9-3; Code 1994, § 20-6) 
State Law reference- Obstructing hydrants, G.L. 1956, § 23-37-4. 
Sec. 20-10. - Reports of violations and fire hazards. 
    Reports of the violation of existing ordinances and laws and all situations endangering life and property through fire hazard shall be submitted in writing to the chief or deputy chief of the fire division who may, at their discretion, forward such reports to the proper authorities for enforcement according to law. 
(Code 1973, § 9-4; Code 1994, § 20-7) 
Secs. 20-11-20-38. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DIVISION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Powers of fire companies generally, G.L. 1956, § 23-37-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-39. - Removal of fire apparatus from city. 
    No engine or any part of the apparatus belonging to the fire division shall be taken from the city at any time except for training purposes and except for the purpose of having such apparatus repaired; provided, however, that in case of a fire in a neighboring town or city, the mayor, or in his absence from the city, the chief of the fire division, may order not more than one-half of the fire apparatus of the city to be taken to such town or city, such apparatus to be accompanied by not more than one-half of the members of the division, for the purpose of assisting in the extinguishing of such fire. Such apparatus may also be removed from the city in order to fulfill the requirements of mutual aid agreements. 
(Code 1973, § 9-5; Code 1994, § 20-35) 
Sec. 20-40. - Fire department vacancies. 
(a)  Legislative findings. 
(1)  It is the policy of the city to provide high-quality fire service to our community. Quality fire services are provided by professional, well-trained individuals working together. Selecting the best people to be our community's fire fighters is essential to the make-up of the fire department and the fundamental aim of a recruiting program. A proactive, positive approach to fire recruiting is necessary to attract quality applicants representative of the demographics of the city. Recruiting is conducted when needed to maintain service strength. 
(2)  It is the policy of the city to identify and employ the best-qualified individuals to perform the tasks and functions of the fire department without regard to race, color, religion, sex, age, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, socioeconomic status or mental, physical, developmental, or sensory disability. The department prohibits discrimination against any person in recruitment, appointment, training, promotion, retention, discipline, or any other aspect of personnel administration for reasons of political or religious opinions, affiliations, or because of race, color, national origin, physical disability or age, except where specific age or physical requirements constitute a bonafide occupational qualification necessary to properly and efficiently perform the functions of the job. 
(3)  It is the policy of the city to actively encourage women and traditionally under-represented populations to apply for employment in all positions within the fire department. All persons should have equal opportunities in recruitment, selection, appointment, promotion, training, discipline and related areas. 
(b)  Whenever a vacancy shall be declared to exist in the permanent fire department of this city, the personnel board shall, through the press, advertise the time and place where a competitive examination shall be held to determine the relative competency of those applicants for the position. Through the human resources department, the personnel board shall make available an application form which a prospective candidate must complete without the aid or assistance of any other person. 
(1)  Applications will be made available online to create better accessibility for potential candidates. 
(2)  Demographically under-represented and female officers will be depicted in the firefighting role in department publications whenever possible to encourage potential female and demographically under-represented candidates. 
(3)  Female officers or officers who are demographically under-represented within the department will, whenever possible, actively encourage recruitment of potential candidates. 
(4)  The fire department will participate in information sessions, and career fairs to encourage potential candidates; when possible utilizing female and demographically under-represented officers. 
(5)  The fire department will build upon relationships with high schools, colleges, and universities to attract potential candidates. 
(6)  The fire department will work with groups in the community representing the community's diversity to build relationships and encourage potential candidates. 
(7)  Advertising will be formatted in all languages that are spoken by at least ten percent of city residents as determined by the United States Census Bureau. 
(8)  Advertising will include print, web and radio broadcasts on local media outlets. 
(9)  Advertising will be distributed to local area businesses in targeted areas of the city. 
(c)  Any false statements, evasions, deception or reservations in answering the application questions shall be cause for rejection and if discovered after appointment is cause for dismissal. All applicants' statements relative to eligibility are subject to verification by authentic proof thereof, and applicants shall authorize the personnel board to make legitimate investigations as to residency, citizenship, education and/or other evidence of eligibility. Any person who has been convicted of a crime may be ineligible for appointment to the fire department, and no person shall be appointed unless he is a citizen of the United States. No applicant may be younger than 18 years of age on the date of application. All applicants must be high school graduates or received a GED (general equivalency diploma) as of the date of application. Consistent with the intent of this section, the competitive exam, to determine an applicant's eligibility, shall be established by the following criteria: 
(1)  Physical required. Applicants shall be examined by their physician to determine their ability to perform a physical fitness exam without substantial risk of injury. Results of such examination shall be forwarded to the city on a form supplied by the city. 
(2)  Physical agility exam required. A physical fitness exam shall be required of all applicants prior to any psychological examination or appointment. This exam shall be consistent with the firefighter physical performance assessment test, sponsored by the state fire chief's association, or its equivalent. Each candidate participating shall be scored on a pass/fail basis. 
(3)  EMT license required. Each candidate shall have a state EMT-basic license upon appointment to the fire department. 
(4)  Written examination. A formal written examination of not less than 80 questions shall be given. The written examination shall cover areas of general knowledge and shall not involve technical aspects of any particular academic subject. After correction of the examinations, all applicants shall be assigned numerical grades. The maximum score for the written examination shall be 40, provided that an additional four points shall be awarded for those who have established documented legal residency in the city for at least one year prior to application to the department, an additional two points shall be awarded for any veteran honorably discharged from the U.S. Armed Forces, and an additional four points shall be awarded for any person fluent in any second language as spoken by at least ten percent of city residents as determined by the United States Census Bureau for a final, total maximum score for the written examination of 50. 
(5)  Oral examination. An oral examination is to be given to the top 25 scores on the written examination by a four member board consisting of the following, or his or her designee: the public safety director, the chief of the fire department, the director of human resources and a woman or active fire fighter who is demographically under-represented, as designated by the fire union of the city. The oral examination shall be recorded on video. The oral examination shall consist of questions designed to test past experience, personality, alertness, confidence, qualifications, diversity awareness, professional bearing, and judgment of the applicant. The members of the board are required to evaluate the applicant on a zero to ten point system for each of the ten interview questions. At no time may any two board members scoring be more than two points apart per question. The candidate's total score for the oral examination shall be computed by dividing the combined scores of the examiners by eight. The maximum score for the oral examination shall be 50. 
(d)  Those candidates who attain the highest combined total score for the written, oral and physical exams shall be placed on the eligibility list numerically. Only candidates with a combined final score of 70 or higher shall be eligible for the eligibility list. Candidates, at the discretion of the chief of the fire department, shall undergo a physical examination by a doctor designated by the personnel board. The candidates must also take a battery of psychological tests and undergo a comprehensive background investigation at the direction of the chief of the fire department. If any of the candidates fail to qualify physically or psychologically or as a result of their background investigation, as determined by the director of public safety, they shall be ineligible for referral to the personnel board for hiring and removed from the eligibility list. After the required number of candidates has been determined to pass the physical and psychological examinations and background investigation, the chief of the fire department shall make a recommendation of hiring from the candidates who are ranked one, two or three to the personnel board who shall make the appointment to the fire department from the eligibility list. The eligibility list shall be valid for a maximum of two years from the date of the personnel board's decision, unless the director of public safety grants a six-month extension, and shall extinguish sooner upon no qualified candidates remaining on the list. 
(e)  A training program up to one year, paid for by the city, shall be held for all new members of the fire department, leaving the choice of the training to the discretion of the chief of the fire department. The training program shall include all necessary classes for the proper certification and licensing for state EMT (cardiac). During the one-year period, each new member of the fire department shall be on probationary status and, at the end of said one year, shall be subject to termination if the proper certification and licensing for state EMT (cardiac) are not obtained. The director of public safety may grant a six-month extension to this one-year deadline upon a showing of good cause. 
(f)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the director of public safety shall have the authority to establish a procedure for the hiring of a lateral transfer applicant, defined as a firefighter in good standing, with at least three years experience and having all necessary certifications and licensing. 
(Code 1973, § 19-35; Code 1994, § 20-37; Ord. of 4-23-2014(1); Ord. of 9-28-2015 , § 2; Ord. of 12-11-2017(1) , § 2) 
Secs. 20-41-20-68. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LABOR RIGHTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Firefighters arbitration act, G.L. 1956, § 28-9.1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 20-69. - Bargaining agent recognized. 
    In accordance with the firefighters arbitration act (G.L. 1956, § 28-9.1-1 et seq.), the city hereby recognizes Local 1485 of the International Association of Firefighters AFL-CIO as the sole and exclusive bargaining agent for the city fire division. 
(Code 1973, § 9-9; Code 1994, § 20-46) 
State Law reference- Recognition of bargaining agent, G.L. 1956, § 28-9.1-5. 
Sec. 20-70. - Bargaining committee. 
(a)  Created; membership; chairman. A collective bargaining committee to represent the city in its negotiations with the bargaining agent of the members of the fire division is hereby created and shall consist of the mayor or his representative, the finance director, the city solicitor, the president of the city council and the chief of the fire division. Any agreement reached between the collective bargaining committee and the bargaining agent shall be subject to the approval of the city council. The mayor is hereby designated as chairman of the collective bargaining committee, and in his absence, the president of the city council shall preside. 
(b)  Meetings. Bargaining meetings shall be held within ten days after receipt from either party of the request for a meeting for collective bargaining purposes. In matters requiring appropriations of money, notice of request for collective bargaining shall be made at least 120 days before the last day on which money can be appropriated by the city to cover the contract period which is the subject of the collective bargaining procedure. Request for a meeting for collective bargaining shall be made by written notices addressed to the city council and to the mayor and to the secretary of the bargaining agent. 
(c)  Authority. The collective bargaining committee of the city shall have the authority, subject to the approval of the city council, to enter into written agreements with the bargaining agent; provided, that no such written agreement or contract shall exceed the term of one year. 
(Code 1973, §§ 9-10-9-12; Code 1994, § 20-47) 
Sec. 20-71. - Time off granted to fire division representatives to participate in negotiations. 
    Those representatives appointed by the bargaining agent for the purpose of negotiating a contract with the city who are members of the fire division shall be granted time off without loss of pay for the purpose of participating in such negotiations. 
(Code 1973, § 9-13; Code 1994, § 20-48) 
Sec. 20-72. - Failure to reach agreement on contract to be resolved by city council or arbitrators. 
    If the bargaining agent and the collective bargaining committee are unable within 20 days of meeting to reach an agreement on a contract, the unresolved issues shall be submitted to the city council for consideration. If the bargaining agent and the city council are unable to reach an agreement within ten days, any and all unresolved issues shall be submitted to arbitration. The decision of the arbitrators shall be advisory to the bargaining agent and the city. 
(Code 1973, § 9-14; Code 1994, § 20-49) 
State Law reference- Arbitration of unresolved issues, G.L. 1956, § 28-9.1-7 et seq. 
Sec. 20-73. - Removal of chief from the collective bargaining unit. 
    Notwithstanding the removal of the chief of the fire division from the collective bargaining unit, he shall heretofore remain as a member of the established classified pay plan for the city and receive the same privileges, benefits and wages which inure to and were enjoyed by the holder of that classified position prior to its removal from the collective bargaining unit. 
(Code 1994, § 20-50; Ord. of 11-6-2000) 
Sec. 20-74. - Regulations for the employment of chief of fire division. 
(a)  A chief of the fire division for the city, appointed under the regulations of this Code, shall be retained either under a contract of employment not to exceed 60 months, or as an at-will employee whose employment may be terminated at any time without cause. 
(b)  Every contract shall commence on the second Monday in January. 
(Ord. of 4-14-2008(1), § 20-51) 
Secs. 20-75-20-91. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FIREFIGHTERS' PENSION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Relief of injured and deceased firefighters, G.L. 1956, § 45-19-1 et seq.; retirement of municipal employees, G.L. 1956, § 45-21-1 et seq. 

Sec. 20-92. - Pension list and fund established. 
    The city council hereby creates and establishes a pension list and a pension fund for officers and members of the permanent fire division of the city and for all who shall become members of the division. 
(Code 1973, § 9-15; Code 1994, § 20-61) 
Sec. 20-93. - Members entitled to placement on list-Generally. 
(a)  Upon recommendation of the board of pensions and retirement, the city council may place upon the pension list established in section 20-92 permanent members of the paid fire division who: 
(1)  Request to be placed on non-service connected disability by reason of physical or mental infirmity, which renders the member totally or partially permanently disabled; provided, however, that no member of the division shall be eligible for a non-service connected disability pension unless he or she served at least five years; provided further, that no member of the division shall be placed upon the pension list until there is presented to the board of pensions and retirement a certificate from a physician approved by the city, that he or she is totally or partially permanently disabled. 
(2)  Request to be placed on service-connected disability by reason of injuries sustained or illness incurred while in the performance of duty which renders the member totally or partially permanently disabled. No member of the division shall be granted a service-connected disability pension and placed upon the pension list until there is presented to the board of pensions and retirement a certificate from a physician approved by the city that he or she is unfit to perform active duty. It is the express intent and purpose of this provision for the service-connected disability pension benefits received by a member to be benefits paid in lieu of workers' compensation benefits. 
(3)  The determination of disability from any cause, whether service connected or non-service connected shall be made upon the basis of reports on examinations made by three physicians consisting of the treating physician, a physician selected by the city, and a third physician to be selected by the other two physicians. A majority decision by the selected physicians must be reached with regard to: 
a.  Determination of disability; and 
b.  Whether the disability is total and permanent or partial and permanent. 
The member shall be provided a written determination of the decision within 60 days after the date that the city has received all three physicians' reports. If the majority decision is that the member has sustained a total or partial permanent disability, the physician appointed by the city shall so certify to the board of pensions and retirement in accordance with paragraph (1). 
(4)  In the event there is no duly constituted board of pensions and retirement, recommendation for placement on the pension list shall be made by the director of personnel and the administrative and finance officer to the city council. 
(b)  For the purpose of this provision, the city shall determine whether a member is totally and permanently disabled utilizing the same standards as the Social Security Administration, which includes the presumptive total and permanent disabilities set forth by the Social Security Administration. 
(c)  In accordance with G.L. 1956, § 45-19-16, notwithstanding the provisions of any general or special law or to any municipal ordinance, it is hereby provided that every condition of impairment of health caused by smoke inhalation of the lungs or respiratory tract resulting in total disability or death to a uniformed member of the fire division shall be presumed to have been suffered in the line of duty. 
(d)  A member who has been placed on the pension list for service-connected total and permanent disability shall receive disability retirement benefits for life. 
(e)  A member who has been placed on the pension list for service-connected partial and permanent disability, shall be placed on a regular pension when he or she reaches social security retirement age, calculated in accordance with the collective bargaining agreement in effect at the time the member became disabled. 
(Code 1973, § 9-16; Code 1994, § 20-62; Ord. of 8-10-2016(1) , § 1) 
Sec. 20-94. - Same-Members with 25 years' service. 
    Any permanent member of the paid fire division who has been regularly employed as a member of the division for at least 25 years and who has attained the age set forth in the collective bargaining agreement in effect at the time the request is made, may in writing request the board of pensions and retirement to place his or her name on such pension list and, if the board shall grant such request, the name of the member shall be placed upon the list. If the member has been regularly employed for 25 years and has not attained the age set forth in the collective bargaining agreement in effect at the time the request is made, the member may be placed on the list and elect to defer the payment of pension benefits until he reaches said age; provided, however, that if said member elects to receive pension benefits immediately, the amount of said benefits will be reduced by an early retirement factor, as actuarially determined. 
(Code 1973, § 9-17; Code 1994, § 20-63; Ord. of 8-10-2016(1) , § 1) 
Sec. 20-95. - Members on list subject to department rules; temporary active duty. 
    Members whose names are on the pension list shall be subject to all the rules of the fire division as to conduct. The chief of the division may, at any time, call upon members of the pension list for temporary regular fire duty, and for such service they shall receive full pay at the rate then paid regular members of the division for similar work. During the term of such temporary active fire duty, such pensioned member shall not be entitled to any compensation from the pension fund. 
(Code 1973, § 9-18; Code 1994, § 20-64) 
Sec. 20-96. - Payments into fund. 
    The director of finance is hereby authorized and directed to place in the firemen's pension fund: 
(1)  One percent of the annual salary or wages due each permanent member of the paid fire division, to be deducted by him from each payroll. 
(2)  All fines and penalties imposed upon members of the fire division for violations of the rules and regulations of the division and certified to him by the chief of the division, and it is hereby made a duty of the chief to communicate such fines and penalties to the director of finance. 
(3)  All sums charged against any member of the division absent from duty where no substitute has been employed in such member's place, provided that such absence was not caused by illness. It is hereby made a duty of the chief of the fire division to communicate these charges to the director of finance. 
(4)  All donations, contributions and receipts from any source that may be made or received on account of or for the benefit of the fund. 
(Code 1973, § 9-19; Code 1994, § 20-65) 
Sec. 20-97. - Appropriations when fund is insufficient. 
    Whenever the pension fund shall be insufficient to pay the pensions to the members entitled thereto, the city council shall appropriate from time to time such additional sums as may be required to carry out the intent and provisions of this division. 
(Code 1973, § 9-20; Code 1994, § 20-66) 
Sec. 20-98. - Fund to be kept separate; investments. 
    The director of finance shall be the custodian of the firemen's pension fund, which he shall keep separate and apart from other funds. He may invest, reinvest and change the form of investment of the fund, subject to the approval of the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 9-21; Code 1994, § 20-67) 
Sec. 20-99. - Amount of pension. 
(a)  Any permanent member of the paid fire division placed on the pension list shall receive thereafter during his lifetime, unless otherwise provided, a pension equivalent to one-half of the compensation he was receiving at the time he was placed upon the list, to be paid weekly to those entitled thereto. 
(b)  Any paid member of the fire division who has served at least 15 years on the paid fire division shall receive thereafter a minimum pension of $25.00 per week or, as provided in subsection (a) of this section, one-half of the compensation he was receiving at the time he was placed upon the list, whichever is the greater. 
(Code 1973, § 9-22; Code 1994, § 20-68) 
Sec. 20-100. - Members not assessed after name placed on list. 
    A member of the fire division shall not be required to pay any assessment to the pension fund after the date his name is placed upon the pension list. 
(Code 1973, § 9-23; Code 1994, § 20-69) 
Sec. 20-101. - Receipt of contributions upon resignation or discharge. 
    Any member of the fire division who shall resign or be discharged therefrom shall thereupon be entitled to any payments theretofore made by him to the fund. 
(Code 1973, § 9-24; Code 1994, § 20-70) 
Sec. 20-102. - Pension not subject to transfer or attachment. 
    The pension received by firemen under the provisions of this division shall not be transferable nor subject to attachment and shall be paid to the member entitled thereto; except, that it may be regulated and arranged by the city council and paid so that it will be best appropriated to the use and benefit of the person on the pension list. 
(Code 1973, § 9-25; Code 1994, § 20-71) 
State Law reference- Exemption of pension fund from attachment or other process, G.L. 1956, § 9-26-5. 
Sec. 20-103. - Rules and regulations. 
    The board of pensions and retirement, subject to approval of the city council, is hereby empowered to make such rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this division as may be deemed best for governing the pension list and pension payments. 
(Code 1973, § 9-26; Code 1994, § 20-72) 
Secs. 20-104-20-134. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS 

Sec. 20-135. - Maintenance; false alarm fees; acts of God; disconnection after three false alarms. 
(a)  All fire alarm systems connected to the fire division shall be maintained in good operating condition at all times. 
(b)  If a fire alarm system connected to the fire division transmits an alarm signal condition to the fire division through a mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or negligence of the user, his employees or agents, the fire chief may assess the owner a false alarm service fee for each false alarm in excess of three false alarms occurring within a calendar year. All fees assessed hereunder shall be paid to the finance director for deposit into the special fire equipment fund. 
(c)  False fire alarms caused by acts of God, including, but not limited to, power outages, hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes, thunderstorms or adverse weather or atmospheric disturbances shall not be deemed to be a false fire alarm. 
(d)  The chief of the fire division may authorize the disconnection of any fire alarm system from the municipal fire alarm system if, after three false alarms, such system in the opinion of the fire chief, is not maintained in good operating condition. 
(Code 1994, § 20-101; Ord. of 5-13-1991(4), § 9-9) 
Sec. 20-136. - Annual fee. 
(a)  There shall be assessed by the fire division an annual fee for each privately owned fire alarm box. The fee shall be due annually within 30 days after July 1, of each year. The annual fee of $125.00 shall be charged for the following master box services: 
(1)  Service installation to the box outside the building or to ten feet above ground at the pole for an underground service, whichever is applicable. The city will only supply the wire and replace same. 
(2)  Providing electrical power to operate the circuits, fire alarm boxes and receiving equipment. 
(3)  Twenty-four-hour supervision and maintenance of the circuits and receiving equipment at the fire station. 
(4)  Yearly testing and basic maintenance of master. 
(5)  Assistance in the restoration of service following an alarm. 
(6)  Disconnecting and reconnecting box for tests and repairs. 
(7)  Consultation for system installation, charges and improvements when written requests are made by the owner of the fire alarm box. 
(b)  Failure of owner of the privately owned fire box to pay the annual fee within 45 days after July 1, each year, shall result in the deactivation of the fire box. The reconnection fee thereafter shall be $250.00. 
(c)  A copy of this statement will be sent to all master box owners in the city. 
(d)  The assessed fees collected from the owner of the fire boxes shall be deposited into a special fire equipment account fund, the account fund to be administered by the chief of the fire division accountable to the director of public safety. 
(Code 1994, § 20-102; Ord. of 5-13-1991(4), § 9-10; Ord. of 12-19-2011(4) ) 
Sec. 20-137. - In-building radio specifications. 
(a)  Generally. The fire division, fire alarm division, has the authority to waive the fire division communication system and substitute a radio communications system to achieve effective fire division radio communications throughout the protected premises. Voluntary adoption of this alternative is subject to the specifications contained within this section. 
(b)  Radio coverage. For purpose of this section, adequate radio coverage shall include all of the following: 
(1)  A minimum signal strength of -95 dBm available in 95 percent of the area of each floor when transmitted from the fire division. 
(2)  A minimum signal strength of -95 dBm received at the fire division system from 95 percent of the area of each floor of the building. 
(c)  Amplification system allowed. Buildings and structures shall be equipped with any of the following, in order to achieve the required radio coverage: a radiating cable system or an internal multiple antenna system with FCC Type Accepted Bi-Directional UHF Amplifiers as needed to encompass CFFD UHF frequencies 483/486 (Channel 1). The system shall be capable of operating on an independent battery and/or generator system for a period of at least 12 hours without external power input. In order to use an emergency generator in lieu of a battery back-up system, the generator must be an oil-fired generator. The battery system, if installed, shall automatically charge in the presence of external power input. The amplifier fault circuit shall be connected to a trouble fault in the fire alarm panel. An audible alarm shall be present at the fire alarm panel to indicate a fault in the amplifier. 
(d)  Acceptance test procedures. 
(1)  Acceptance testing for an in-building radio amplification system is required, upon completion of installation. It is the building owner's responsibility to have the radio system tested to ensure that two-way coverage on each floor of the building is a minimum of 95 percent. Each floor of the building shall be divided into a grid of approximately 20 equal areas. 
(2)  A maximum of one area will be allowed to fail the test per floor. A spot located approximately in the center of a grid area will be selected for the test. Once the spot has been selected, prospecting for a better spot within the grid area will not be permitted. Field strength testing instruments are to be recently calibrated (one year) and of the frequency selective type incorporating a flexible antenna similar to the ones used on the hand held transceivers. All compliance testing is to be done with 50 ohm loads in place of the antenna to avoid interference to fire alarm. The fire division, fire alarm, is to be notified prior to any testing. Talk back testing will be conducted by the fire division, fire alarm personnel during sample testing of the accuracy of the BDA compliance test report. All test results and as-built drawings are to be supplied at the time the sample testing is requested. 
(3)  The gain values of all amplifiers shall be measured and the results kept on file with the building owner so that the measurements can be verified each year during the annual tests. In the event that the measurement results become lost, the building owner will be required to rerun the acceptance test to reestablish the gain values. 
(e)  Annual tests. When an in-building radio system is installed, the building owner shall test all active components of the system, including but not limited to amplifier, power supplies, and backup batteries, a minimum of once every 12 months. Amplifiers shall be tested to ensure that the gain is the same as it was upon initial installation and acceptance. Backup batteries and power supplies shall be tested under load for a period of one hour to verify that they will operate during an actual power outage. All other active components shall be checked to determine that they are operating within the manufacturer's specifications for the intended purpose. 
(f)  Five-year test. In addition to the annual test, the building owner shall perform a radio coverage test a minimum of once every five years to ensure that the radio system continues to meet the requirements of the original acceptance. The procedure set forth in subsection (e) of this section shall apply to such tests. 
(g)  Qualifications of testing personnel. All tests shall be conducted, documented, and signed by a person in possession of a current FCC general radio telephone operator license. All test records shall be retained at the inspected premises by the building owner and a copy submitted to the fire division, fire alarm division. 
(h)  Fire division inspections. Fire department personnel, after providing reasonable notice to the owner or his representative, shall have the right to enter onto the property to conduct field testing to be certain that the required level of radio coverage is present. 
(i)  Property owner letter. At final acceptance the applicant shall supply a letter to the Central Falls fire division, fire alarm division, 150 Illinois St., Central Falls, RI 02863, accepting the property owner's responsibilities. These responsibilities are as follows: upgrades to system as directed by the fire division, maintenance contract in place with name of contractor, who will provide a 24-hour by seven-day emergency response within two hours after notification, and contact personnel with phone numbers. This letter is to be on company letterhead signed by the property owner or a legal representative. 
(j)  Request for waiver. A waiver from the fire division, fire alarm division, is required for radio equipment usage in lieu of a telephone system in high rise occupancies. The applicant shall make a formal request in writing to the Central Falls Fire Division, Fire Alarm Division, 150 Illinois St., Central Falls, RI 02863. The request shall state address of property, property owner (responsible party), radio equipment vendor, contact personnel with telephone numbers, radio system drawings with technical parameters, and equipment specifications shall accompany the waiver request. Applicants will receive a written reply within 30 days. This waiver is the initial step in this procedure and required before proceeding. 
(k)  Required form. All required forms can be obtained from the Central Falls Fire Division, Fire Alarm 150 Illinois St., Central Falls, RI 02863. 
(1)  Equipment location notification form. 
(2)  BDA compliance test report. 
(l)  Cabinet. The cabinet shall be a NEMA 4 painted steel cabinet. The color will be fire engine red and bear the lettering as follows: "CENTRAL FALLS FIRE DEPT. RADIO" in bright yellow. The maintenance vendor and telephone number will be marked on the cabinet. The cabinet will have a lock mechanism to keep the unit secure. 
(m)  Primary power. Connection to primary power can be done in two manners. The first, a cord set with twist lock plug and receptacle or with metallic conduit. Each bi-directional amplifier shall be powered by its own 20 ampere circuit. 
(Ord. of 5-14-2007) 
Chapter 22 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Relief of injured and deceased police officers, G.L. 1956, § 45-19-1 et seq.; appeals from police department, G.L. 1956, § 45-20-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1-22-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DIVISION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-19. - Composition. 
    The police division of the department of public safety of the city shall consist of the superior officers appointed under the provisions of the Charter and as many police patrol officers as the director of public safety deems necessary. 
(Code 1973, § 21-1; Code 1994, § 22-26; Ord. of 6-25-2007(2)) 
Sec. 22-20. - Hiring procedures. 
(a)  Legislative findings. 
(1)  It is the policy of the city to provide high-quality police service to our community. Quality policing is provided by professional, well-trained individuals working together. Selecting the best people to be our community's police is essential to the make-up of the police department and the fundamental aim of a recruiting program. A proactive, positive approach to police recruiting is necessary to attract quality applicants representative of the demographics of the city. Recruiting is conducted when needed to maintain service strength. 
(2)  It is the policy of the city to identify and employ the best-qualified individuals to perform the tasks and functions of the police department without regard to race, color, religion, sex, age, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, socioeconomic status or mental, physical, developmental, or sensory disability. The department prohibits discrimination against any person in recruitment, appointment, training, promotion, retention, discipline, or any other aspect of personnel administration for reasons of political or religious opinions, affiliations, or because of race, color, national origin, physical disability or age, except where specific age or physical requirements constitute a bonafide occupational qualification necessary to properly and efficiently perform the functions of the job. 
(3)  It is the policy of the city to actively encourage women and traditionally under-represented populations to apply for employment in all positions within the police department. All persons should have equal opportunities in recruitment, selection, appointment, promotion, training, discipline and related areas. 
(b)  The director of human resources shall advertise through statewide printed media and the subsequent methods of community outreach that applications are being accepted for the position of police officer grade II. Notice will be given to applicants of the time and place where competitive exams will be held. 
(1)  Applications will be made available online to create better accessibility for potential candidates. 
(2)  Demographically under-represented and female officers will be depicted in the law enforcement role in department publications whenever possible to encourage potential female and demographically under-represented candidates. 
(3)  Female officers or officers who are demographically under-represented within the department, whenever possible, will actively encourage recruitment of potential candidates. 
(4)  The police department will participate in information sessions, and career fairs to encourage potential candidates; when possible utilizing female and demographically under-represented officers. 
(5)  The police department will build upon relationships with high schools, colleges, and universities to attract potential candidates. 
(6)  The police department will work with groups in the community representing the community's diversity to build relationships and encourage potential candidates. 
(7)  Advertising will be formatted in all languages that are spoken by at least ten percent of city residents as determined by the United States Census Bureau. 
(8)  Advertising will include print, web and radio broadcasts on local media outlets. 
(9)  Advertising will be distributed to local area businesses in targeted areas of the city. 
(c)  All statements of police officer applicants relative to eligibility are subject to verification by authentic proof thereof, and applicants shall authorize the director of human resources to make legitimate investigations as to residency, citizenship, education and/or evidence of eligibility. 
(d)  Any person who has ever been convicted of a crime or has been placed on a term of probation, or has received a deferred sentence, or a filing after entering a plea constituting an admission to a complaint, information or indictment may be ineligible for appointment to the police department. 
(e)  No person shall be appointed unless they are a citizen of the United States. All applicants must be high school graduates or have received a G.E.D. certificate and have an associate degree or 60 or more college or junior college credits. An exception may be made to the requirement of an associate degree or 60 or more college or junior college credits if an applicant has completed their enlistment period and has been honorably discharged from the U.S. Armed Forces or can document a minimum of one year fulltime service in the field of law enforcement. 
(f)  No applicant for the position of police officer may be younger than 18 years of age on the date of application. 
(g)  An applicant's eligibility for the position of police officer grade II shall be established by the following criteria: 
(1)  The human resources department shall make available an application form which prospective candidates must complete without the aid or assistance of any other person. Statements that are materially false shall result in disqualification or if discovered after appointment shall be cause for dismissal. 
(2)  Applicants shall be examined by their physician to determine their ability to perform a physical fitness exam without substantial risk of injury. Results of such examination shall be forwarded to the city on a form supplied by the city. 
(3)  A physical fitness exam shall be required of all applicants. This exam shall be consistent with the state municipal police training academy standards. The physical fitness requirements shall be conducted by the police department with the assistance of one or more certified physical fitness specialists selected from a list provided by the state municipal police training academy. Each candidate participating shall be scored on a pass/fail basis for each of the required activities. 
(4)  Candidates who have passed the physical examination shall be required to take a written examination. Such examination shall be prepared and scored by an independent examination service selected by the director of human resources. The maximum score for the written examination shall be 40, provided that an additional four points shall be awarded for those who have established documented legal residency in the city for at least one year prior to application to the department, an additional two points shall be awarded for any veteran honorably discharged from the U.S. Armed Forces, and an additional four points shall be awarded for any person fluent in any second language as spoken by at least ten percent of city residents as determined by the United States Census Bureau for a final, total maximum score for the written examination of 50. 
(5)  An oral examination is to be given to the top 25 scores on the written examination by a four member board consisting of the following, or his or her designee: the public safety director, the chief/colonel of the police department, the director of human resources and a woman or demographically under-represented police officer from the city police department as designated by the police union of the city. The oral examination shall be recorded on video. The oral examination shall consist of questions designed to test past experience, personality, alertness, confidence, qualifications, diversity awareness, professional bearing, and judgment of the applicant. The members of the board are required to evaluate the applicant on a zero to ten point system for each of the ten interview questions. At no time may any two board members scoring be more than two points apart per question. The candidate's total score for the oral examination shall be computed by dividing the combined scores of the examiners by eight. The maximum score for the oral examination shall be 50. 
(6)  Candidates who attain the highest combined total scores under subsections (4) through (5) of this section shall be placed on the eligibility list numerically. 
(7)  At the discretion of the chief of the police department, candidates on the eligibility list may be afforded a physical examination by the city physician or a physician appointed by the city, and will be required to undergo psychological testing and a comprehensive background investigation. If any of the candidates fail to qualify physically or psychologically or as a result of their background investigation, as determined by the director of public safety, they shall be ineligible for referral to the personnel board for hiring and removed from the eligibility list. The next qualified candidate, at the discretion of the chief of the police department, shall be selected for the physical and psychological examinations and a background investigation. After the required number of candidates have been determined to pass the physical and psychological examinations and background investigation, the chief of the police department shall make a recommendation of hiring from the candidates who are ranked one, two or three to the personnel board who shall make the appointment to the police department from the eligibility list. 
(8)  The eligibility list shall be valid for a maximum of two years from the date of the personnel board's decision, unless the director of public safety grants a six-month extension, and shall extinguish sooner upon no qualified candidates remaining on the list. 
(h)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the director of public safety shall have the authority to establish a procedure for the hiring of a lateral transfer applicant, defined as a police officer in good standing, with at least three years experience. 
(Code 1994, § 22-27; Ord. of 4-14-1993, § 19-37; Ord. of 6-25-2007(2); Ord. of 5-12-2008(2); Ord. of 9-28-2015 , § 1; Ord. of 12-11-2017(1) , § 1) 
Sec. 22-21. - Filling of vacancies. 
(a)  Policies and procedures relating to the promotions for the rank of sergeant, lieutenant, captain, and major shall be governed by the relevant provisions in the collective bargaining agreement between the police union and the city. 
(Code 1994, § 22-28; Ord. of 4-14-1993, § 19-37.1; Ord. of 5-12-1993(1), § 19-38; Ord. of 8-4-1998; Ord. of 6-25-2007(2); Ord. of 9-28-2015 , § 1) 
Sec. 22-22. - Course reimbursement. 
(a)  Consistent with G.L. 1956, § 42-28.1-1 et seq., any newly hired fulltime police officer of the city police department shall be entitled to reimbursement of his/her eligible expenses incurred by taking courses leading to an associate's degree in law enforcement or criminal justice. 
(b)  The term "eligible expenses" includes the cost of tuition, books and supplies. 
(c)  Reimbursement for eligible expenses shall be limited to that amount which is charged by the Community College of Rhode Island per semester regardless of the number of courses taken in a semester. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 22-23. - Conduct of members and employees. 
    The members of the police division, both civilian and sworn, shall not engage in any other business or employment, unless approved by the office of the colonel/chief of police, and they shall perform all such duties as are or may be required of them by the laws of the state or the ordinances of the city. They shall severally obey their superior officers and shall faithfully conform to and observe all rules and regulations made for the management of the division. 
(Code 1973, § 21-2; Code 1994, § 22-29; Ord. of 6-25-2007(2)) 
Sec. 22-24. - Colonel/chief, major/deputy chief or captains to be complainants. 
    The colonel/chief of police and in his absence the major/deputy chief of police and the captains shall, respectively, in order, severally be complainants under any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 21-3; Code 1994, § 22-30; Ord. of 6-25-2007(2)) 
Sec. 22-25. - Station house. 
    The station house shall be in the charge of the ranking officer on regular duty and such officer shall be responsible for the enforcement at such times of the rules and regulations for the government of the station and for the conduct of the officers under his command. In case of enforced absence, such ranking officer shall detail an officer to have charge of the station. The officer in charge shall receive into his custody and safely keep all persons arrested. 
(Code 1973, § 21-4; Code 1994, § 22-31; Ord. of 6-25-2007(2)) 
Sec. 22-26. - Fines, fees, penalties and compensation received by police. 
    All fees, fines and penalties received by any member of the police division and all compensation received for services rendered in an official capacity or within the hours prescribed for official duty shall be immediately accounted for and paid over to the colonel/chief of police, who shall pay the same over to the director of finance as required by the Charter. The colonel/chief shall also enter the amount so received, the name of the policeman from whom received and the case in which the same was so received in a book which the colonel/chief of police is hereby required to keep for that purpose. In the same book the colonel/chief of police shall enter, in like manner, all fees, fines, penalties and compensation received by himself. He shall, at least once in each month, present such book to the director of finance, who is hereby required to examine the same and the items thereof and who, if he finds it correct, shall certify accordingly and state the monthly sum thereof; provided, however, that the colonel/chief of police shall be allowed to retain from such sum so much thereof as will enable him to have on hand the sum of $25.00 to meet the incidental expenses of his office, which disbursements shall always be accounted for subsequently; provided further, that members of the permanent police who receive fees for attendance upon the district, superior or supreme court shall be entitled to retain such fees to their own use as reimbursement for the expenses incident to such attendance. 
(Code 1973, § 21-5; Code 1994, § 22-32; Ord. of 6-25-2007(2)) 
Sec. 22-27. - Monthly report of colonel/chief. 
    The colonel/chief of police shall, once in each month, present to the city council a report showing the condition of the police division, the work done during the month preceding the report, the amount paid over to the director of finance under the provisions of section 22-26, and any suggestions respecting the division which he may deem in the interests of the city to require. 
(Code 1973, § 21-6; Code 1994, § 22-33; Ord. of 6-25-2007(2)) 
Sec. 22-28. - Removal of colonel/chief from collective bargaining unit. 
    No colonel/chief of police shall be a member of the collective bargaining unit. 
(Code 1994, § 22-34; Ord. of 3-7-1994; Ord. of 8-31-2004(4); Ord. of 6-25-2007(2)) 
Sec. 22-29. - Regulations for the employment of the colonel/chief of police. 
(a)  A colonel/chief of police of the city, appointed under the regulations of this Code, shall be retained either under an employment contract not to exceed 60 months, or as an at-will employee who may be terminated at any time, without cause. 
(b)  Every contract shall commence on the second Monday in January. 
(Code 1994, § 22-35; Ord. of 11-8-2004(2); Ord. of 6-25-2007(2)) 
Sec. 22-30. - Processing fee for application to carry a concealed pistol or revolver. 
    Pursuant to R.I.G.L. § 11-47-11 et seq., the chief of police is the authorized authority for issuance of a license to carry a pistol or revolver and is responsible to conduct appropriate investigation into an applicant's qualifications and needs for said license. The chief of police shall adopt a written policy, in conformity with applicable state and federal laws, for the procedure in the issuance of such a license, and the processing fee for all applications shall be $160.00. 
(Ord. of 3-20-2013(1) ) 
Secs. 22-31-22-59. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - POLICE OFFICERS' PENSION 

Sec. 22-60. - List and fund created. 
    The city council hereby creates and establishes a pension list and pension fund for officers and members of the permanent police division of the city and for all who shall become members of the division. 
(Code 1973, § 21-7; Code 1994, § 22-56) 
Sec. 22-61. - Eligibility. 
(a)  Upon recommendation of the board of pensions and retirement, the city council may place upon the pension list permanent members of the paid police division who: 
(1)  Request to be placed on non-service connected disability by reason of age, physical or mental infirmity, which renders the member totally or partially permanently disabled; provided, however, that no member of the division shall be eligible for a non-service connected disability pension unless he or she served at least five years; provided further, that no member of the division shall be placed upon the pension list until there is presented to the board of pensions and retirement a certificate from a physician approved by the city that the member is totally or partially permanently disabled. 
(2)  Request to be placed on service-connected disability by reason of injuries sustained or illness incurred while in the performance of duty which renders the member totally or partially permanently disabled. No member of the division shall be granted a service-connected disability pension and placed upon the pension list until there is presented to the board of pensions and retirement a certificate from a physician approved by the city that he or she is unfit to perform active duty. It is the express intent and purpose of this provision for the service-connected disability pension benefits received by a member to be benefits paid in lieu of workers' compensation benefits. 
(3)  The determination of disability from any cause, whether service connected or non-service connected shall be made upon the basis of reports on examinations made by three physicians consisting of the treating physician, a physician selected by the city, and a third physician to be selected by the other two physicians. A majority decision by the selected physicians must be reached with regard to 
a.  Determination of disability; and 
b.  Whether the disability is total and permanent or partial and permanent. 
The member shall be provided a written determination of the decision within 60 days after the date that the city has received all three physicians' reports. If the majority decision is that the member has sustained a total or partial permanent disability, the physician appointed by the city shall so certify to the board of pensions and retirement in accordance with paragraph (1). 
(4)  In the event there is no duly constituted board of pensions and retirement, recommendation for placement on the pension list shall be made by the director of personnel and the administrative and finance officer to the city council. 
(b)  For the purpose of this provision, the city shall determine whether a member is totally and permanently disabled utilizing the same standards as the Social Security Administration, which includes the presumptive total and permanent disabilities set forth by the Social Security Administration. 
(c)  A member who has been placed on the pension list for service-connected total and permanent disability shall receive disability retirement benefits for life. 
(d)  A member who has been placed on the pension list for service-connected partial and permanent disability, shall be placed on a regular pension when he or she reaches social security retirement age, calculated in accordance with the collective bargaining agreement in effect at the time the member became disabled. 
(Code 1973, § 21-8; Code 1994, § 22-57; Ord. of 8-10-2016(1) , § 2) 
Sec. 22-62. - Request to have name placed on list. 
    Any permanent member of the police division who has been regularly employed as a member of the division for at least 25 years and who has attained the age set forth in the collective bargaining agreement in effect at the time the request is made, may in writing request the board of pensions and retirement to place his or her name on such pension list and, if the board shall grant such request, the name of the member shall be placed upon the list. If the member has been regularly employed for 25 years and has not attained the age set forth in the collective bargaining agreement in effect at the time the request is made, the member may be placed on the list and elect to defer the payment of pension benefits until he reaches said age; provided, however, that if said member elects to receive pension benefits immediately, the amount of said benefits will be reduced by an early retirement factor, as actuarially determined. 
(Code 1973, § 21-9; Code 1994, § 22-58; Ord. of 8-10-2016(1) , § 2) 
Sec. 22-63. - Members subject to rules of division and to recall to temporary active duty. 
    Members of the pension list shall be subject to all rules of the police division as to conduct. The chief of police may at any time call upon members on the pension list for temporary regular police duty, and for such service they shall receive full pay at the rate then paid regular members of the division for similar work. During the term of such temporary active police duty, such pensioned members shall not be entitled to any compensation from the pension fund. 
(Code 1973, § 21-10; Code 1994, § 22-59) 
Sec. 22-64. - Payments into fund. 
    The director of finance is hereby authorized and directed to place in the pension fund: 
(1)  One percent of the annual salary or wages due each permanent member of the paid police division, to be deducted by him from each payroll. 
(2)  All fines and penalties imposed upon members of the police division for violations of the rules and regulations of the division and certified to him by the chief of police. It is hereby made a duty of the chief to communicate such fines and penalties to the director of finance. 
(3)  All sums charged against any of the members absent from duty where no substitute has been employed in such member's place, provided that such absence was not caused by illness. It is hereby made a duty of the chief of police to communicate such charges to the director of finance. 
(4)  All donations, contributions and receipts from any source that may be made or received on account of or for the benefit of the fund. 
(Code 1973, § 21-11; Code 1994, § 22-60) 
Sec. 22-65. - Additional appropriations when fund insufficient. 
    Whenever the policemen's pension fund shall be insufficient to pay the pensions to the members entitled thereto, the city council shall appropriate from time to time such additional sums as may be required to carry out the intent and provisions of this division. 
(Code 1973, § 21-12; Code 1994, § 22-61) 
Sec. 22-66. - Custodian of fund; investments. 
    The director of finance shall be the custodian of the policemen's pension fund, which he shall keep separate and apart from other funds. He may invest, reinvest and change the form of investment of the fund, subject to the approval of the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 21-13; Code 1994, § 22-62) 
Sec. 22-67. - Amount of benefits. 
    Any permanent member of the paid police division placed on the pension list shall receive thereafter during his lifetime, unless otherwise provided, a pension equivalent to one-half of the compensation he was receiving at the time he was placed upon the list, to be paid weekly to those entitled thereto; provided, however, that any paid member of the police division who has served at least 15 years on the paid police division shall receive thereafter a minimum pension of $25.00 per week or, as provided in this section, one-half of the compensation he was receiving at the time he was placed upon the list, whichever is the greater. 
(Code 1973, § 21-14; Code 1994, § 22-63) 
Sec. 22-68. - Assessments need not be paid after name placed on list. 
    A member on the pension fund list shall not be required to pay any assessment to the fund from the date his name is placed upon the pension list. 
(Code 1973, § 21-15; Code 1994, § 22-64) 
Sec. 22-69. - Refund of contributions on cessation of membership. 
    Any member of the police division who shall resign or be discharged therefrom shall thereupon be entitled to any payments theretofore made by him to the fund. 
(Code 1973, § 21-16; Code 1994, § 22-65) 
Sec. 22-70. - Payments not transferable or subject to attachment. 
    The pension payments provided by this article shall not be transferable nor subject to attachment and shall be paid to the member entitled thereto; except, that they may be regulated and arranged by the city council and paid so as to be best appropriated to the use and benefit of the person entitled to them. 
(Code 1973, § 21-17; Code 1994, § 22-66) 
State Law reference- Exemption of pension fund from attachment or other process, G.L. 1956, § 9-26-5. 
Sec. 22-71. - Rules and regulations. 
    The board of pensions and retirement, subject to approval of the city council, is hereby empowered to make such rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this division as may be deemed best for governing the pension list and payments provided for by this division. 
(Code 1973, § 21-18; Code 1994, § 22-67) 
Secs. 22-72-22-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - POLICE PROTECTION SERVICES 

Sec. 22-101. - Definitions; interpretation. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dwelling unit means a structure or portion thereof providing independent and complete cooking, living, sleeping and toilet facilities for a group of persons living as a single housekeeping unit. 
    Excessive police response means each police response in excess of five to a single dwelling unit in a residential property. 
    Mobile home means a detached single dwelling unit fabricated at a factory and capable of being transported to location of use on its own chassis and wheels, identified by a model number and serial number by its manufacturer, and designed primarily for placement on an impermanent foundation. 
    Owner, when used in reference to a residential property, means the record owner of the residential property as shown in the real property records. 
    Police response means that one or more police officers goes to a residential property in response to a call for assistance, a complaint, an emergency or a potential emergency; provided, that the term "police response" does not include a response to: 
(1)  Receipt of false information, unless the false information was provided by an occupant or owner of the residential property. 
(2)  A false alarm, unless the false alarm was caused, permitted or allowed by an occupant or owner of the residential property in violation. 
(3)  A call involving potential child neglect, potential domestic violence, or potential stalking. 
    Residential property means a parcel, tract or lot shown as an individual unit on the most recent plat of record that contains one or more dwelling units, and a mobile home. 
(Code 1994, § 22-76; Ord. of 6-1-2004, § I) 
Sec. 22-102. - Fee for police protection services. 
(a)  Subject to subsection (b) of this section, the owner of a residential property shall pay the municipality a fee of $300.00 per occurrence in excess of five police responses to the residential property during a calendar year. 
(b)  The owner of a residential property shall be liable for the fee established by subsection (a) of this section only if: 
(1)  The municipality has notified the owner in writing that the fee will apply to any excessive police responses to the residential property during the calendar year. 
(2)  The time allowed for appropriate corrective action has expired. 
(3)  The owner has not taken appropriate corrective action. 
(c)  If a residential property has more than one owner, all owners shall be jointly and severally liable for any fee imposed under this section. 
(d)  For residential property owned as a condominium, a fee based on excessive police responses to a single dwelling unit shall be assessed against the owner of the dwelling unit. 
(Code 1994, § 22-77; Ord. of 6-1-2004, § II) 
Sec. 22-103. - Notice to property owner. 
(a)  The municipality may notify the owner of a residential property in writing there have been five police responses in the current calendar year to a single dwelling unit in the residential property. 
(b)  A notice under this section shall be given in a manner that is reasonably calculated to provide actual notice to the owner of the residential property. At a minimum, the notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the mailing address of the owner as shown on the municipality's real property tax records, and if the residential property has a different street address, to that street address. The municipality also shall give notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, at another address where it appears more likely that the owner will receive actual notice at the address. Such other address may include, without limitation, an address identified from the telephone directory, public records, or prior police contacts with the residential property or the owner. The notice also shall be posted at the principal entrance to the entrance to the residential property. 
(c)  The notice shall: 
(1)  Identify the residential property that is the subject of the notice by street address and legal description, and identify the dwelling unit to which the police responses have been made if there is more that one dwelling unit in the residential property. 
(2)  State that there have been five police responses to a dwelling unit in the residential property during the current calendar year. 
(3)  State that if the owner does not take appropriate corrective action, the owner will be liable for a fee for each excessive police response to the residential property during the calendar year. 
(4)  State the amount of the fee per excessive police response to the residential property. 
(5)  State the name and telephone number of a representative of the city to contact concerning the notice. 
(Code 1994, § 22-78; Ord. of 6-1-2004, § III) 
Sec. 22-104. - Corrective action. 
(a)  An owner of a residential property shall have 30 days from the date of mailing of the notice to promptly take appropriate corrective action in response to the notice. Appropriate corrective action shall be action that reasonably would be expected to correct the cause of the police responses to the residential property, and may include, without limitation, written notice to quit. 
(b)  There shall be no fee for additional police responses to the residential property that is the subject of the notice during the 30-day period allowed under subsection (a) of this section if the owner takes appropriate corrective action during the 30-day period. The owner shall be considered to have taken appropriate corrective action if there are no additional police responses to the residential property from the end of the 30-day period until the earlier of the: 
(1)  End of the calendar year; or 
(2)  The date 90 days after the end of the 30-day period as allowed under this section. 
(Code 1994, § 22-79; Ord. of 6-1-2004, § 4) 
Sec. 22-105. - Lien on property. 
(a)  The fee imposed is a lien on the residential property to which there have been an excessive number of police responses. 
(b)  The lien becomes effective upon the recording of a notice of the lien that describes the residential property that is the subject of the lien, states the amount of fees for which the lien has been recorded, and states that the lien has been recorded pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1994, § 22-80; Ord. of 6-1-2004, § 5) 
Secs. 22-106-22-123. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - POLICE DETAILS 

Sec. 22-124. - Assignment requests for events or projects; procedures. 
(a)  Any and all requests for detail police officers shall be made through the police department detail officer. 
(b)  The chief of police, or his designee, in accordance with the collective bargaining agreement between the city and the FOP Lodge #2, shall have the power and authority to determine and assign the number of police detail officers/vehicles to any projects or any other special detail assignments within the city. 
(c)  The chief of police, or his designee, shall review all projects and assignments within the city to determine the necessity of any assignments of officers to foster public safety and the safety of the officers. 
(d)  Any and all parties requesting police details shall be required to comply with the recommendation of the chief of police, or his designee, and all other provisions of this chapter. 
(e)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the chief of police, or his designee, shall have the full power and authority to determine the necessity of any detail within the city. 
(Ord. of 6-25-2007(1)) 
Sec. 22-125. - Payments by responsible party. 
(a)  The city shall be reimbursed for any and all sums paid to any officer in accordance with the detail payment schedule in effect. Payment shall be made by the responsible party in accordance with the schedule of charges in effect by the city. 
(b)  Prior to the furnishing of any detail officers, the chief of police, or his designee, shall require the party deemed responsible for the event or project to acknowledge its financial obligation to the city. Further, the acknowledging party shall be responsible to pay the city administrative costs of four dollars per hour and vehicle maintenance costs of $12.00 per hour for expenses incurred by the city. These costs are in addition to the wages required to be paid to the members of FOP Lodge #2 pursuant to their official detail rates for officers. 
(c)  All parties deemed responsible for the event or project shall make payment to the city finance department directly. Payment must be made within 45 days of the date of the work; otherwise a 25 percent late fee will immediately be assessed and a 11/2 percent interest rate per month will accrue on the unpaid balance. These fees will be assessed by the finance department. 
(d)  All detail monies will be paid to the officers in accordance with the normal city payroll system. All applicable taxes will be withheld by the city. The officers will be paid in the next complete payroll cycle following the detail in accordance with the current payroll system. 
(e)  The cost of any litigation with respect to payment will be borne by the party deemed responsible for the event or project. 
(f)  The finance director shall set up a special revenue account for the police department. 
(Ord. of 6-25-2007(1)) 
Chapter 24 - LIBRARY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Free public libraries, G.L. 1956, § 29-4-1 et seq. 

Sec. 24-1. - Appropriated to use of inhabitants; name. 
    The free public library acquired from the city fire district shall continue to be appropriated to the use of all the inhabitants of the city under such rules and regulations as may be from time to time adopted by the board of trustees of the library. Such library shall be called "the free public library of the city." 
(Code 1973, § 2-14; Code 1994, § 24-1) 
Sec. 24-2. - Meetings of board of trustees; annual report. 
    The board of trustees of the public library shall meet not less than four times per year and more often if they deem it necessary. They shall make a report to the city council on or before December 1 in each year of their proceedings during the year preceding the report, of the condition of the library and extent of its public use, the additions to the library, and its receipts and expenses during the year, and may make such suggestions and give such further information relating to the library as the board may deem expedient. 
(Code 1973, § 2-16; Code 1994, § 24-2) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to appointment of library trustees, G.L. 1956, § 29-4-5. 
Sec. 24-3. - Fines and penalties. 
(a)  Any person who shall take or borrow any book or other library property from any of the libraries or collections of public libraries within the city, primarily subsidized by local or state funds, and who, upon neglect to return the same within the time required and specified in the bylaws, rules or regulations of the public library owning such property, after receiving notice in writing by the librarian or other proper custodian of the property that the same is overdue, shall upon further neglect to return the same within 60 days from the date of such notice be fined not more than $25.00, such fine to be for the use of the public library. A written or printed notice given personally or sent by mail to a last known or registered place of residence shall be considered sufficient notice under this section. In addition, if such book should be lost, destroyed or not returned, such person shall, within 60 days after being so notified, pay to the custodian the replacement value of such book, including all reasonable processing costs as determined by the governing board having jurisdiction. All library users shall be notified of the aforementioned penalties at the time they obtain or renew their library privileges. 
(b)  Whoever, without authority, with the intention of converting to his own or another's use, willfully conceals a book or other library property belonging to a public library within the city which is primarily subsidized by local or state funds, while still on the premises of such public library, or willfully or without authority removes a book or other library property from any of the public libraries or collections therein, shall be fined not more than $25.00, such fine to be for the use of the library, and shall be ordered to make restitution to the library in the full retail value of the books or library property. 
(Code 1994, § 24-4; Ord. of 10-5-1992) 
Chapter 26 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Malicious destruction of property or obstruction of lawful pursuits. 
    Every person who shall willfully and maliciously or mischievously injure or destroy the property of another, or obstruct the use of the property of another, or obstruct another in the prosecution of his lawful business or pursuits, in any manner, shall be charged in accordance with Chapter 44-11 of the Rhode Island General Laws. 
(Code 1973, § 18-11; Code 1994, § 26-4; Ord. of 9-14-2015(3) , § 1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 11-44-1. 
Sec. 26-2. - Airplane glue, sale or furnishing to minors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, furnish, deliver, supply, lend or give any quantity of so-called toxic airplane glue to any minor unless first supplied with written permission from a parent or guardian of the minor requesting such minor to be sold, furnished or otherwise supplied with the toxic airplane glue. 
(Code 1973, § 18-1; Code 1994, § 26-12; Ord. of 9-14-2015(3) , § 1) 
Sec. 26-3. - Child safety zone; sex offenders. 
    Sex offender registration, sex offender notification, child safety zones and violations related thereto shall be charged in accordance with Chapter 11-37 of the Rhode Island General Laws. 

(Ord. of 6-9-2008(2), §§ 1-5; Ord. of 9-14-2015(3) , § 1) 
Sec. 26-4. - Juvenile curfew. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to: 
(1)  Promote the general welfare and protect the general public through the reduction of juvenile violence and crime within the city; 
(2)  Promote the safety and well-being of the city's youngest citizens, persons under the age of 18, whose life inexperience renders them particularly vulnerable to becoming participants in unlawful activities, particularly unlawful drug and gang activities, and to being victimized by older perpetrators of crime; and 
(3)  To help foster and strengthen parental responsibility for children. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purposes of the article the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular and words in the singular number include the plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    Curfew hours refers to the hours between 9:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. on any day of the week. 
    Emergency refers to any unforeseen circumstances, or the status or condition resulting therefrom, requiring immediate action to safeguard life, limb, and property. The term includes, but is not limited to fires, natural disasters, automobile accidents, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
    Establishment refers to any privately-owned place of business within the city operated for a profit, to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment. With respect to such entertainment, the term "operator" shall mean any person, and any firm association, partnership (and the members or partners thereof) and/or any corporation (and the officers thereof) conducting or managing the establishment. 
    Juvenile or minor refers to any unemancipated, unmarried person under the age of 18. 
    Officer refers to a sworn police or other law enforcement officer charged with the duty of enforcing the laws of the state and/or the ordinances of the city. 
    Parent refers to: 
(1)  A person who is a minor's biological or adoptive parent and who has legal custody of a minor (including either parent, if custody is shared under court order or agreement); 
(2)  A person who is the biological or adoptive parent with whom a minor regularly resides; 
(3)  A stepparent; 
(4)  A person judicially appointed as a legal guardian of the minor; and/or 
(5)  A person 18 years of age or older standing in loco parentis (as indicated by the authorization of an individual listed in subsections (1), (2) or (3) of this definition, for the person to assume the care or physical custody of the child, or as indicated by any other circumstances). 
    Person refers to an individual, not to any association, corporation, or any other legal entity. 
    Public place refers to any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access, including, but not limited to: streets, highways, roads, sidewalks, alleys, avenues, parks, and/or the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment buildings, tenement houses, office buildings, transportation facilities, shops, stores, restaurants, parking lots, playgrounds, theatres, taverns, cafes, large gathering halls, and any similar areas that are open to the use of the public. 
    Remain refers to the actions: 
(1)  To linger or stay at or upon a public place; and/or 
(2)  To fail to leave a public place when requested to do so by an officer or by the owner, operator, or other person in control of that place. 
    Temporary care facility refers to a nonlocked, nonrestrictive shelter at which minors may wait, under visual supervision, to be retrieved by a parent. No minors waiting in such facility shall be handcuffed and/or secured (by handcuffs or otherwise) to any stationary object. 
(c)  Curfew for juveniles. It is unlawful for a juvenile to be in a public place within the city, to be in any motor vehicle operating or parked in a public place, or to be in or on the premises of any establishment within the city as follows: During every month of the year, juveniles may not be in a public place, as described in this subsection, during the hours of 9:00 p.m. through 5:00 a.m. on any day of the week 
(d)  Exceptions. 
(1)  The juvenile is accompanied by a parent; 
(2)  The juvenile is involved in an emergency; 
(3)  The juvenile is engaged in an employment activity, or is going to or returning home from such activity, without detour or stop; 
(4)  The juvenile is on the sidewalk directly abutting a place where he resides with a parent; 
(5)  The juvenile is attending an activity sponsored by a school, religious, or civic organization, by a public organization or agency, or by another similar organization or entity, which activity is supervised by adults, and/or the juvenile is going to or returning from such activity without detour or stop; 
(6)  The juvenile is on an errand at the direction of a parent, and the juvenile has in his possession a written note signed by the parent containing the following information: the name, signature, address, and telephone number of the parent authorizing the errand, the telephone number where the parent may be reached during the errand, the name of the juvenile, and a brief description of the errand, the juvenile's destination and the hours the juvenile is authorized to be engaged in the errand; 
(7)  The juvenile is involved in interstate travel through, or beginning or terminating in, the city; or 
(8)  The juvenile is exercising his First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and/or the right to assembly. 
A special curfew hour of 10:00 p.m. on Halloween night is hereby established for the trick or treat visitations. 
(e)  Parental responsibility. It shall be unlawful for a parent having legal custody of a juvenile knowingly to permit or by inefficient control to allow the juvenile to be in any public place within the city under circumstances not constituting an exception to, or otherwise beyond the scope of this section. The term "knowingly" includes knowledge that a parent should reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a juvenile in that parent's legal custody. This requirement is intended to hold a neglectful or careless parent up to a reasonable community standard of parental responsibility through an objective test. It shall, therefore, be no defense that a parent was completely indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such juvenile. 
(f)  Establishment operator responsibility. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of an establishment, or for any person who is an employee thereof, to knowingly permit, allow or encourage a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours without his parent or guardian present. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this subsection that the operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was present at the establishment without a parent or guardian after curfew hours and refused to leave. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person (including a juvenile) to give a false name, address, or telephone number to any officer investigating a possible violation of this section. 
(g)  Vehicle operator responsibilities. It is unlawful for a person who is the owner or operator of any motor vehicle to knowingly permit, allow or encourage a violation of this section. 
(h)  Enforcement procedures. Before taking any enforcement action hereunder, an officer shall make an immediate investigation for the purpose of ascertaining whether of not the presence of a juvenile/minor in a public place, motor vehicle and/or establishment within the city during curfew hours is a violation of this section. The officer shall require the juvenile/minor to provide his name, age, address, telephone number, and how to contact his parent or guardian. In determining the age of the suspected juvenile and in the absence of convincing evidence such as a driver's license, passport, birth certificate, a police officer shall, in the first instance of a violation of this section, use the officer's best judgment in determining age. 
(1)  The officer shall issue the juvenile a written warning that the juvenile is in violation of this section and order the juvenile to go promptly home. 
(2)  Police procedures shall constantly be refined in the light of experience and may provide that the officer may transport the juvenile to a parent or guardian under appropriate circumstances. Circumstances prompting the transportation could include but not be limited to exact time of day, weather conditions, time of year, business or shift at time of juvenile encounter, etc. 
(3)  Notwithstanding subsection (h)(1) of this section, when a juvenile has received one previous written warning for violation of this section or an officer has reasonable grounds to believe that the juvenile has engaged in delinquent conduct, the procedure shall then be for the officer to take the juvenile to the police station where a parent or guardian and the juvenile shall be questioned. This is intended to permit ascertainment, under constitutional safeguards, of relevant facts, and to centralize responsibility to the person designated there and then on duty for accurate, effective, fair, impartial, and uniform enforcement, and recording, thus, make available experienced personnel and access to information and records for factual documentation. 
(4)  If a juvenile is detained pursuant to subsection (h)(3) of this section, once a parent or guardian has come to take charge of the juvenile, and the appropriate information has been recorded, the juvenile shall be released to the custody of such parent. If the parent cannot be located or fails to take charge of the juvenile, then the juvenile shall be released to the juvenile authorities, except that in the extent that accordance with police regulations, approved in advance by juvenile authorities, the juvenile may temporarily be entrusted to an adult, neighbor or other person who will on behalf of a parent or guardian assume the responsibility of caring for the juvenile pending availability or arrival of a parent or guardian. 
(5)  Notwithstanding subsection (h)(4) of this section, if the situation dictates as determined by the officer-in-charge at the police station a juvenile may be transported to a temporary care facility for a period not to exceed the remainder of the curfew hours, so that his parents or guardian may retrieve the juvenile. 
(6)  In the case of a first violation of this section by a juvenile requiring the officer to issue a written warning, said written warning shall be either sent via mail or be hand delivered by an officer of the police department to the parent or guardian of the juvenile and shall advise said parent or guardian that any subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of the article, including enforcement of parental responsibility and of applicable penalties. 
(7)  For the first violation of this section by an operator of an establishment who permits a juvenile to remain on the premises without a parent/guardian or without notifying the police department of the violator being in their establishment, an officer shall issue a written warning notice of violation with a warning that any subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of this section, including enforcement of operator responsibility and of applicable penalties. 
(i)  Penalties. 
(1)  If, after the warning notice pursuant to subsection (h)(1) of this section of a first violation by a juvenile, a parent violates subection (e) of this section (in conjunction with a second violation by the juvenile), this shall be treated as a first offense by the parent. For the first offense by the parent, the fine shall be $100.00, and for each subsequent offense by a parent the fine shall increase by an additional $100.00, e.g., $200.00 for a second offense, $300.00 for a third offense. The judge of the municipal court of the city, upon finding a parent guilty, shall sentence the parent to pay this fine and the cost of prosecution. 
(2)  The parent/guardian having legal custody of a juvenile shall be liable for all costs incurred by the city for providing personnel to remain in the company of the juvenile who has been detained pursuant to subection (h)(3) of this section if the parent does not pick up the juvenile within one hour after receiving notice from the city that the city is detaining the juvenile for a curfew violation. The amount to be paid by the parent/guardian shall be based on an hourly wage and benefits of the city employee who is assigned to remain with the juvenile either at the police station or at a temporary care facility as specified in subsection (h)(5) of this section. 
(3)  The parent/guardian having legal custody of a juvenile shall be liable for any fine or condition of restitution or reparation imposed by a court upon a curfew violator, provided that the curfew violator has not paid the fine or made restitution or reparation within the time ordered by the court, and further provided that the parent/guardian has been made a party defendant in all enforcement proceedings against the curfew violator and shall be served with all citations, summons, complaints, notices, and other documents required to be served on the curfew violator defendant. 
(4)  Any juvenile who shall violate any provisions of this section more than three times shall be reported to the juvenile authorities as a juvenile in need of supervision and the chief of police or his designee may proceed to file such charges with the family courts as deemed necessary. 
(5)  If, after the warning notice pursuant to subsection (h)(7) of this section of a violation of the article, an operator of an establishment violates subsection (f) of this section for a second time, this shall be treated as a first offense by the operator. For the first offense by an operator, the fine shall be $100.00, and for each subsequent offense by an operator the fine shall be increased by an additional $100.00, e.g., $200.00 for the second offense, $300.00 for the third offense. 
(j)  Continuing evaluation. The city council shall continue its evaluation and updating of this section. 
(k)  Notice. Notice of the existence of this section and of the curfew regulations established by it shall be posted in, on or about such public or quasi-public places as may be determined by the chief executive or the police department in order that the public may be constantly informed of the existence of this section and its regulations. 
(l)  Construction. 
(1)  The city attorney is hereby authorized to give advisory opinions in writing, which shall be binding and shall be adhered to by the police, until this section is amended in such respect, interpreting terms, phrases, parts or any provisions. Normally such advisory opinions shall be in response to good faith, signed letters addressed to the chief executive or to a member of the city council, questioning this section as: 
a.  Ambiguous; 
b.  Having a potentially chilling effect on constitutional rights specifically invoked; or 
c.  Otherwise invalid, in all three categories with respect to proposed conduct definitely described. 
(2)  This administrative remedy must be exhausted prior to presenting to any court a question in any of the three categories. The city council does not intend a result through the enforcement of this section that is absurd, impossible of execution or unreasonable. Council intends that this section be held inapplicable in such cases, if any, where its application would be unconstitutional under the Constitution of the state or the Constitution of the United States of America. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2008(1), §§ 42-101-42-111, 42-113(b); Ord. of 9-14-2015(3) , § 1) 
Sec. 26-5. - Light sources facing neighboring property. 
(a)  No artificial lighting shall shine directly upon any neighboring residential property or be so established that it shall shine directly upon any neighboring residential property or shall shine directly on or into any rooms, porches or patios of any neighboring structure or property as to be a nuisance. Nor shall any artificial lighting be maintained or operated from any structure or land in such a way as to be a nuisance to neighboring residential properties or as to impair vision though inordinate glare or to create a hazard to neighboring properties or as to interfere with the reasonable quiet enjoyment, use or comfort of the occupants of the neighboring residential properties. 
(b)  Exterior lighting facing neighboring residential property shall be hooded or shielded so that it does not produce an objectionable or inordinate glare on the neighboring residential property. 
(c)  Penalties. Any person responsible for such nuisance or annoying lighting as described in this section shall, upon a complaint having been made to the department of code enforcement, be issued a warning to abate said nuisance. For failure to comply within 14 days of receipt of said warning, said person shall be subject to a fine of $100.00. 
(Ord. of 4-14-2008(2); Ord. of 9-14-2015(3) , § 1) 
Secs. 26-6-26-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PROPERTY RIGHTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-29. - Trespassing on exterior school property. 
    Trespassing on school property shall be charged in accordance with Chapter 44-11 of the Rhode Island General Laws. 
(Code 1973, § 18-21.5; Code 1994, § 26-3; Ord. of 9-14-2015(3) , § 1) 
Sec. 26-30. - Public notices, defacing or destroying. 
    A person shall be charged in accordance with Chapter 44-11 of the Rhode Island General Laws if he or she wantonly tears down, defaces or destroys any notice of any public meeting, auction or other sale or any other public notice lawfully posted. 
(Code 1973, § 18-16; Code 1994, § 26-10; Ord. of 9-14-2015(3) , § 1) 
Sec. 26-31. - Street markers and signs, breaking or injuring. 
    A person shall be charged in accordance with Chapter 44-11 of the Rhode Island General Laws if he or she wantonly breaks down, injures, mars or destroys any monument or other memorial erected for the purpose of designating the boundaries of any street or highway in the city, or any tree, stake or other thing marked for that purpose, or breaks down, injures, mars or destroys any signboard erected upon any street or highway, or wantonly defaces or alters the inscription on any such board. 
(Code 1973, § 18-21; Code 1994, § 26-11; Ord. of 9-14-2015(3) , § 1) 
Secs. 26-32-26-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GRAFFITI[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of 9-14-2015(3) , § 1, amended Div. 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 2, §§ 26-51-26-55, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1994, §§ 26-36-26-40; Ord. of 9-12-1994(2), § 18-100-18-103; Ord. of 2-10-2003. 

Sec. 26-51. - Declaration of policy. 
    The city and other urban areas throughout the country are experiencing unauthorized acts of vandalism by individuals that deface, disfigure or damage public and private property through the use of paint or other materials used to write names, initials, letters, symbols or other miscellaneous markings commonly known as "graffiti." This defacing, disfiguring or damaging of public and private property has created a form of visual pollution that has impacted the citizen's quality of life. The purpose of this article is to prevent same. 
(Ord. of 2-10-2003; Ord. of 9-14-2015(3) , § 1) 
Sec. 26-52. - Graffiti restrictions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person without the express consent of the property owner to paint, deface, disfigure or damage property, including, but not limited to, buildings, walls, fences, poles, containers, bridges, vehicles and all other structures and hard surfaces, through the use of paint or other indelible materials used to write names, initials, letters, symbols or other miscellaneous markings commonly known as "graffiti" and said person shall be charged in accordance with Chapter 44-11 of the Rhode Island General Laws. 
(Ord. of 2-10-2003; Ord. of 9-14-2015(3) , § 1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 11-44-21.1. 
Sec. 26-53. - Enforcement and penalties for minors. 
    The agency charged with the enforcement of this division shall be the police department. This enforcement shall be done in conjunction and with referral and evaluation performed by the city's code enforcement director. Any minor violating the provisions of this division may be referred to the juvenile hearing board, who may subject the minor to a requirement of up to 50 hours of community service work. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2015(3) , § 1) 
Secs. 26-54-26-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PROHIBITING SMOKING WITHIN PROXIMITY TO PUBLIC FACILITIES AND THE DELIVERY OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO MINORS 

Sec. 26-66. - [Intent.] 
    It is the intent of the City of Central Falls to create a tobacco free environment for schools, childcare centers: playgrounds and parks within the City of Central Falls. 
(Ord. of 10-10-2012 , § 1) 
Sec. 26-67. - Smoking prohibition. 
    Smoking and the use of tobacco products is prohibited in or on school grounds, child care facilities, playgrounds and parks within the City of Central Falls, to a distance including 25 feet of any entrance into or exit out of said buildings, including athletic fields, childcare facilities, playgrounds, parks and public events involving youth, families and seniors. 
(Ord. of 10-10-2012 , § 2) 
Sec. 26-68. - [Delivery of tobacco products to minors.] 
    Delivery of tobacco products to persons under the age of 18 is prohibited in accordance with R.I.G.L. 11-9-13 and 11-9-131. It shall be unlawful for any person to deliver any tobacco product or snuff to a person under the age of 18 years, nor shall any person under the age of 18 purchase any tobacco product snuff. 
(Ord. of 10-10-2012 , § 3) 
Sec. 26-69. - Signs to be erected. 
    The public works department is hereby directed to cause conspicuous signs giving notice that the above-referenced properties and facilities are tobacco free zones. 
(Ord. of 10-10-2012 , § 4) 
Sec. 26-70. - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person who violates this division shall be deemed to be creating a public nuisance, and violators shall be punishable to a fine of not less than $100.00 as well as subject to punishment in accordance with section 1-12 of the Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of Central Falls and or prosecuted in accordance with state statues where applicable. 
    Notwithstanding the foregoing, any violations of any provision of this division committed by any person under the age of 18 shall be referred to the municipal court. A first offense shall be punishable by a fine not less than $100.00, or 20 hours community service. Any subsequent offense shall require successful completion of a tobacco cessation program in addition to any fines imposed. 
(Ord. of 10-10-2012 , § 5) 
Secs. 26-71-26-83. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-84. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverage shall be consumed on city streets and sidewalks or within public parks and recreational facilities. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, consume from and/or transport any open container containing alcoholic beverages on any public street, public sidewalk or public way. 
(b)  Penalty. Any person violating this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-12 with the first violation of this section being a fine of $50.00 and each and every offense thereafter being an increased fine of $50.00, up to a fine of no more than $500.00. A court of competent jurisdiction may refer a minor to the juvenile hearing board or, for any individual, may order up to 50 hours of community service instead of ordering a fine. 
(Code 1973, § 18-10; Code 1994, § 26-2; Ord. of 9-14-2015(3) , § 1) 
State Law reference- Disorderly conduct, G.L. 1956, § 11-45-1. 
Sec. 26-85. - Sleeping in public. 
(a)  There shall be no sleeping in any public area of the city at night, including parks, streets and automobiles parked in any public area, except those places which provide sleeping accommodations for transient visitors. 
(b)  Penalty. Any person violating this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-12 with the first violation of this section being a fine of $50.00 and each and every offense thereafter being an increased fine of $50.00, up to a fine of no more than $500.00. A court of competent jurisdiction may refer a minor to the juvenile hearing board or, for any individual, may order up to 50 hours of community service instead of ordering a fine. 
(Code 1973, § 18-18; Code 1994, § 26-5; Ord. of 9-14-2015(3) , § 1) 
Secs. 26-86-26-113. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - NOISE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Unreasonable noise levels, G.L. 1956, § 11-45.1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 26-114. - Penalty. 
    The penalty for the first violation of this division shall be a fine of $100.00, a second violation of this division shall be a fine of $200.00 and a third and any subsequent violation shall be a fine of $500.00. Each fine shall be appealable to the municipal court. 
(Code 1994, § 18-71; Ord. of 8-30-1993, § 6; Ord. of 1-11-1999; Ord. of 1-10-2005(1); Ord. of 11-9-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 26-115. - Declaration of policy. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to prohibit unreasonable, excessive and annoying noise levels from all sources subject to its police power. The noise being generated may originate from radios, CD players, DVD players, tape players, televisions and other audio-producing equipment. 
(Code 1994, § 18-67; Ord. of 8-30-1993, § 1; Ord. of 4-12-2004; Ord. of 11-9-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 26-116. - Enforcement. 
    The police chief or his designee shall train personnel in the proper use of sound level meters and criteria necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1994, § 18-70; Ord. of 8-30-1993, § 5; Ord. of 11-9-2015 ) 
Sec. 26-117. - Violations of acceptable noise levels. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any equipment from which the sound created by this equipment is capable of penetrating a closed vehicle from 20 feet away from the locations at which the sound is being generated, or heard from 100 feet away by a person outside from which the sound is originating. This division shall include, but not be limited to, sound electronically generated by autos, trucks, scooters, motor homes, mobile homes, houses, apartment buildings, condominiums, commercial buildings, lawn maintenance equipment, or from any type of portable sound producing equipment that can be carried or placed outdoors which through its operation exceeds the provisions of this division. 
(b)  All state and municipal vehicles shall be exempt from the provisions of this division, nor any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity which holds a valid state or municipal entertainment license to sponsor a parade, carnival or other similar special event. 
(Code 1994, § 18-68; Ord. of 8-30-1993, § 2; Ord. of 4-12-2004; Ord. of 11-9-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 26-118. - Stereos, radios, musical instruments and other noisemaking devices. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate any stereo, radio, musical instrument or other noisemaking device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner so as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of reasonable persons. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate any stereo, radio, musical instrument or other noisemaking device for the producing or reproducing of sound within a motor vehicle in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of reasonable persons. 
(c)  Any noise level exceeding the ambient base level, as defined in section 26-117 anywhere along the street property, or property lines of any property, or if in a condominium or apartment house with any adjoining apartment, by more than five decibels shall be deemed to be prima facie a violation of the provisions of this division. In the case of a motor vehicle, the noise level must exceed the ambient base level by more than five decibels at least three feet from the motor vehicle. 
(Code 1994, § 18-69; Ord. of 8-30-1993, § 4; Ord. of 11-9-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 26-119. - Public education. 
    The police and fire departments shall conduct public education and post public signage to promote compliance with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2015(1) ) 
Secs. 26-120-26-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC SAFETY 

Sec. 26-150. - Permit requirements for weapons. 
    Permit requirements for weapons shall be in accordance with Chapter 44-11 of the Rhode Island General Laws. 
(Code 1973, § 18-22; Code 1994, § 26-6; Ord. of 9-14-2015(3) , § 1) 
State Law reference- Possession, etc., of weapons, G.L. 1956, § 11-47-1 et seq. 
Sec. 26-151. - Discharging weapons. 
    The discharge of weapons shall be in accordance with Chapter 44-11 of the Rhode Island General Laws. 
(Code 1973, § 18-23; Code 1994, § 26-7; Ord. of 6-1-2005(1); Ord. of 9-14-2015(3) , § 1) 
Sec. 26-152. - Hunting. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt, pursue, take or kill any wild bird or animal in the city with rifles, firearms of any description, bow and arrow, or any other weapon, including air rifles or air pellet guns. 
(Code 1973, § 18-12; Code 1994, § 26-9; Ord. of 9-14-2015(3) , § 1) 
Chapter 28 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal regulation of parks, G.L. 1956, § 32-3-1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 28-1-28-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC CONDUCT IN PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS AND RECREATIONAL AREAS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 28-19. - Playgrounds, parks and playing fields. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Park means any city owned property designated for recreational purposes which shall include, but not be limited to Jenks Park, Pierce Park, the park at Hunt and Lewis Streets and any other parks created by the city. 
    Playground means any city owned property designated for recreational purposes which shall include, but not be limited to the following areas: Cowden Street, Illinois Street, Crossman Street, Sacred Heart Avenue, Garfield Street, tot playgrounds and any other playgrounds created by the city. 
    Playground, tot, means a playground designed and designated for children ten years old and under or any person who shall be supervising a child ten years old and under utilizing said tot playground. Hours of operation for tot playgrounds shall be from 8:30 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., which hours may be modified at the discretion of the chief of police to accommodate public safety issues. 
    Playing field means any city-owned property designated for athletic purposes which shall include, but not be limited to, the Francis Corrigan Sports Complex, Macomber Field, Tarlow Field and any other playing field created by the city. 
(b)  Written permission required. It is hereby declared illegal for any person to enter the playgrounds, parks, or playing fields in the city between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., or in the case of a tot playground between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 8:30 a.m. Any person or group of people wishing to use the playground, park, or playing field during the restricted hours may apply in writing for its use to the board of recreation or mayor and must be granted permission by the mayor or board of recreation. 
(c)  Penalty. The penalty for the first violation of this section shall be a fine of $50.00 and each and every offense thereafter shall include an increased fine of $50.00. 
(Code 1994, § 28-1; Ord. of 12-14-1998; Ord. of 8-25-2003) 
Sec. 28-20. - Prohibited uses; activities. 
(a)  Use by persons being detained or serving sentence. In order to provide for the immediate preservation of public peace, property, health or safety, the use of any public recreational facility, including, but not limited to, all baseball, softball, football, soccer, parks and any recreational fields or facilities by any person either being detained or serving a sentence for a convicted crime shall be prohibited. For the purpose of this section, the terms "person being detained" or "serving a sentence" shall include, but not be limited to, all those in custody of any and all private and public detention facilities, state or federal prisons within the United States. 
(b)  Acts by correctional or training officer while executing duty. It is prohibited for any correctional or training officer while executing his duty to enter, sit, stand, walk, surround, survey, guard or take post at or around, armed or unarmed, any park, ballfield, stadium, court or recreational facility or building owned by the city. 
(c)  Erecting bleachers, fences, etc., without approval. It shall be unlawful for any person to install, erect, move or remove any buildings, stadiums, bleachers, fences or walls at any playground, ballfield, stadium or recreational field or facility owned by the city without first acquiring approval by a majority vote of the city council. 
(d)  Enforcement. The enforcement of this section shall lie with the police chief or the director of public safety. The fine for each offense shall be $500.00. 
(e)  Exceptions. 
(1)  The pursuit of an escapee. 
(2)  Training exercises for guards and training officers. 
(Code 1994, § 28-2; Ord. of 6-14-1994, §§ 1-5) 
Sec. 28-21. - Alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Public parks or park means any land owned or leased by the city for the use of the public for any one or combination for the following uses, to wit: recreation, amusement, playground and field, swimming, trails, sports, bike paths, and any other area used by the public for relaxation or outdoor enjoyment. 
(b)  Alcohol consumption. Unless a permit for alcohol use, sale and consumption is granted by the city council or board of license commissioners, it shall be unlawful for any individual or group of individuals to bring into use, sell or possess alcoholic beverages anywhere within a public park. 
(c)  Penalties for violations. Any person violating any provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine not in excess of $1,000.00. 
(d)  Alcohol dispensing regulations. Pursuant to a permit for the use, sale and consumption of alcohol the city council or board of license commissioners may restrict the place, time and manner in which alcohol is to be dispensed. These restrictions may include the requirement that: 
(1)  A beer garden be constructed with fencing on all sides with one entrance/exit for the purpose of checking ages of patrons into the same; 
(2)  All alcohol shall be consumed within the beer garden; and 
(3)  The posting of a police officer at the entrance of the beer garden. 
(e)  Application procedure. All applicants for a permit to use, sell or consume alcohol in a public park shall comply with the following: 
(1)  File an application for a permit with the city clerk's office at least 45 days in advance of the date on which the permit is sought; 
(2)  Pay a $500.00 application fee which is set by the city council; 
(3)  Obtain written approval from the director of recreation; 
(4)  Obtain written instructions from the chief of police regarding the use of police details for the permit event; 
(5)  Provide proof of liability insurance which names the city as a loss payee; said insurance policy to be no less that $2,000,000.00; 
(6)  All servers must be tips, or stop certification (or equal); 
(7)  Applicant to sign indemnification agreement; 
(8)  Rescue vehicle to be posted on site. 
(Ord. of 7-28-2008) 
Sec. 28-22. - Smoking during sporting or other recreational events prohibited. 
(a)  Smoking tobacco in any form, during youth sporting events or any other recreational event sponsored for youth activity, shall not be permitted at any city owned property designated for athletic or recreational purposes which shall include, but not be limited to, the Francis Corrigan Sports Complex, Macomber Field, Tarlow Field and any other playing field or recreational facility created by the city. 
(b)  Any person who violates this section shall be deemed to be contributing to the maintenance of a public nuisance in a public place and shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25.00. 
(c)  This section does not prohibit smoking in designated areas during nonyouth sporting or other events held at these facilities. 
(Code 1994, § 28-3; Ord. of 12-10-2001) 
Sec. 28-23. - Establishment of permit for the use of recreational facilities; exceptions. 
(a)  The director of recreation is hereby authorized to issue a permit and charge a fee of $30.00 to any person, organization, or private club wishing to use any public recreational facility, including but not limited to, all baseball, softball, football, soccer, parks and any recreational fields or facilities owned by the city. 
(b)  The charge as described herein may be waived, in the discretion of the director of recreation, when the use of said facility is sponsored by a religious, charity or nonprofit group. 
(Code 1994, § 28-4; Ord. of 1-13-2003) 
Secs. 28-24-28-49. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - JENKS PARK, CITY PLAYGROUNDS, FRANCIS CORRIGAN SPORTS COMPLEX 

Sec. 28-50. - Vehicles. 
(a)  No person shall drive any vehicle into Jenks Park, city playgrounds or the Francis Corrigan Sports Complex without first obtaining permission from the chief of police. 
(b)  Penalty. Any person violating this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-12 with the first violation of this section being a fine of $50.00 and each and every offense thereafter being an increased fine of $50.00, up to a fine of no more than $500.00. A court of competent jurisdiction may refer a minor to the juvenile hearing board or, for any individual, may order up to 50 hours of community service instead of ordering a fine. 
(Code 1973, § 13-1; Code 1994, § 28-26; Ord. of 4-11-2005(1); Ord. of 9-14-2015(3) , § 3) 
Sec. 28-51. - Animals and fowl. 
    No person being the owner or having the charge or custody of any animal or fowl shall allow such animal or fowl to enter Jenks Park or to remain therein. This provision, however, shall not include guide dogs. 
(Code 1973, § 13-2; Code 1994, § 28-27) 
Sec. 28-52. - Bills and notices not to be posted. 
    No person shall post or otherwise affix any bill, notice or other paper upon any structure or thing within any part of Jenks Park, nor upon any of the gates or enclosures thereof. 
(Code 1973, § 13-3; Code 1994, § 28-28) 
Sec. 28-53. - Goods and circulars not to be sold or given away. 
    No person shall sell, expose for sale or give away any goods, wares or circulars in Jenks Park. 
(Code 1973, § 13-4; Code 1994, § 28-29) 
Sec. 28-54. - Lying upon or overturning seats prohibited. 
    No person shall lie upon or overturn any seat in Jenks Park. 
(Code 1973, § 13-5; Code 1994, § 28-30) 
Sec. 28-55. - Taking or injuring property; throwing stones. 
    No person shall take, pluck, injure, destroy, cut, mark or deface any flower, root, plant, shrub, tree, building, fence, monument or other property in Jenks Park. No person shall throw a stone or other missile in such park. 
(Code 1973, § 13-7; Code 1994, § 28-32) 
State Law reference- Vandalism, G.L. 1956, § 11-44-1. 
Chapter 30 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Refuse disposal, G.L. 1956, § 23-18.9-1 et seq.; littering, G.L. 1956, § 37-15-6. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Transportation. 
    No person shall transport over any street of the city any house offal, garbage, fruit, vegetable, wastepaper, cardboard cartons or other refuse whatsoever, or sand, gravel, crushed rock, coal or ashes, except in such a manner as will prevent the same from falling to and littering the streets or sidewalks of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 11-1; Code 1994, § 32-1) 
State Law reference- Prevention of load leakage, G.L. 1956, § 31-25-9; fastening and covering of load, G.L. 1956, § 31-25-9. 
Sec. 30-2. - Littering. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Excrement means manure, human or animal waste, or human or animal excrement. 
    Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of food. 
    Household litter means any waste material generated or accumulated in or about a person's household, transported from such household, and then thrown, deposited or placed in any public receptacle. 
    Litter means items of garbage, refuse, or rubbish. 
    Public property means and includes all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleyways, highways, squares, spaces, grounds, parks, reservations, playgrounds, lands or buildings owned, controlled or maintained by the city. 
    Public waters means and includes all rivers, streams, lakes, ponds, and other bodies of water owned, controlled or maintained by the city and to which the public has the right to access. 
    Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned vehicles or parts thereof, solid markers, and industrial wastes. 
    Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, and similar materials. 
(b)  Prohibited. No person shall throw, deposit, place, cast, scatter, pile, leave or lay any litter in, about or upon any property or public waters in the city except in public receptacles provided for such purpose, in authorized private receptacles for collection, or in public dumps; except, further, that no person shall deposit, place or leave any household litter, garbage or refuse in such public receptacles. 
(c)  Fine. The fine for this offense shall be $250.00. 
(Code 1973, §§ 11-2, 16-9-17; Code 1994, § 32-2; Ord. of 6-6-1990(1), § 11-2; Ord. of 12-19-2011(6) ) 
State Law reference- Littering, G.L. 1956, § 37-15-6. 
Sec. 30-3. - Accumulations on private property prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any premises within the city to permit any accumulation on premises owned or occupied by him of ashes, waste or refuse, other than in containers provided for in section 30-37. 
(b)  The penalty for the first violation of this section shall be a fine of $150.00 to the owner from which the nuisance will come. The second offense shall be a fine of up to $250.00 and each and every offense thereafter shall be a fine of up to $500.00. 
(Code 1973, § 11-3; Code 1994, § 32-3; Ord. of 6-6-1990(1), § 11-3; Ord. of 9-30-2002(2); Ord. of 12-19-2011(6) ) 
Sec. 30-4. - Junk on premises of used car or auto parts dealer. 
(a)  No used car dealer or dealer in auto parts shall keep any junk or remains on his premises for a period of more than six days. 
(b)  All used tires and parts, trash or similar objects shall be stored in a fenced enclosure, located if possible in the rear half (or in the case of corner sites, rear quarter) of the site. All rubbish shall be stored in a clean and orderly manner and shall be removed from the site at least once a month. 
(Code 1973, § 11-4; Code 1994, § 32-4; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3)) 
Secs. 30-5-30-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RUBBISH COLLECTION 

Sec. 30-27. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Combustible rubbish means all combustible material, including newspaper, magazines, cardboard boxes, cartons, wood (of proper size) rags, discarded clothing, leaves and grass clippings. 
    Commercial establishment means all establishments wherein business transactions or services are rendered to the public. Apartment houses with more than four dwelling units and mixed commercial and residential buildings are classified as "commercial establishments" for the purposes of this article. Excluded from this definition are properties that have qualified for a homestead exemption under section 34-45. 
    Dwelling unit means any room, or group of rooms, within a structure that is designed to be used by one family for living, sleeping, regular cooking (operating stove and refrigerator) and eating. 
    Garbage means all vegetable, animal, fish, fowl or fruit matter resulting from the use or storage of food for human consumption. 
    Noncombustible rubbish means all noncombustible waste, including fuel residue, tin or metal cans, bottles, household appliances and all other refuse not already defined as combustible or garbage, but excluding liquids. 
    Refuse includes garbage and combustible and noncombustible rubbish and which is used throughout this article to simplify the text. 
(Code 1994, § 32-26; Ord. of 10-18-2004; Ord. of 8-25-2014) 
Sec. 30-28. - Violations and penalties; habitual offenders. 
    Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements unless otherwise provided for in this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined no less than $100.00 and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Code 1994, § 32-38; Ord. of 10-18-2004; Ord. of 4-10-2006; Ord. of 8-25-2014) 
Sec. 30-29. - Complaints regarding violations. 
    Whenever a violation of this article occurs or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Said complaint, stating fully the cause and basis thereof, shall be filed with the director of public works, or designee. The director shall properly record said complaint, investigate and take action as provided by this article. 
(Code 1994, § 32-37; Ord. of 10-18-2004; Ord. of 4-10-2006; Ord. of 8-25-2014) 
Sec. 30-30. - Director of public works and director of code enforcement to administer program. 
(a)  The director of public works shall have the charge, care and management of the personnel and equipment engaged in the administration of the program for collection of household refuse in the city. The director of public works and the director of code enforcement or their designee shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter which shall include the power to perform inspections, issue citations and prosecute violations. 
(b)  An enforcing officer may order the owner or occupant of any premises in the city to remove at his own expense any nuisance, refuse, solid waste, source of filth or filth found thereon within 24 hours after the service of notices as prescribed herein. 
(c)  The department of public works shall collect refuse from the residential structures and municipal buildings as set forth by this article. 
(Code 1994, § 32-27; Ord. of 10-18-2004; Ord. of 8-25-2014) 
Sec. 30-31. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  The director of public works, as part of his or her administrative powers, is empowered to establish refuse collection rules and regulations. 
(b)  In order for refuse to be collected on a weekly schedule by the city, property owners shall set aside said waste as described in section 30-36 except that the following shall be collected in the following manner in order to promote the safe and convenient handling of rubbish and to promote the orderly appearance of the city when rubbish is on the sidewalk awaiting collection: 
(1)  Tree limbs and wood must be four feet in length or less and tied in bundles. Wood must be free of all nails and screws. 
(2)  Rugs must be cut in half and four feet in length, tied and bundled. 
(3)  No sand, dirt, sod, rocks, demolition lumber, broken concrete, asphalt, plaster, brick or any other construction material will be collected. 
(4)  No automotive parts, tires, motor oil or other hazardous liquids will be collected. 
(5)  Refuse too large to place in containers as described in section 30-38 shall be required to be placed or arranged next to the container so that they may be picked up by the department. 
(6)  Frozen containers, containers containing hot/warm ashes, sod, and rocks will not be collected. 
(7)  Improperly disposed of rubbish/garbage and recycling not conforming to section 30-38 may be collected by the department and will be billed to the property owner in the amount of $100.00 per item. 
(Code 1994, § 32-28; Ord. of 10-18-2004; Ord. of 4-10-2006; Ord. of 8-25-2014) 
Sec. 30-32. - Frequency of collection, establishment of routes, days and times of collection; notices. 
(a)  Refuse shall be collected at least once a week from all commercial and residential structures in the city, or as many times as necessary in order to eliminate potential health hazards or as the director of public works or director of code enforcement may determine. 
(b)  The director of public works shall divide the city into districts for the collection of refuse combustibles and shall establish routes, days and times for the collection in each district. The director of public works shall provide reasonable notification of the day and time of collection when there is a change in the collections schedule for the householders in each district by any method which the director may consider advisable. 
(Code 1994, § 32-29; Ord. of 10-18-2004; Ord. of 4-10-2006; Ord. of 8-25-2014) 
Sec. 30-33. - Collection hours restricted. 
    Except for the removal of rubbish and recycling by the city, no one shall pick up or remove, not shall any person cause or allow to be picked up or removed, any refuse, rubbish, recycling or trash from any commercial or industrial establishments between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., if such establishment is located within 200 feet of a dwelling. 
(Code 1994, § 32-30; Ord. of 10-18-2004; Ord. of 4-10-2006; Ord. of 12-19-2011(6) ; Ord. of 8-25-2014) 
Sec. 30-34. - Eligibility of household refuse collection by the department of public works. 
    The following uses or structures shall be eligible for household refuse collection by the city: 
(1)  Residential structures with five or fewer units. 
(2)  Public schools; 
(3)  Structures used for municipal offices or services; and 
(4)  Owner occupied residential structures with five units or more. In order to be eligible for this pickup a property owner must meet all the requirements of the homestead exemption as provided for in section 36-55 of this Code. 
(Code 1994, § 32-31; Ord. of 10-18-2004; Ord. of 2-28-2005(1); Ord. of 4-10-2006; Ord. of 4-12-2010(1), § 32-31; Ord. of 8-25-2014) 
Sec. 30-35. - Collection of refuse at commercial establishments. 
(a)  Structures or multiple structures with more than five dwelling units on a lot, single or combined and structures containing mixed uses of commercial and residential are defined as "commercial establishments" and are not eligible for multiple refuse collection services. It is the responsibility of the owners of such structures, or their agents, to provide for the storage and collections of refuse in a manner fully consistent with this article. Such structures may employ a private collection services that utilizes either a commercial collection container, barrels with covers or plastic bags. 
(b)  All commercial trash and garbage containers (commonly known as dumpsters) shall be covered at all times, and the name, address and telephone number of said commercial contractor or company shall be prominently displayed on each container. 
(c)  Said commercial trash and garbage container shall be screened by fencing or shrubbery if visible from the street. 
(Code 1994, § 32-32; Ord. of 10-18-2004; Ord. of 4-10-2006; Ord. of 4-12-2010(2), § 32-32; Ord. of 12-19-2011(6) ; Ord. of 8-25-2014) 
Sec. 30-36. - Placing for collection; removal of bulk and other special items. 
(a)  Property owners shall set rubbish in bags that have been properly tied and placed in 65 or 95 gallon containers provided by the city and bearing the city seal. Receptacles shall be placed on the curb without obstructing passage along the sidewalk. Rubbish shall be placed for collection on the day designated by the director of public works on the street on which the property is located in the time and manner provided for in section 30-40. 
(b)  The director of public works or his designee should be called for instructions regarding the pickup of large items and appliances. No resident of the city shall place any mattress, computers, televisions, furniture and all large metal items or appliances on the sidewalk for pickup without first having made an appointment with and paid a fee to the department of public works or designee. A fee equal to the cost for the removal and disposal of these items including metal items and appliances containing freon shall be charged. The director of public works shall notify the city council of any increases in fees. 
(Code 1994, § 32-33; Ord. of 10-18-2004; Ord. of 4-11-2005(4); Ord. of 4-10-2006; Ord. of 8-25-2014) 
Sec. 30-37. - Garbage containers. 
    All garbage shall be deposited in 65 or 95 gallon containers provided by the city and bearing the city seal and shall at all times have a secure cover and/or the lid closed. The city will only supply the first garbage container and first recycling container to each property in the city and, thereafter, property owners are responsible for purchasing replacement containers. 
(Code 1994, § 32-34; Ord. of 10-18-2004; Ord. of 4-10-2006; Ord. of 12-19-2011(6) ; Ord. of 8-25-2014) 
Sec. 30-38. - Authorized rubbish disposal. 
(a)  Rubbish and recycling shall be deposited in 65 or 95 gallon containers provided by the city and bearing the city seal and shall at all times have a secure cover and/or the lid closed. There shall not be overflowing rubbish or recycling nor trash bags on the ground nor any items improperly placed next to the garbage and recycling containers. 
(b)  Any violation of this section may be subject to the $100.00 fine outlined in section 30-31(b)(7). 
(Code 1994, § 32-35; Ord. of 10-18-2004; Ord. of 4-10-2006; Ord. of 8-25-2014) 
Sec. 30-39. - Failure to furnish and set out containers; notice to remove. 
(a)  The failure or neglect by any owner of any premises in the city to have a secured, closed lid on their garbage and recycling containers and/or to have sufficient containers for all rubbish and/or to set out such containers regularly for each collection or removal and/or to remove garbage and recycling containers from the curb the same day as collection shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  Any violation of this article shall result in a notice of violation ticket in the amount of $150.00 per incident. The notice of violation ticket shall be in writing, signed by the enforcing officer and served by the enforcing officer, his or her designee, any sheriff, deputy sheriff, constable, police constable or the city sergeant or by leaving a copy of the order personally with or at the last and usual place of residence of the owner, or agent, if within the state or by affixing the notice of violation ticket to the rubbish or recycling container or item which is in violation. If the premises is occupied, or the residence of the owner or agent is unknown or without the state, the notice may be served by posting a certified copy of the notice on the premises, and by mailing a copy of the notice to the property owner at the address noted with the office of the tax assessor. Other methods of service as set forth in the municipal court rules of procedure may also be utilized by the city. 
(c)  If the owner or occupant fails to comply with the notice of violation ticket, the enforcing officer may cause the nuisance, source of filth, refuse, solid waste of filth to be removed; and all expenses incurred by the city shall be paid by the owner, occupant or other person who caused or permitted the refuse, solid waste or filth to be recovered in an action brought in the name of the city, including placing a lien on the property for all expenses and related costs incurred by the municipality which shall include an administrative fee of ten percent of the total costs of all expenses incurred by the municipality. 
(d)  Each day in excess of 24 hours that any person shall permit offending refuse or garbage to remain after receipt of such notice from the enforcing officer shall be deemed as a separate offense under this section. 
(Code 1994, § 32-36; Ord. of 10-18-2004; Ord. of 4-10-2006; Ord. of 4-18-2011(1), § 32-36(c); Ord. of 12-19-2011(6) ; Ord. of 8-25-2014) 
Sec. 30-40. - Time when containers may be set on curbs. 
    No rubbish containers shall be set out on curbs before 4:00 p.m. prior to the day set for collections, and such containers shall be removed the same day the collection has been made. 
(Code 1994, § 32-39; Ord. of 10-18-2004; Ord. of 4-10-2006; Ord. of 12-19-2011(6) ; Ord. of 8-25-2014) 
Sec. 30-41. - Filling, covering and placing containers; negligence of owner of container. 
    The owner or occupant of any premises in the city shall have his or her 65 or 95 gallon containers provided by the city and bearing the city seal filled as compactly as naturally possible, shall have the containers securely covered to prevent scattering of the contents and shall place such containers on the curb to prevent cluttering of the sidewalk and damage to pedestrians and users of the sidewalks. Any damage caused by the negligence of the owner of any container shall be paid for by the owner, and the city shall not be held responsible therefor. 
(Code 1994, § 32-40; Ord. of 10-18-2004; Ord. of 4-10-2006; Ord. of 8-25-2014) 
Sec. 30-42. - Tampering with or removing containers. 
    No person shall in any manner remove, move, remove from or tamper with any rubbish or recycling container, whether full or empty. Violators of this section may be subject to a $250.00 fine from the director of public works and/or all applicable criminal penalties. 
(Code 1994, § 32-41; Ord. of 10-18-2004; Ord. of 4-10-2006; Ord. of 12-19-2011(6) ; Ord. of 8-25-2014) 
Sec. 30-43. - Refusal to collect upon violation; removal by householder. 
    Wherever there has been failure to comply with the provisions of this article or with the rules and regulations established thereunder, the department of public works may refuse collection of any rubbish from the householder where such failure has occurred until such time as compliance and regulations established thereunder has occurred on a regular collection day. Any householder, the collection of whose rubbish has been refused as provided by this section, shall cause the rubbish to be removed forthwith at his own cost and expense. 
(Code 1994, § 32-42; Ord. of 10-18-2004; Ord. of 4-10-2006; Ord. of 8-25-2014) 
Secs. 30-44-30-74. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REFUSE DISPOSAL FACILITIES 

Sec. 30-75. - Rules and regulations. 
    The director of public works shall have the power to make rules and regulations establishing minimum standards for permissible types of refuse disposal facilities. Such rules and regulations may not, however, be inconsistent with any rules, regulations, standards and criteria adopted by the state department of health regarding refuse disposal facilities. 
(Code 1973, § 11-18; Code 1994, § 32-61) 
Sec. 30-76. - Means of disposal to be approved. 
    Disposal of refuse shall be permitted only by sanitary landfills or incinerators or other means approved by the director of public works of the city and the state director of health. 
(Code 1973, § 11-19; Code 1994, § 32-62) 
Sec. 30-77. - Sanitary landfills. 
    Any person who maintains or operates a sanitary landfill as a public refuse disposal facility or permits the use of his land or land under his control for such a facility shall maintain such facility in conformance with any rules and regulations established by the director of public works of the city and the state department of health. 
(Code 1973, § 11-20; Code 1994, § 32-63) 
Sec. 30-78. - Incinerators. 
(a)  Construction. Any person who constructs or causes to be constructed any incinerator which is to be used as a public refuse disposal facility shall construct such facility according to the standards established by the director of public works of the city and the state department of health. 
(b)  Maintenance and operation. Any person who maintains or operates an incinerator as a public refuse disposal facility shall maintain such facility in conformance with standards established by the director of public works of the city and the state department of health. 
(Code 1973, §§ 11-21, 11-22; Code 1994, § 32-64) 
Sec. 30-79. - Identification of commercial trash containers. 
(a)  The name, address and telephone number shall be displayed prominently on all commercial trash and garbage containers (dumpsters). 
(b)  Violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of $100.00 for the first offense and $100.00 for each subsequent violation. 
(Code 1994, § 32-65; Ord. of 10-15-1985, § 11-24; Ord. of 12-19-2011(6) ) 
Sec. 30-80. - Commercial trash containers to be covered. 
(a)  All commercial trash containers must be covered. 
(b)  Violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of $50.00 for the first offense and $100.00 for each subsequent violation. 
(Code 1994, § 32-66; Ord. of 10-15-1985, § 11-25) 
Sec. 30-81. - Commercial collection, duty of owner. 
(a)  Every owner of a dwelling using commercial rubbish removal (dumpsters) shall provide for proper collection and removal of the contents thereof. 
(b)  Every owner of a commercial rubbish receptacle (dumpster) shall be responsible for the proper collection and removal of the contents of such containers. 
(c)  Violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of $100.00 for the first violation and by a fine of $100.00 for each subsequent violation. 
(Code 1994, § 32-67; Ord. of 10-15-1985, §§ 11-26, 11-27; Ord. of 12-19-2011(6) ) 
Secs. 30-82-30-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RECYCLING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Waste recycling, G.L. 1956, § 23-18.8-1 et seq. 

Sec. 30-106. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Arrangements means the process by which the city plans for and carries out the separation, weighing, collection, hauling and disposal of solid waste generated within the city. 
    Hazardous waste means any waste as defined in G.L. 1956, § 23-19.1-4, or in regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
    Household hazardous waste means hazardous municipal solid waste. 
    Local recycling program means a recycling program for municipal solid waste as set forth in a local recycling plan approved by the state pursuant to the municipal recycling regulations, as amended. 
    Mixed recyclables are defined by guidelines promulgated by the director of public works and/or Rhode Island Resource Recovery. 
    Municipal solid waste means solid waste generated by the residents of the city in the course of their daily living, the disposal of which the city council has undertaken in the discharge of its duties to protect the health of the municipality. The term "municipal solid waste" does not include solid waste generated by residents of the city in the course of their employment or that generated by any manufacturing or commercial enterprise. 
    Recyclable materials are all materials as established by Rhode Island Resource Recovery guidelines. The materials to be included may change from time to time depending upon new technologies, economic conditions, waste stream characteristics, environmental effects or mutual agreement between the state and municipalities. 
    Resident means anyone residing in the city for any period of time who generated solid waste for which the city accepts responsibility for disposal. 
    Solid waste means garbage, refuse and other discarded solid materials generated by residential, institutional, commercial, industrial and agricultural sources but not including solids or dissolved material in domestic sewage or sewage sludge, nor hazardous waste as defined in the hazardous waste management act, G.L. 1956, § 23-19.1-1 et seq. 
    Source separation means the removal by the generator of recyclable materials, including mixed recyclables from all other solid waste generated by the household along with the removal of solid waste from mixed recyclables generated by the household, and conveyance of the recyclables to the curbside or other designated location by the municipality or its agents. 
    White goods means major kitchen or laundry appliances, including, but not limited to, stoves, washers, refrigerators and dryers. Nothing in this definition shall waive compliance with the rules and regulations for generation, transportation, storage and disposal of hazardous waste. 
(Code 1994, § 32-92; Ord. of 9-11-1989, § IB; Ord. of 3-18-1998(2); Ord. of 5-11-2015 , § 1) 
Sec. 30-107. - Implementation. 
    A mandatory recycling program is hereby implemented in the city pursuant to G.L. 1956, ch. 23-18.8 (G.L. 1956, § 23-18.8-1 et seq.) and G.L. 1956, ch. 23-18.9 (G.L. 1956, § 23-18.9-1 et seq.), and the Rhode Island Resource Recovery guidelines, as amended, and state department of environmental management municipal recycling regulations, as amended. 
(Code 1994, § 32-91; Ord. of 9-11-1989, § IA; Ord. of 5-11-2015 , § 1) 
Sec. 30-108. - Compliance required. 
    All residents, taxpayers and others doing business in the city shall separate recyclables from the non-recyclable portion of their solid waste and prepare them for recycling according to directions published by the city. Rubbish and recycling shall be deposited in 65 or 95-gallon containers provided by the city and bearing the city seal and shall at all times have a secure cover and/or the lid closed. 
(Code 1994, § 32-93; Ord. of 9-11-1989, § ID; Ord. of 5-11-2015 , § 1) 
Sec. 30-109. - Mandatory recycling requirements. 
(a)  Source separation for collection . In accordance with state law and/or department of environmental management regulations and/or Rhode Island Resource Recovery guidelines, mandatory recycling will be accomplished by source separation with curbside collection. 
(1)  Curbside collection . The city shall provide for collection of mixed recyclables once per week from residents in dwellings serviced by the existing curbside collection contract. The collection of mixed recyclables shall be accomplished on the same day as the collection of non-recyclable materials. This day shall be designated by the director of public works. 
(2)  Special recycling containers . Every property owner and/or tenant shall be provided with a 65 or 95-gallon container provided by the city and bearing the city seal wherein recyclables will be placed at curbside for collection as prescribed by the department of public works. Recyclable materials shall be prepared according to directions published by the director of public works and/or Rhode Island Resource Recovery guidelines. 
(3)  Method of container distribution . Containers shall be distributed in accordance with department of public works regulations. The initial container will be provided to each property owner and/or tenant free of charge. If a container must be replaced, the property owner and/or tenant shall be charged the currently required replacement fee. 
(4)  Materials requiring special disposal . Oil paint, computers and computer equipment and any other material requiring special disposal shall be disposed of pursuant to guidelines promulgated by the director of public works and/or Rhode Island Resource Recovery. 
(b)  Notice of violation; penalties for noncompliance . 
(1)  Any violation for failure to separate recyclable and non-recyclable materials in accordance with Rhode Island Resource Recovery guidelines or for leaving recyclables prepared in a manner inconsistent with department of public works regulations or Rhode Island Resource Recovery guidelines shall result in a notice of violation ticket in the amount of $250.00 per incident, with notice and an opportunity to be heard and appealed in the municipal court. The notice shall advise the resident of his or her duties by law. A copy of such notice shall be kept by the director of public works. 
(2)  After the first notice of violation ticket has been issued, each additional notice of violation ticket within a one year period shall be in the amount of $500.00 and shall be accompanied with a summons to appear in municipal court for an opportunity to appeal and be heard. 
(3)  The notice of violation ticket shall be in writing, signed by the enforcing officer and served by the enforcing officer, his or her designee, any sheriff, deputy sheriff, constable, police constable or the city sergeant or by leaving a copy of the order personally with or at the last and usual place of residence of the owner, or agent, if within the state or by affixing the notice of violation ticket to the recycling container in violation. If the premises is occupied, or the residence of the owner or agent is unknown or without the state, the notice may be served by posting a certified copy of the notice on the premises, and by mailing a copy of the notice to the property owner at the address noted with the office of the tax assessor. Other methods of service as set forth in the municipal court rules of procedure may also be utilized by the city. 
(Code 1994, § 32-94; Ord. of 9-11-1989, § IC; Ord. of 2-8-1999; Ord. of 9-13-2004; Ord. of 5-11-2015 , § 1) 
Sec. 30-110. - Ownership of recyclables. 
(a)  Once municipal solid waste has been deposited at curbside for collection by the department of public works, such solid waste becomes the property of the city. No resident, taxpayer or other person engaged in the business of separation, recovery, collection, removal, storage or disposition of solid waste shall pick up or procure any recyclable materials within the city for personal gain except as specifically authorized by the director of public works. 
(b)  The director of public works may issue permits to charitable organizations to collect recyclable materials on the condition that a report is filed by such organization detailing the weights of each material collected in compliance with state department of environmental management reporting requirements and provided that the director of public works determines that such collection does not conflict with the city's recycling implementation program. 
(Code 1994, § 32-95; Ord. of 9-11-1989, § II) 
Sec. 30-111. - Commercial recycling. 
    Business firms shall be subject to state and federal recycling regulations. 
(Code 1994, § 32-96; Ord. of 9-11-1989, § ID) 
Chapter 32 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Maintenance of town highways, G.L. 1956, § 24-5-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 32-1. - Laying out sidewalks on petition of abutting landowners. 
(a)  The city council is hereby authorized in its discretion, upon the petition of abutters on public highways, to make concrete, cement or granolothic sidewalks, according to the choice of such abutters on such public highways, such abutters so petitioning to pay one-half of the cost of such work and the city the other half. Such work, when ordered by the city council, shall be done under the direction of the department of public works. 
(b)  The city council may make rules as to the payment of the cost of work done under this chapter by the abutters, or it may authorize the department of public works to make rules as to the payment of such cost. 
(Code 1973, §§ 23-1, 23-2; Code 1994, § 34-1) 
State Law reference- Division of cost between city and landowners, G.L. 1956, § 24-7-3. 
Sec. 32-2. - Sale of goods or merchandise on streets and sidewalks. 
    No person shall sell, display, display for sale or offer for sale or suffer to be sold any goods, wares or merchandise of any type, nature or description whatsoever, however named, called or described, in or from any open-air stand or in any open-air area or on or from any stand adjacent to or near any building or from any place other than a building, or shall make sales on any sidewalk in the city, unless and until he shall have obtained a license therefor from the city council. Such person shall first make application, giving the size, location, nature and purpose of the stands and the area or place to be used. The council may grant such license upon such terms and conditions as in their discretion are necessary and essential. The granting of such licenses is not mandatory, since the welfare of the public is of primary consideration. The license fee therefor shall be established from time to time for each period of one year, such licenses to be prorated from June 1 in each year. 
(Code 1973, § 23-3; Code 1994, § 34-2) 
Sec. 32-3. - Use of streets for recreational purposes. 
(a)  Children's baths and showers from hydrants. The board of recreation is hereby authorized and empowered to use certain streets which are not main arteries of travel for the purpose of furnishing children with an opportunity to use and enjoy baths and showers from and at hydrants during the period set aside by the board of recreation for recreational activities. 
(b)  Block parties. The board of recreation is authorized and empowered to set off certain streets for the purpose of block parties. 
(c)  Exclusion of vehicular traffic. For either purpose mentioned in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the board of recreation is authorized and empowered to rope off so much of the streets as shall be deemed necessary to the exclusion of all vehicular traffic, which vehicular traffic shall include bicycles, motor vehicles and other type vehicles. 
(d)  Supervision of streets so used. Each street used for the purposes mentioned in this section shall be under the supervision of someone duly authorized by the board of recreation. 
(e)  Trespassing in recreational area. No person shall trespass into the restricted area provided for in subsection (c) of this section without the consent or authority of the board of recreation or its designated agent with any vehicle described in this section, nor shall any person trespass into such area without such permission. 
(Code 1973, §§ 23-10-23-14; Code 1994, § 34-4) 
Sec. 32-4. - Vehicles on sidewalks. 
(a)  No vehicle shall be driven, backed, moved or allowed to stand on any sidewalk, except for the purpose of crossing the sidewalk when necessary; and in such case, such vehicle shall use the shortest way from the street to the abutting estate. 
(b)  The penalty for violation of this section shall be $15.00. 
(Code 1973, § 23-17; Code 1994, § 34-6) 
Sec. 32-5. - Depositing cans, dirt and other substances on streets and sidewalks. 
    No person shall throw or deposit or cause to be thrown or deposited in or upon any street, highway, sidewalk or public place any tin pans or cans, dirt, sweepings, coal, dust, soot, ashes, cinders, shavings, hair, shreds, manure, oyster, clam or lobster shells, or any animal or vegetable matter or substance whatsoever. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as forbidding the placing of sand or other substances on sidewalks encumbered by ice, or the removing of snow from sidewalks at any time as provided in sections 32-8 and 32-9. 
(Code 1973, § 23-18; Code 1994, § 34-7) 
State Law reference- Littering, G.L. 1956, § 37-15-6. 
Sec. 32-6. - Hoisting or lowering merchandise over streets. 
    No merchandise shall be hoisted or lowered into or out of any building over any street, highway or public place in any manner so as to endanger people lawfully using such street, highway or public place. 
(Code 1973, § 23-24; Code 1994, § 34-8) 
Sec. 32-7. - Obstructing sidewalks. 
(a)  Prohibited. No person shall stand on any footwalk, sidewalk, doorstep or in any doorway or shall ride, drive, fasten or leave any horse or other animal or any carriage, team or any other vehicle on any such footwalk, sidewalk, doorstep or doorway within the city to the obstruction, hindrance, delay, disturbance or annoyance of passersby or of persons residing or doing business in the vicinity thereof. 
(b)  By loading or unloading merchandise. On streets not otherwise restricted, merchandise may be transferred from or to trucks or other vehicles over the sidewalks by the use of skids and planks when necessary; provided, that the sidewalk is not unreasonably obstructed, and then only for such reasonable time as is necessary. If the sidewalk and travel thereon is obstructed by such skids or planks for more than ten minutes at a time, any police officer may order such skids or planks removed. If not removed, he may himself remove them or cause them to be removed. 
(Code 1973, §§ 23-25, 23-26; Code 1994, § 34-9) 
Sec. 32-8. - Removal of snow from sidewalks and prohibition on disposal of snow on streets. 
(a)  The owner, occupant or other person having the care of any building or lot of land bordering on any street, highway, square or public place where there is a sidewalk supported by curbing shall, within the first four hours of daylight after the ceasing to fall of any snow, cause the snow to be removed from the sidewalk adjoining such building or lot of land. In case of neglect so to do, the person chargeable with this duty shall be punished as provided in section 1-12 for each and every hour after the expiration of such four hours that the snow shall remain on the sidewalk. The provisions of this section shall also apply to the falling of snow from any building. 
(b)  No owner, lessee or occupant of any premises, or any person cleaning or removing snow there from, shall deposit, permit or cause to be deposited any snow from said premises upon any street or public place except with the permission of the director of public works. 
    Any person found guilty of violating this subsection shall be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00. Enforcement shall be the responsibility of the city police department and/or an inspector or supervisor of the city public works department. The imposition of such fine and other charges may be appealed to municipal court within ten days of the issuance of a written citation. 
(Code 1973, § 23-27; Code 1994, § 34-10; Ord. of 4-18-2011(2)) 
Sec. 32-9. - Removal of ice from sidewalks. 
    Whenever any sidewalk or any part thereof adjoining any building or lot of land on any street, highway, square or public place where such sidewalks are supported by curbing shall be encumbered by ice, it shall be the duty of the owner, occupant or other person having the care of such building or lot to cause the sidewalk to be made safe and convenient by removing the ice therefrom or by covering such ice with sand or some other suitable substance. In case such owner, occupant or other responsible person shall neglect so to do for the space of three hours during the daytime, he shall be punished as provided in section 1-12 and in a like manner for every day thereafter that the sidewalk shall continue to be so encumbered. 
(Code 1973, § 23-28; Code 1994, § 34-11) 
Sec. 32-10. - Removal of injurious substances from streets and sidewalks. 
    Whenever, from accident or casualty, any liquid or other substance which may injure by contact therewith any man or beast, or any glass or other solid substance which may render travel unsafe to man or beast or vehicles upon the highway shall be thrown or deposited in any street or sidewalk, the person in whose charge and control such liquid or substance was at the time of such accident shall, as soon as reasonably may be, by removal of such liquid or substance or otherwise, restore the street or sidewalk to a clean condition, safe and convenient for travel. 
(Code 1973, § 23-29; Code 1994, § 34-12) 
Sec. 32-11. - Wetting down or placing water on streets and sidewalks. 
    No person shall, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. of any day, wet down the sidewalks of or use water upon the outside of any structure abutting upon or near to any public street in the city in any manner that may cause annoyance or inconvenience to anyone having the right to use the street or sidewalk during the time aforesaid, and no person shall wet down any such sidewalk or use water in any manner that may cause such water to come upon such sidewalk or street at any time when such water may be likely to freeze upon such sidewalk or street. 
(Code 1973, § 23-30; Code 1994, § 34-13) 
Sec. 32-12. - Tree ordinance. 
(a)  Purpose . This section shall establish the Central Falls Tree Advisory Board, which shall be responsible for a devising and educating on issues pertaining to trees and wooded plants in the City of Central Falls, and to maintain the status of Tree City USA. 
(b)  Definitions . 
(1)  Street trees . Trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues, or ways within the city. 
(2)  Park trees . Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the City, or to which the public has free access as a park. 
(c)  Board established . There is established for the City of Central Falls an advisory board to be known as the Central Falls Tree Advisory Board. 
(d)  Membership and compensation . The Central Falls Tree Advisory Board shall consist of three members who live or work in the Central Falls area and whom the mayor, with the approval of the city council, shall appoint. The members shall serve without compensation for services performed. 
(e)  Appointments/terms of office. The term of the persons to be appointed by the Mayor shall be three years. In the event a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his or her successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term. The first board shall serve as follows: One member shall serve for one year, one member shall serve for two years, and one member shall serve for three years. The mayor, for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or irreconcilable conflict may remove members. 
(f)  Meetings . The board shall meet quarterly. The board shall determine meeting dates and times. Special meetings may be held as often as the Board deems necessary or as directed by the mayor or city council. For purposes of conducting the board's business, exercising its powers and for all other purposes, a quorum of the board shall consist of two or more members. Any action taken by a majority of those present, when those present constitute a quorum at any regular or special meeting of the board, shall be deemed and taken as the action and decision of the board. The board shall elect such officers, as it deems necessary to conduct business. The board shall adopt such rules of procedure, as it deems necessary. The board shall keep written minutes of all meetings held and all business transacted. All records of the Board shall be open to public inspection, except those that may be exempt from public disclosure under state law. 
(g)  Duties of the advisory board . The Board shall acquire authorization form the director of public works prior to under taking any project. The duties of the tree board shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Promote the responsible planting of trees on public and private property. 
(2)  Promoting public education about trees. 
(3)  Promoting proper tree maintenance. 
(4)  Advocating trees within the City of Central Falls. 
(5)  Providing for aesthetics within the City of Central Falls through the formulation and implementation of tree programs. 
(6)  Developing programs and projects while working with other community groups to enhance the city's beautification. 
(7)  Developing innovative and joint funding for tree projects from a variety of sources. 
(8)  Providing the mayor and city council with a yearly report regarding tree board activities. 
(9)  Develop, maintain and provide a tree standard manual for proper tree planting, maintenance and care of trees and wooded plants, by development of landscaping and/or tree ordinances within the city, as well as reviewing project plans for compliance with said ordinances as requested by city staff. 
(h)  Utilities . No street trees may be planted under or within ten lateral feet of any overhead utility wire, or over or within five lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility. 
(i)  Public tree care . The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to insure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. The board may remove or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners. 
(j)  Tree topping . It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or city department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this section at the determination of the board. 
(k)  Pruning, corner clearance . Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk. Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs, which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a streetlight or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign. 
(l)  Dead or diseased tree removal on private property. The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private property within the city, when such trees constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which constitute a potential threat to other trees within the city. The board will notify in writing the owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by said owners at their own expense within 60 days after the date of service of notice. In the event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the city shall have the authority to remove such trees and charge the cost of removal on the owner's property tax notice or to file a lien against the property. 
(m)  Removal of stumps. All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground. 
(n)  Authorized . The tree warden is hereby authorized on petition of abutters on public sidewalks and with approval of the tree advisory board to issue a permit to plant street trees of a species approved by the tree warden on the sidewalks and in such places as approved by the director of public works and the tree advisory board. 
(o)  Cost . The director of public works is authorized to certify one-half of the cost of planting trees under this section to the director of finance, who is hereby authorized to pay such cost from the public works budget. 
(p)  Penalty and appeal. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be subject to a fine by the tree advisory board not to exceed $500.00 per violation. Any person may appeal from any ruling or order of the tree advisory board to the board of appeals who may hear the matter and render a final decision. 
(Code 1973, § 23-30.5; Code 1994, § 34-15; Ord. of 3-23-2015(2)) 
Sec. 32-13. - Repairing and/or servicing of motor vehicles on public property. 
(a)  No person shall, within the city, repair and/or service any motor vehicle on public streets, within public parks, within public playgrounds, within public parking lots or on other public property except in an emergency. 
(b)  Penalty for violation of this section shall be $50.00 for the first offense and $100.00 for each subsequent offense. 
(Code 1973, § 23-30.7; Code 1994, § 34-16) 
Sec. 32-14. - Liability for damage from defective roads; recovery of amount of damage. 
(a)  Pursuant to G.L. 1956, § 24-5-13, if any person shall incur damage to his motor vehicle by reason of a pothole on any city highway, causeway, street, lane or bridge, which damage would have not occurred without the existence of the pothole, he may recover from the city the amount of damages sustained up to and not more than the sum of $300.00; provided, however, that the municipality had reasonable notice of the pothole, or may have had notice thereof by the exercise of proper care and diligence on its part, and a reasonable opportunity to repair the pothole. 
(b)  All claims shall be made within a period of seven days from the date on which the damage was sustained by filing a written report in a manner prescribed by the city. In no instance, however, shall any claim for damage so caused to a motor vehicle registered in a foreign state be considered unless that state has a similar statute affording similar protections to persons owning motor vehicles registered in this state. 
(Code 1994, § 34-17; Ord. of 4-11-2005(6)) 
Secs. 32-15-32-31. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of 9-18-2017(2) , § 1, amended article II in its entirety to read as herein set out. In addition to new provisions being added, former provisions were kept and renumbered. The historical notation remains with the renumbered provisions. For a more detailed description of changes to this article see the code comparative table. 

Sec. 32-32. - Purpose and scope. 
    The city recognizes the importance of new installations, maintenance and upgrading of utility service to ensure the public welfare. The purpose of this article is to ensure the long-term integrity of city infrastructure, to promote cooperation between the city and persons with an interest in excavating city streets and to ensure any excavation of a public right away is restored to the same condition or better than it was found before the excavation. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2017(2) , § 1) 
Sec. 32-33. - Definitions. 
    The terms defined below shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this chapter except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(1)  Chief of police shall refer to the chief of police of the central falls police department. 
(2)  City shall refer to the City of Central Falls. 
(3)  Director shall refer to the director of the department of public works for the city. 
(4)  DPW shall refer to the department of public works for the city. 
(5)  Emergency shall refer to a situation that presents an immediate and serious risk of injury, loss of life, or damage to property or public welfare. 
(6)  Emergency repair work shall refer to any excavation work which is in response to or necessitated by an emergency. 
(7)  Excavation work shall refer to, but is not limited to, any compacting, construction, cutting, digging, excavation, occupation, use, repair, or other disturbance in or under a street, road, sidewalk, or other public right-of-way. 
(8)  Permanent patch shall refer to final repair of excavation work to be performed in accordance with these standards and intended to permanently return the opened portion of the roadway to as good a condition as or better than it was prior to the performance of the excavation work. 
(9)  Permit shall refer to a permit granted by the city to a person for permission to do street opening work in a public way. 
(10)  Person or persons shall refer, but not limited to, any contractor, corporation, entity, firm, or utility. For the purpose of this article, "person" shall also refer to any contractors, subcontractors, or agents of the persons. 
(11)  Protected street shall refer to any street, road, right-of-way, or sidewalk that was been paved by the city within the last five years. 
(12)  Temporary patch shall refer to the interim application of bituminous concrete with the anticipation of a permanent patch. 
(13)  Utility shall refer to any and all persons or entities engaged in the transmission and distribution of electrical energy, natural gas, water, and telephonic, visual and other communication systems. For the purpose of this article, "utility" shall also refer to any contractors, subcontractors, or agents of the utility. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2017(2) , § 1) 
Sec. 32-34. - Permit required. 
    Prior to the start of excavation work, a permit shall be issued by the DPW. Permits shall be issued upon payment of $75.00 to the DPW. Such permits shall specify the time, place, size, and nature of the project. Applicants seeking permits must also list any contractors, subcontractors, or agents, who will be performing the proposed work. 
(1)  The city reserves the right to request from the applicant a surety performance bond relative to the extent and scope of the proposed excavation work being contemplated within the city's right-of-way areas. 
(2)  A person or a utility applying for a permit shall provide a certificate of general liability insurance or appropriate evidence of self-insurance of not less than $500,000.00 naming the city as an additional insured. 
(3)  Any material misrepresentation from the plans approved by the DPW may result in the cancellation of said permit. If excavation work has already begun, the permittee shall be responsible for any work needed to restore the area to the same condition or better before any excavation work. 
(4)  The city reserves the right to revoke any permit if the director deems that the permittee has exceeded the time, place, size, or nature of the project that was originally approved in the permitting process. 
(5)  A copy of each permit issued will be given to the chief of police who is hereby authorized to require the person receiving the permit to maintain, at the expense of such person, as many police officers on special duty or detail as the chief of police may determine necessary to protect the safety and general welfare of the public and to preserve the free circulation of traffic and to require the person receiving the permit to enclose the opening, occupied or used area with a rail, fence or other guard if determined necessary by the chief of police, subject to the payment requirements of section 22-125. 
(6)  Any person conducting work subject to this article is responsible for ensuring compliance, by itself and its contractors, with these standards. Any work, in relation to this article, may be inspected by the city to ensure compliance with these standards. In the event of noncompliance, the person shall, at their own expense, correct such failures. 
(7)  A copy of the permit must be on the job site at all times for inspection. Repeated failures to have the permit available may result in the suspension of the permit. This provision is not applicable during emergency repair work. 
(8)  In the event that any person or utility engages in any of the activities described in this article without obtaining the required permit, that person or utility shall be subject to a fine of $500.00 per violation per day. 
(Code 1973, § 23-19; Code 1994, § 34-36; Ord. of 11-14-1994; Ord. of 3-21-2011; Ord. of 9-18-2017(2) , § 1) 
Sec. 32-35. - Street pavement plan. 
(a)  The city shall develop and maintain a comprehensive program for categorizing the condition of city streets and a projected schedule for street repairs and repaving hereinafter "the plan." The plan will be posted on the city's website and shall be provided to each utility operating in the city. The plan will be published on the first of March of each year. 
(b)  The plan will contain a good-faith listing that contains a ranking of proposed streets and sidewalks that are a priority for repaving, subject to available funding, and will also contain a listing of roads considered for repaving during the ensuing 24 months. 
(c)  The purpose of the report is to identify which streets, roads, rights-of-way, or sidewalks that will be paved by the city and promote communication and cooperation between the city, utilities, persons. 
(d)  Any utility operating in the city shall work with the city to minimize the impact of utility roadwork and specifically to reduce the incidence of non-emergency utility excavation in newly-paved streets. 
(e)  Any utility anticipating major work in any of the streets which are scheduled for repaving in the ensuring 18 months shall notify the city of the utility's plan by March 1 of each year. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2017(2) , § 1) 
Sec. 32-36. - Restoration of surface. 
(a)  Any person performing excavation work shall restore the excavation work location to the same condition or better. The city reserves to right to evaluate the restored condition of the excavation work and if the condition is not satisfactory to the DPW, the city may order the person who conducted the excavation work to cure any issues. 
(b)  Any existing plaque, emblem, marker or symbol embedded within said street or sidewalk before such excavation work was effectuated shall be replaced in the same location and condition upon completion of such excavation work. 
(c)  The permanent patching of bituminous concrete base and top shall be laid and rolled in two courses. The binder (base course) shall be two and one-half inches in depth and the top course shall be one and one-half inches in depth. The minimum total thickness of both courses, measured after rolling, shall be four inches. The base course of the permanent pavement shall be placed and carefully raked to a minimum surface and thoroughly rolled to the required thickness. Before placing the base course of the permanent pavement, the edge of the original bituminous surface shall receive an application of approved asphalt emulsion so that the new pavement material may be properly bonded to the old. The top course of the permanent pavement shall be placed to the grade that matches the existing bituminous surface after rolling. The permanent paving shall not overlap the existing pavement and will not have to be applied with a mechanical spreader unless otherwise directed. The permittee shall furnish, place, grade and compact bituminous concrete pavement of class I type I-1 as shown and specified in the latest state standard construction specifications for road and bridge. The director shall evaluate each permit application and determine if the patch requires infrared treatment. 
(d)  Temporary patching shall be in accordance with the standard specifications of the state department of public works and is to be a minimum of two-inch compacted thickness. 
(e)  For a period of five years, any excavation work done on a protected street or a paved location that was previously listed on the plan, following the permanent paving of any street, road, right-of-way, or sidewalk, any excavation work will require pavement restoration from curb to curb for the entire length of city block wherein the excavation is located. 
(Code 1973, § 23-20; Code 1994, § 34-37; Ord. of 1-12-2009; Ord. of 9-18-2017(2) , § 1) 
Sec. 32-37. - Lighting. 
    The person receiving the permit shall place and maintain from the beginning of twilight, through the whole of every night, over or near the place so occupied, opened, obstructed or used, and over or near any dirt, gravel or other material placed in or near such place, lights sufficient to protect travelers from injury; shall place and maintain a safe and convenient way satisfactory to the chief of police, for the use of foot travelers and for vehicles around or over such place. 
(Code 1973, § 23-21; Code 1994, § 34-38; Ord. of 11-14-1994; Ord. of 9-18-2017(2) , § 1) 
Sec. 32-38. - Failure to restore satisfactorily; work done by city; cost. 
    In case any street or sidewalk is not left in a manner satisfactory to the director of public works under the provisions of section 32-33, he or she shall cause the work to be properly done, and the expense thereof shall be charged to and paid by the person conducting excavation work. 
(Code 1973, § 23-22; Code 1994, § 34-39; Ord. of 9-18-2017(2) , § 1) 
Sec. 32-39. - Fine. 
    Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this article may be prohibited from undertaking any activity involving further excavation work for a period deemed reasonable by the director of public works. Such failure of compliance shall be punishable by a fine of $500.00 for each and every violation per day. Any fine issued in accordance to this article shall be subject to appeal in municipal court within 30 days. 
(Code 1994, § 34-40; Ord. of 11-14-1994; Ord. of 9-18-2017(2) , § 1) 
Sec. 32-40. - Public emergency. 
    In the case of a public emergency occurring during a time when a permit is not easily available, and the emergency requires the emergency repair work, the person shall not be required to obtain a permit from the DPW. Such person, however, shall notify the chief of police where the work will be located and the cause for the emergency repair work. Such person shall only begin work once they receive written authorization from the chief of police. Any person operating under a public emergency authorization shall still comply with the provisions of this article, and shall apply for a permit with the DPW within 30 days thereafter or be subject to the fines and penalties provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2017(2) , § 1) 
Secs. 32-41-32-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CURB CUTS AND DRIVEWAY OPENINGS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 32-61. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article, or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall perform any work in violation of any specifications of plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order, as affirmed or modified by the board of appeals, or by a court of competent jurisdiction, shall severally, for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished in accordance with section 1-12. 
(Code 1973, § 16-18-13; Code 1994, § 34-63) 
Sec. 32-62. - Administration. 
(a)  Powers of director of public works. The director of public works shall execute the provisions of this article, and the ordinances in amendment hereof, except as otherwise provided. He shall have the power to act on any question relative to the administration and enforcement of this article, including the issuance and revocation of permits, the collection of fees, the inspection of the work and materials, the holding of bonds, and the issuance of notices and orders necessary to the proper implementation of this article. 
(b)  Maintenance of records. The director shall maintain a record of all permits issued, all fees levied and all bonds posted. He shall keep a record of all violations of law, and shall report all violations to the city solicitor. 
(Code 1973, § 16-18-1; Code 1994, § 34-61) 
Sec. 32-63. - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by any officer, department, board, commission, or agency of the city may take an appeal to the board of appeals, from any decision of the director of public works. Any appeal may be taken within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed by filing with the director, and with the board of appeals, a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. The director shall forthwith transmit to the board of appeals all the papers upon which the action appealed was taken. 
(Code 1973, § 16-18-12; Code 1994, § 34-62) 
Secs. 32-64-32-84. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 32-85. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make or alter any curb cut or driveway opening without first having obtained a permit from the director of public works, and on state controlled highways, a permit must be obtained from the state department of public roads and bridges, and work must conform to state and city standards. 
(Code 1973, § 16-18-2(a); Code 1994, § 34-76) 
Sec. 32-86. - Application. 
    Before a permit for a curb cut or driveway is issued, the owner shall submit an application in such a manner and on such a form as prescribed by the director of public works. Every application shall be accompanied by a dimensional plan drawn to scale, showing the location of the proposed curb cut, or driveway opening; the location of existing curb cuts, or driveway openings on the same lot; the distance from the proposed curb cut, or driveway opening to lot lines; the location of street intersections, when applicable, and the locations of existing or proposed buildings, curbs, sidewalks, trees, poles, public utilities, or other objects which might affect the work. 
(Code 1973, § 16-18-2(b); Code 1994, § 34-77) 
Sec. 32-87. - Action on application. 
    The director shall examine all applications for permits, and shall refer all such applications, if deemed necessary, to the city traffic division, and if, in the opinion of the director of public works, the application and the plans attached thereto are in conformance with the provisions of this division, the director shall issue a permit for the work to be performed. 
(Code 1973, § 16-18-2(c); Code 1994, § 34-78) 
Sec. 32-88. - Compliance. 
    All work shall be done in compliance with the permit issued for said work and all work must be completed within 60 days from issuance of permit. 
(Code 1973, § 16-18-2(d); Code 1994, § 34-79) 
Sec. 32-89. - Revocation. 
    The director of public works shall revoke any permit as follows: 
(1)  If any reason is found to exist that would have been cause to deny such permit. 
(2)  Whenever there has been a false statement as to material fact in the application upon which the permit was issued. 
(3)  For any violation of any provision of this division, on the part of the permittee, or his agent or employee, in doing any act or work authorized to be done by such permit. 
(Code 1973, § 16-18-2(e); Code 1994, § 34-80) 
Sec. 32-90. - Contractors to be qualified. 
    Any work for which a permit is issued under the provisions of this division may be performed by the department of public works or with the written permission of the director of public works, by a contractor hired by the permittee, if the contractor is deemed qualified by the director of public works. 
(Code 1973, § 16-18-3; Code 1994, § 34-81) 
Sec. 32-91. - Fees. 
(a)  Payment. The applicant for a curb cut or driveway permit shall pay to the director of public works the currently required fee for either residential or commercial property as the case may be. 
(b)  For city work. When the work, for which a curb cut or driveway permit is issued, is performed by the department of public works, the director shall charge any permittees according to the established unit price schedule, which will be updated annually. 
(Code 1973, § 16-18-4; Code 1994, § 34-82) 
Sec. 32-92. - Bonds. 
    When a curb cut or driveway opening is made or altered by a contractor hired by the permittee, and if the contractor has previously been responsible for less than satisfactory work according to this division, or the interpretation thereof, by the director of public works, the contractor shall be required to post a bond with the city in the amount of one-half the cost of construction. 
(Code 1973, § 16-18-5; Code 1994, § 34-83) 
Sec. 32-93. - Inspections. 
    The director of public works shall conduct or cause to be conducted at least two inspections of each permit issued, the first to take place within five days of the submission of the application as part of the approval process, and shall be a prerequisite to the final approval of the application. The second and final inspection shall take place after the completion of construction upon the director's notification, by the permittee, that the same is ready for inspection. Upon the director's assurance that all work and materials conform to the plans, specifications, and directions, the city will accept the project, and when applicable, release the contractor's bond. 
(Code 1973, § 16-18-6; Code 1994, § 34-84) 
Secs. 32-94-32-114. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS 

Sec. 32-115. - Size and location of openings. 
(a)  Width of openings. The width of curb cut and driveway openings shall be as follows: 
(1)  The maximum width of any curb cut or driveway opening for any residential purpose shall not exceed 18 feet when designed to accommodate one car, or 24 feet when designed to accommodate two cars. 
(2)  The maximum width of a curb cut or driveway opening for any purpose other than residential shall not exceed 20 feet when designed for one-way traffic, and 34 feet when designed for two-way traffic. 
(3)  For the purpose of this division, the distance of a curb cut, or driveway opening is to figure as a distance from the point of tangency, to the point of tangency of the radius turns or turnstones. 
(b)  Distance to street intersection. The distance of curb cuts and driveway openings from street intersections shall be as follows: 
(1)  No curb cut or driveway opening shall be located within 25 feet of the intersection, of the prolongation of the curblines, unless authorized by the director of public works or traffic division. 
(2)  In no case shall a curb cut or driveway opening be located on the radius corner of any streets, roadway, or highways of the city unless authorized by the director of public works or the traffic division. 
(c)  Distance between curb cuts or driveway openings on same lot. When more than one curb cut or driveway opening is located on the same lot, they shall be separated by a distance of at least 26 feet in areas where curb parking is allowed and at least six feet in areas where curb parking is not allowed. 
(d)  Number permitted. No more than two curb cuts or driveway openings shall be permitted on the street frontage of any lot, except, that three curb cuts or driveway openings may be permitted if the distance between the lot lines within which the curb cuts or driveway openings are located exceeds 185 feet. 
(e)  Distance to the lot line. A curb cut or driveway opening may be constructed beginning directly on the lot line, provided, that all of the restrictions set forth in the zoning ordinance can also be met. 
(f)  Curved curb radius turnstones. Curved curb radius turnstones shall have a two-foot radius, constructed for a 90-degree angle along the tangents, or end of the straight curbing and shall be a minimum of six inches in thickness, and a minimum depth of 18 inches. The type of material used shall be granite or an approved equal. 
(g)  Angle of driveway to property line. No driveway shall be constructed so as to cause an exiting vehicle to cross the driveway opening within the sidewalk area at an angle of less than 45 degrees. 
(Code 1973, § 16-18-7; Code 1994, § 34-96) 
Sec. 32-116. - Materials. 
    Materials used in work performed under the provisions of this division shall be those as specified by the director of public works. 
(Code 1973, § 16-18-8; Code 1994, § 34-97) 
Sec. 32-117. - Sidewalks. 
(a)  General conditions. The sidewalk is to be kept in a cleared, safe, and passable condition at all times during the construction of a curb cut or driveway opening. 
(b)  Repairs. Any repairs or replacement of the sidewalk necessitated by the construction of a curb cut or driveway opening shall be made within the time period of the curb cut permit; and shall be a prerequisite for the approval of construction and acceptance of the curb cut, or driveway opening, by the city. 
(c)  Materials. The materials and type of construction used in the repair or replacement of sidewalks shall be the same as that which exists on the particular lot. 
(Code 1973, § 16-18-9; Code 1994, § 34-98) 
Sec. 32-118. - Safeguards. 
    At all times during which any work under this division is being performed, and until work is completed and approved by the director, the contractor or permittee shall maintain all necessary barriers, lights and other safeguards for the prevention of accidents and for the protection of public and private property. 
(Code 1973, § 16-18-10; Code 1994, § 34-99) 
Sec. 32-119. - Removal of rubbish. 
    After all work is completed, the contractor, permittee or other person in charge of such work shall remove all rubbish, waste and excess materials, and leave the street, roadway or highway, in a neat and clean appearing condition. 
(Code 1973, § 16-18-11; Code 1994, § 34-100) 
Secs. 32-120-32-136. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HOUSE NUMBERING 

Sec. 32-137. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any owner who fails to affix to and retain number markings on his building in conformity with the standards established in accordance with this article shall, upon conviction by the municipal court, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $25.00, and to pay all costs associated with prosecution thereof. 
(Code 1994, § 34-123; Ord. of 8-24-1992, § 4) 
Sec. 32-138. - Enforcement of article. 
    Any division of the department of public safety shall have the duty to enforce the requirements contained in this article. 
(Code 1994, § 34-124; Ord. of 8-24-1992, § 3) 
Sec. 32-139. - Duties of public works director. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the director of public works to prepare plans for, keep a record of, and assign to all buildings fronting upon every street or public way within the city numbers for such buildings. 
(b)  The director of public works shall prepare and file in the office of the city clerk written standards relating to the number markings to be affixed to and retained on all buildings in accordance with the provisions ordained in this article. 
(Code 1994, § 34-121; Ord. of 8-24-1992, § 1) 
Sec. 32-140. - Duties of building owners. 
    It shall be the duty of every owner of buildings located in the city to affix to and retain number markings to such buildings in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  The number markings shall be in color contrast to the building. 
(2)  Each individual number marking shall be no less than two inches in height and one-fourth inch in width. 
(3)  The number markings shall be located either above, below or on the side of the building's front door, but in no event shall the marking be less than three feet from ground level. 
(4)  If the building does not contain a door on its street side, then the number marking shall be located at a place closest in distance to the street. 
(Code 1994, § 34-122; Ord. of 8-24-1992, § 2) 
Secs. 32-141-32-163. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MOVING BUILDINGS 

Sec. 32-164. - Permit required. 
    No building shall be moved along, across or through any of the public highways or streets within the city without permission of the city council first had and obtained therefor upon petition made as provided in section 32-165. The permit therefor shall prescribe the streets through, along or across which and the time within which such building shall be removed. 
(Code 1973, § 23-5; Code 1994, § 34-146) 
Sec. 32-165. - Petition for permit. 
    Whenever any person shall desire to remove any building along, across or through any of the streets or public highways in the city, he shall present his petition in writing to the city council for permission to make such removal, which petition shall describe the building, its dimensions, location, the place to which it is desired to be removed and the streets along, across and through which such building is to be removed. Every such petition shall be filed, and the cost of advertising the petition shall be deposited with the city clerk. Such clerk shall cause notice of the pendency of such petition and of the time when the petition will be considered by the council to be publicly advertised for at least one week before action thereon by the council, and all persons interested in the matter of the petition may appear before the council and be heard relative thereto. 
(Code 1973, § 23-6; Code 1994, § 34-147) 
Sec. 32-166. - Owner to pay damages and costs; bond. 
    The owner of every building moved along, across or through the streets of the city shall pay to the city all damages, costs and expenses occasioned to the city by such removal to be ascertained by the city council. Before removing such building, the owner shall give bond to the director of finance in such sum as the city council shall prescribe, satisfactory to the council for the payment of all such costs, damages and expenses so to be ascertained. Such bond shall be further conditioned to pay all costs, damages and expenses that may be caused to the property of or that may be incurred by any person in consequence of such removal. 
(Code 1973, § 23-7; Code 1994, § 34-148) 
Sec. 32-167. - Trimming or moving trees, wires or posts. 
    In case it shall be necessary in the moving of any building to cut down or trim any tree or move any post, wire or other obstruction on the line of the street or highway along, across or through which the building is to be moved, that fact shall be set forth in the petition and notice provided for in section 32-165. No tree shall be cut down, nor its branches cut off, and no post, wire or other obstruction shall be so moved, unless special permission shall have been given therefor from the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 23-8; Code 1994, § 34-149) 
Sec. 32-168. - Signs and notices. 
    Every person engaged in moving any building through any of the public streets or highways of the city shall cause to be posted, at a proper distance from the building, signs and notices that such street or highway is impassable by reason of the moving of the building. 
(Code 1973, § 23-9; Code 1994, § 34-150) 
Secs. 32-169-32-189. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TELEPHONE AND TELEGRAPH POLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city council to regulate poles and wires, G.L. 1956, § 45-6-1; cutting, destroying, etc., poles and wires, G.L. 1956, § 11-35-4. 

Sec. 32-190. - Compliance with article. 
    Any and all telegraph and telephone poles set or maintained in any of the public streets or highways in the city by any person shall be suffered and permitted to be so set and maintained only upon the express conditions set out in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 24-1; Code 1994, § 34-171) 
Sec. 32-191. - License required. 
    No person shall set, use or maintain or shall cause to be set, used or maintained, and no person shall do any work or shall be employed in setting, using or maintaining, any telegraph or telephone pole or line of poles in any public street or highway of the city without a license therefor being first had and obtained from the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 24-2; Code 1994, § 34-172) 
Sec. 32-192. - Right of use of city. 
    The city and the several departments of the city government shall at all times have the first right to occupy and use telegraph and telephone poles set or maintained in any public street or highway for supporting any and all wires used or that may be desired to be used by the city and the departments of city government and in such manner as such departments or either of them may elect. 
(Code 1973, § 24-3; Code 1994, § 34-173) 
Sec. 32-193. - Responsibility for damages. 
    The owner and all persons using or maintaining any telephone or telegraph pole set or maintained in any public street or highway shall be responsible for and shall pay, upon request, all damages that may have resulted or may result to the city or to any person in consequence of the careless and negligent setting, using or maintaining by such owner or user of any such pole. 
(Code 1973, § 24-4; Code 1994, § 34-174) 
Sec. 32-194. - Setting, use and maintenance subject to regulations of city council. 
    The setting, use and maintenance of any telephone or telegraph pole in any street or highway of the city shall at all times be subject to the regulations and directions of the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 24-5; Code 1994, § 34-175) 
Sec. 32-195. - Removal or repair. 
    The owner or user of any telephone or telegraph pole set or maintained in any public street or highway shall change the location of, repair or remove such pole upon the order of the city council so to do. 
(Code 1973, § 24-6; Code 1994, § 34-176) 
Sec. 32-196. - Interference with wires used by city. 
    No person shall remove, change the location of or in any manner interfere with any or either of the wires that are or may be used by the city or by the several departments of city government, as provided for in section 32-192, without permission therefor from the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 24-7; Code 1994, § 34-177) 
Secs. 32-197-32-215. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PARADES AND PROCESSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 32-216. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Footrace means an athletic event involving two or more persons for the purpose of competition, recreation, or for the purpose of promotional publicity. 
    Parade means any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, footrace, or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, park or other public place in the city. 
    Parade permit means a permit as required by this article. 
    Public assembly means any gathering of persons on public streets or other public places for the purpose of conducting social, recreational or residential functions. 
    Public assembly permit means a permit as required by this article. 
(Code 1973, § 23-15; Code 1994, § 34-5) 
Secs. 32-217-32-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 32-241. - Required. 
    No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade or public assembly, unless a parade or public assembly permit shall have been obtained from the director of public safety. 
(Code 1973, § 23-15; Code 1994, § 34-5) 
Sec. 32-242. - Exceptions to division provisions. 
    This division shall not apply to: 
(1)  Funeral processions; 
(2)  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. 
(Code 1973, § 23-15; Code 1994, § 34-5) 
Sec. 32-243. - Application. 
(a)  Required. A person seeking issuance of a parade or public assembly permit shall file an application with the director of public safety on forms provided by such officers. 
(b)  Filing period. An application for a parade or public assembly permit shall be filed with the director of public safety not less than ten days nor more than 20 days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade. 
(c)  Contents. The application for a parade or public assembly permit shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade or public assembly. 
(2)  If the parade or public assembly is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by any organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization. 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade or public assembly chairman who will be responsible for its conduct. 
(4)  The date when the parade or public assembly is to be conducted. 
(5)  The hours when such parade or public assembly will start and terminate. 
(6)  A statement as to whether the parade or public assembly will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed. 
(7)  The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade or public assembly. 
(8)  The time at which units of the parade or public assembly will begin to assemble at any such assembly area. 
(9)  The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade. 
(10)  If the parade or public assembly is designed to be held by and on behalf of or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the director of public safety a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade or public assembly authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf. 
(d)  Late applications. The director of public safety, where good cause is shown therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application under this division which is filed less than one day before the date such parade or public assembly is proposed to be conducted. 
(Code 1973, § 23-15; Code 1994, § 34-5) 
Sec. 32-244. - Standards for issuance. 
    The director of public safety shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of the parade or public assembly will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route or location. 
(2)  The conduct of the parade or public assembly will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city. 
(3)  The conduct of such parade or public assembly will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto. 
(4)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas. 
(5)  The conduct of such parade or public assembly will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire. 
(6)  The conduct of the parade or public assembly is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance. 
(7)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route. 
(8)  The director of public safety, if he deems necessary, may require the applicant to designate a certain number of parade marshals who shall be responsible for conducting the parade or assembly in an orderly manner. 
(Code 1973, § 23-15; Code 1994, § 34-5) 
Sec. 32-245. - Notice of rejection. 
    The director of public safety shall act upon the application for a parade permit within three days after its filing. If the director of public safety disapproves the application, he shall mail to the applicant within three days after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of his action, stating the reasons for his denial of the permit. 
(Code 1973, § 23-15; Code 1994, § 34-5) 
Sec. 32-246. - Appeal procedure. 
    Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade or public assembly permit to the city council. The appeal shall be taken within three days after denial. The city council shall act upon the appeal at the next regularly scheduled council meeting. 
(Code 1973, § 23-15; Code 1994, § 34-5) 
Sec. 32-247. - Alternative permit. 
    The director of public safety, in denying an application for a parade or public assembly permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of a parade or public assembly on a date, at a time, or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within seven days after notice of the action of the director of public safety, file a written notice of acceptance with the director of public safety. An alternate parade or public assembly permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of a parade or public assembly permit under this article. 
(Code 1973, § 23-15; Code 1994, § 34-5) 
Sec. 32-248. - Contents. 
    Each parade or public assembly permit shall state the following information: 
(1)  Starting or beginning time. 
(2)  Minimum speed, if applicable. 
(3)  Maximum speed, if applicable. 
(4)  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade or public assembly, if applicable. 
(5)  The portions of the streets to be traversed or utilized. 
(6)  The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof, if applicable. 
(7)  Such other information as the director of public safety shall find necessary to the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 23-15; Code 1994, § 34-5) 
Sec. 32-249. - Duties of permittee. 
(a)  Compliance with laws. A permittee under this article shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(b)  Possession of permit. The parade or public assembly chairperson or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade or public assembly. 
(Code 1973, § 23-15; Code 1994, § 34-5) 
Sec. 32-250. - Revocation. 
    The director of public safety shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued under this article upon application of the standards for issuance as set forth in this division. 
(Code 1973, § 23-15; Code 1994, § 34-5) 
Secs. 32-251-32-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SIDEWALK CAFÉ LICENSE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 12. 

Sec. 32-301. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, "sidewalk café" means any area situated on a public sidewalk where food, refreshments, and/or beverages are sold by a restaurant, delicatessen, ice cream shop or coffee shop (hereinafter "operating establishment") for public consumption at tables or counters located on the sidewalk fronting the operating establishment. Sidewalk cafés shall operate only as authorized pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2010(3), § 34-180) 
Sec. 32-302. - Permit required. 
(a)  A person shall not construct, maintain, use or operate a sidewalk café without first obtaining a permit as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  An application for a sidewalk café license shall be made to the city clerk's office on forms provide by the city clerk. The city clerk shall transmit the applications to the city council for approval at the next council meeting. The application shall be made by the operating establishment. 
(c)  A sidewalk café permit shall be for one year from May 1 in each year until the following April 30. The holder of a permit shall pay an annual fee of $ ____________ . The annual fee shall be paid with the original permit application and with the request for renewal of permit. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2010(3), § 34-181) 
Editor's note- The annual fee, referenced in subsection (c) above, is not set out herein, but is available in the city offices. 
Sec. 32-303. - Standards. 
(a)  Sidewalk cafés shall be permitted only in the general business, limited business and waterfront business districts. 
(b)  No part of a sidewalk café area shall encroach upon any part of the sidewalk frontage of any adjacent premises, right-of-way or alley. 
(c)  A sidewalk café must leave a minimum four-foot unobstructed passageway for pedestrians along the length of the café. 
(d)  In the case that a business owner holds property adjacent to their business (e.g. side yard setback, parking lot, etc) a sidewalk café may be permitted in that location as well. The side yard café will be subject to the same guidelines as the sidewalk café. 
(e)  The holder of a sidewalk café license shall fully insure, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city and in their capacity as such, the officers, agents, and employees thereof from and against any and all claims and damages in any way arising out of or through the acts or omissions of the permit holder or its employees in the construction, operation, maintenance, use, placement or condition of the sidewalk café. An applicant for a sidewalk café shall provide proof of such insurance before a permit may be issued or renewed under this chapter, and a fully executed Indemnification Agreement. 
(f)  A sidewalk café shall close and all café seating shall be removed from the café area no later than 11:00 p.m. The café area shall be cleared of all other furniture, debris and obstructions to the sidewalk no later than midnight. 
(g)  An operating establishment shall not sell, serve or allow consumption of alcoholic beverages on its sidewalk café without receiving the required license from the "board of license commissioners". Alcoholic beverages shall be served on the sidewalk café only in conjunction with the service of food. Notwithstanding any contrary or different hours of operations in its alcoholic beverages license, an operation establishment shall not sell, serve or allow consumption of alcoholic beverages on its sidewalk café after the sidewalk café's closing time. All alcohol sold to patrons at the sidewalk café must remain on the business premises. It may not be at any time taken off the business property. 
(h)  The following are prohibited in the café area: cooking of food, unshielded trash or refuse storage, advertisements (exclusive of menus intended to be read from café); outdoor entertainment, music, speakers or public address systems; exclusively carry out transactions. 
(i)  A sidewalk café shall comply with all applicable building, health, safety, fire, zoning, and environmental standards. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2010(3), § 34-182) 
Secs. 32-304-32-309. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - GREEN AND COMPLETE STREETS 

Sec. 32-310. - Vision and purpose. 
    Streets in the city carry not only people and goods, but also various utilities, including stormwater runoff. City streets are also a plurality of city land use and the windows into the city for visitors and residents alike. The city shall develop a safe, reliable, efficient, integrated and connected multimodal transportation system that will promote access, mobility and health of all kinds for all users and abutters, including people with mobility aids, and that will improve environmental quality and reduce polluted stormwater runoff. The goal is of the city is to create a connected network of right-of-way facilities accommodating all modes of travel to the maximum practical extent and to promote the walkability and bikability of the city's streets, along with good access to public transportation, beautification and shade, and responsible reduction and treatment of polluted stormwater. 
(Ord. of 1-18-2018(1) , § 1, eff. 7-1-2018) 
Sec. 32-311. - Definition. 
    "Green and complete streets" means streets that are designed and operated to enable safe access for all users, in that pedestrians, bicyclists, motorists and public transportation users of all ages and abilities are able to safely move along and across a street, provide for visual pleasure, including exposure to natural elements, and improve environmental quality by providing for reduction and on-site pretreatment of stormwater prior to eventual release into local waterways and the Narragansett Bay. 
(Ord. of 1-18-2018(1) , § 1, eff. 7-1-2018) 
Sec. 32-312. - Scope of applicability. 
(a)  All city-owned transportation facilities in the public right-of-way including, but not limited to, streets and all other connecting pathways, as well as parking lots on city-owned land, shall be designed and constructed in conformance with the policy that users of all ages and abilities can travel safely and independently, residents and visitors experience pleasantly-designed urban streetscapes that feature greenery, and stormwater is both reduced and treated on-site prior to entering the city's combined stormwater and wastewater conveyance system. 
(b)  Privately constructed streets and parking lots shall adhere to this article. 
(c)  The city shall make good faith efforts to foster partnerships with the state and Providence Plantations and neighboring communities to develop facilities and accommodations that further the city's green and complete streets policy as set forth in section 32-310 above and continue such infrastructure beyond the city's borders. 
(d)  The city shall approach every transportation improvement and project phase as an opportunity to create safer, more accessible streets for all users that are more attractive and better manage stormwater. The design of new, rehabilitated or reconstructed facilities should anticipate likely future demand for bicycling, walking, transit, and motorist use, beautification elements, and stormwater runoff and should not preclude the provision of future improvements. These phases include, but are not limited to: planning, programming, design, right-of-way acquisition, construction, construction engineering, reconstruction, operation and maintenance. Other changes to transportation facilities on streets and rights-of-way, including capital improvements, re-channelization projects and major maintenance, must also be included. 
(e)  The city shall utilize the performance measures as described in section 32-315 to identify improvement projects to be included in the city's capital improvement plan and/or street pavement plan, pursuant to section 2-304 of the city's home rule charter and sections 32-35 and 2-330 of this Code, respectively. The projects shall be identified based on their ability to address design issues on city-owned transportation facilities, such as improved safety and ease of use. 
(f)  All transportation infrastructure and street design projects in the city (including those completed by the state or other public companies, including utilities) shall adhere to this article. 
(Ord. of 1-18-2018(1) , § 1, eff. 7-1-2018) 
Sec. 32-313. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Applications for waivers or exceptions shall be reviewed and approved by the city council, with a recommendation from the planning board. All documentation regarding any waiver or exception application shall be publicly available. 
(b)  The city council shall weigh the following when considering applications for waivers or exceptions: 
(1)  An affected roadway prohibits, by law, use by specified users, in which case a greater effort shall be made to accommodate those specified users elsewhere, including on roadways that cross or otherwise intersect with the affected roadway; 
(2)  The activities are ordinary maintenance activities designed to keep assets in serviceable condition (including, but not limited to, mowing, cleaning, sweeping, spot repair and surface treatments such as chip seal or interim measures); 
(3)  The director of the department of public works issues a recommendation that the application of this article is unnecessary or unduly cost prohibitive. 
(4)  Other available means or factors indicate an absence of need, including future need. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), the director of public safety may issue a waiver or an exception in the form of an executive order if application of this article would be contrary to public safety, with notice given to the city council within two business days. 
(Ord. of 1-18-2018(1) , § 1, eff. 7-1-2018) 
Sec. 32-314. - Design standards. 
    The city shall follow accepted or adopted design standards and use the best and latest design standards available. These standards include, but are not limited to Designing Walkable Urban Thoroughfares: A Context Sensitive Approach, NACTO's Urban Street Design Guide, and DEM's LID standards as reflected in its Stormwater Design Manual (2015) and LID Guide (2011). In recognition of context sensitivity, public input and the needs of many users, a flexible, innovative and balanced approach that follows other appropriate design standards may be considered, provided that a comparable level of safety for all users is present. 
(Ord. of 1-18-2018(1) , § 1, eff. 7-1-2018) 
Sec. 32-315. - Performance measures and reporting. 
    An annual report shall be annually submitted to the city council and placed on the city's website by the directors of public works and planning. The annual report shall document the annual increase or decrease for each of the following performance measures. 
(1)  Total miles of bike lanes. 
(2)  Number of bicycle parking facilities. 
(3)  Linear feet of sidewalk in need of repair or construction. 
(4)  Number of non-ADA-compliant curb ramps. 
(5)  Percent of intersection legs with crosswalks. 
(6)  Percent of public transportation facilities accessible via sidewalks and curb ramps. 
(7)  Number of street trees. 
(8)  Maintenance activities of existing green and complete streets facilities. 
(9)  Average travel lane width. 
(10)  Average vehicle speed at measured intersections versus previous years by mode. 
(11)  Number of traffic complaints. 
(12)  Number and severity of traffic violations and accidents by mode. 
(13)  Total dollar amount spent on green and complete streets activities. 
(14)  Percent of impervious surface area in the city. 
(15)  Water quality (bacteria and trace metal pollution) of each stormwater (non-sanitary) outfall located in the city. 
(Ord. of 1-18-2018(1) , § 1, eff. 7-1-2018) 
Sec. 32-316. - Implementation. 
(a)  The department of public works and other relevant departments, agencies, or committees will incorporate green and complete streets principles into all existing plans, manuals, checklists, decision-trees, rules, regulations, and programs as appropriate (including, but not limited to any short-term, medium-term, and long-term capital plans). 
(b)  The department of public works and other relevant departments, agencies, or committees will review current design standards to ensure that they reflect the best available design standards and guidelines, and effectively implement green and complete streets, where feasible. 
(c)  When available, the city shall make good faith efforts to encourage staff professional development and training on non-motorized transportation issues through attending conferences, classes, seminars, and workshops. 
(d)  City staff shall make good faith efforts to identify all current and potential future sources of funding for street improvements and recommend improvements to the project selection criteria to support green and complete streets projects. 
(e)  The city shall promote inter-departmental project coordination among city departments with an interest in the activities that occur within the public right-of-way in order to better use fiscal resources. 
(f)  The city shall make good faith efforts to include an educational component to ensure that all users of the transportation system understand and can safely utilize green and complete streets project elements. 
(Ord. of 1-18-2018(1) , § 1, eff. 7-1-2018) 
Chapter 34 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Taxation, G.L. 1956, § 44-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1-34-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROPERTY TAX CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Power to tax property, G.L. 1956, § 45-2-2. 

Sec. 34-19. - Established. 
    Pursuant to G.L. 1956, § 44-5-20.1, there is hereby established a property tax classification system in the city. 
(Code 1994, § 36-26; Ord. of 2-19-1991, § I) 
Secs. 34-20-34-41. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Property tax exemptions, G.L. 1956, § 44-3-3. 

Sec. 34-42. - Persons 65 years of age or over. 
(a)  The tax assessor is hereby authorized to grant up to a $7,500.00 exemption from valuation of real estate owned and occupied by persons 65 years of age or over. 
(b)  Applications for exemptions under this section filed on or before March 15 of the year thereafter and approved by the assessor prior to the legal certification of the tax roll shall be accepted by the tax collector and credit for such exemption shall be applied to the assessment of December 31 of the year preceding the date of such filing and approval. 
(c)  Tax exemptions authorized by this section shall be effective from and after December 31, 1993. Any applications for exemptions filed after January 31 of any year and subsequently approved by the assessor shall not be operative until the year succeeding such filing and the exemptions credit shall become effective against the assessment made December 31 following the date of filing. 
(Code 1994, § 36-51; Ord. of 5-30-1984(3), §§ 1-6; Ord. of 6-1-1994; Ord. of 6-11-2007(2); Ord. of 5-16-2011(2)) 
Sec. 34-43. - Tax exemptions for veterans. 
(a)  The tax assessor is hereby authorized to grant up to a $7,500.00 real property, tangible personal property or motor vehicle exemption from valuations to each person who served in the military or naval service of the United States in G.L. 1956, § 44-3-4(1). 
(b)  Such exemption shall be granted upon due evidence that he is so entitled. 
(Code 1994, § 36-52; Ord. of 5-30-1984(2), § 1; Ord. of 6-1-1994; Ord. of 6-11-2007(3); Ord. of 4-18-2011(3)) 
Sec. 34-44. - Tax exemptions for prisoners of war. 
    The tax assessor is hereby authorized to grant a $15,000.00 real property, tangible personal property, or motor vehicle exemption from valuation of property located in the city for any veteran of the military or naval service of the United States of America who has been or who shall be classified as, or determined to be, a prisoner of war by the Veterans Administration of the United States. Such exemption shall be granted upon due evidence that such person is so entitled. 
(Code 1994, § 36-53; Ord. of 6-11-1987(2), § 1) 
State Law reference- Authority to so provide, G.L. 1956, § 44-3-4(e). 
Sec. 34-45. - Homestead exemption. 
(a)  The tax assessor is hereby authorized to provide that the property of each person who shall be a domiciled resident of the city on or before December 31 of each year and which property is the principal residence of said person shall be exempt from taxation not to exceed $60,000.00 of assessed valuation. The exemption is applied to residential property and includes property with up to a total of five residential units and may include up to one commercial or professional use unit as part of the total of five assessed units. 
(b)  Each person upon application for such exemption shall provide by means of a sworn statement and with three forms of identification bearing the address of the applicant to the assessor clear and convincing evidence to establish his or her legal residence at the property subject to the exemption. 
(c)  In the event that the property subject to such exemption should be sold or otherwise transferred during the year for which the exemption is claimed to a person who shall not qualify for such exemption, such exemption shall be deemed void and the seller or transferor shall be liable to the city for reimbursement of any tax benefit received as a result of the exemption. 
(Code 1994, § 36-55; Ord. of 6-30-1994, §§ 1-4; Ord. of 8-28-1995, §§ 1-3; Ord. of 6-28-2001; Ord. of 6-11-2007(1); Ord. of 6-30-2008; Ord. of 4-18-2011(4)) 
State Law reference- Authority to so provide, G.L. 1956, § 44-3-34. 
Sec. 34-46. - Exemption for blind persons. 
    The exemption for persons who are legally blind as defined by G.L. 1956, § 44-3-12 is hereby increased to $22,500.00. 
(Code 1994, § 36-56; Ord. of 6-5-1995(2); Ord. of 3-14-2005(1)) 
Sec. 34-47. - Exemption on certain improvements. 
(a)  Any owner of any dwelling of one to eight units who makes any improvements or additions to his residential or rental property in an amount not to exceed $20,000.00 as determined by the tax assessor of the city shall be exempt from reassessment of property taxes on the improvements or addition until the next general city-wide reevaluation of property values by the tax assessor. 
(b)  The property owner shall supply all necessary plans to the building official for the improvements or additions and shall pay all requisite building and other permitting fees as are now required by law. 
(Code 1994, § 36-57; Ord. of 8-7-1995, §§ 1, 2) 
State Law reference- Authority to so provide, G.L. 1956, § 44-5-12(a)(4). 
Secs. 34-48-34-67. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REAL ESTATE NONUTILIZATION TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Real estate nonutilization tax, G.L. 1956, § 44-5.1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 34-68. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases when used in this article, have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abutter means a neighbor whose property touches the property in question. 
    Actively marketed means: 
(1)  Good faith efforts by the owner of the property to obtain one or more occupants of the property. These good faith efforts may include, without limitations, one or more of the following: 
a.  Making substantial financial expenditures in comparison with the value of the property; 
b.  Listing the property for sale or lease, or both, with one or more real estate brokers, for a price and on terms, or for a rental that is realistic considering the fair market value or fair market rental value of the property; or 
c.  Advertising, using one or more signs on the property and at least one other medium, the availability of the property for sale or rental for a price and on terms, or at a rental that is realistic considering the fair market value or fair rental value of the property. Sporadic attempts to sell or lease the property during the privilege year may be viewed as not constituting a good faith marketing effort. 
    Continuously unoccupied means any property which is listed during the entire privilege year as vacant in the records of the city's department of minimum housing. 
    Development plan means a plan to rehabilitate a vacant and abandoned property within a set time frame for a use in conformance with the city's comprehensive plan. 
    New owner means any person who has purchased the vacant and abandoned property during the period subsequent to the notice of designation as vacant and abandoned. 
    Nonprofit housing organization means any organization exempt from taxation pursuant to § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code (26 USC 501(c)(3)) whose exempt purposes include the provision of affordable housing to low and moderate income households. 
    Privilege year means the 12-month period corresponding to the calendar year. 
    Reviewing entity means the municipal entity designated by the city or town pursuant to G.L. 1956, § 44-5.1-3. 
    Vacant and abandoned property means: 
(1)  A building that has remained continuously unoccupied during the privilege year or a lot, with no existing structure that is littered with trash and obviously abandoned; 
(2)  In the case of property containing one or more buildings used in whole or in part for one or more dwelling units immediately prior to the time the property became vacant, has been under continuous designation as vacant by the city's department of minimum housing during the privilege year; or 
(3)  In the case of property containing one or more buildings, none of which were used in whole or in part for one or more dwelling units immediately prior to the time the property became vacant, which has been under continuous citation by the city's department of code enforcement for violation of minimum housing code provisions relating to the health or safety of citizens during the privilege year. 
(Code 1994, § 36-71; Ord. of 5-13-2002; Ord. of 6-12-2017(2) , § 2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 44-5.1-2. 
Sec. 34-69. - Imposition. 
(a)  The city may annually impose upon any property which is determined to be vacant and abandoned a non-utilization tax measured by the assessed value of the real estate at the rate of $10.00 for each assessed $100.00 of assessed value of the real estate as most recently returned by the tax assessor of the city. The tax shall be in addition to any other taxes authorized by the general or public laws. 
(b)  The code enforcement office within the city is designated as the city entity responsible for determining which properties are vacant and abandoned. 
(c)  The department of code enforcement will survey all vacant properties and abandoned properties once during the privileged year, prior to March 15 of that privileged year. 
(1)  The department of code enforcement shall, upon designation of a property as vacant and abandoned, cause the office of the city assessor to notify the owner in writing of the date of designation of the property as vacant and abandoned and the date upon which the non-utilization tax may be imposed. 
(2)  The department of code enforcement shall file the notice of designation as vacant and abandoned with the recorder of deeds. 
(3)  The property owner of record may notify the city's code enforcement office if a change in the property occurs. At any time after the property presents the appearance of being used and cared for, the city's code enforcement office may notify the assessor to remove the property from the list of properties on the real estate non-utilization tax list. 
(4)  Any person or entity who, through foreclosure or otherwise, vacates or maintains vacant property shall notify the department of code enforcement. 
(d)  The director of planning or other designated official is hereby designated as the reviewing officer to review and approve a development plan submitted by a nonprofit housing organization or an abutter. 
(e)  The city tax assessor and/or the finance director is hereby empowered to abate the real estate non-utilization tax if it is imposed in error or if a nonprofit housing organization or an abutter acquires the property for rehabilitation and submits a development plan that complies with the provisions of G.L. 1956, § 44-5.1-3(i). 
(Code 1994, § 36-72; Ord. of 5-13-2002; Ord. of 6-12-2017(2) , § 2) 
Sec. 34-70. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The non-utilization tax authorized by this section shall not be imposed on property owned by an abutter, a new owner, or a nonprofit housing organization if the assessor finds the following: 
(1)  The abutter, new owner, or nonprofit housing organization submits a proposed development plan which has been approved by the director of planning and/or his/her designated official; and 
(2)  The proposed development plan contains a reasonable timetable for the development or the reuse of the property; and 
(3)  The director of planning and/or his/her designee determines that the proposed development plan contains a reasonable timetable for the development or reuse of the property; and 
(4)  The director of planning and/or his/her designee determines that the proposed development plan is in accordance with the approved comprehensive plan of the city and approves it. 
(b)  The director of planning and/or his/her designee shall deliver a copy of the approved development plan to the assessor who shall certify the property as exempt from the non-utilization tax. 
(c)  Failure of the nonprofit housing organization, without good cause, to carry out the development or reuse of the property in accordance with the timetable set forth in the approved development plan shall result in the property being subject to the non-utilization tax as of the first date of assessment following the expiration of the timetable in the approved development plan. 
(d)  The decision of the director of planning and/or his/her designee to deny approval of a development plan may be appealed to the city appeals board. 
(Code 1994, § 36-73; Ord. of 5-13-2002; Ord. of 6-12-2017(2) , § 2) 
Sec. 34-71. - Property ceasing to be subject to tax. 
    Upon a finding by the code enforcement office that the property is no longer vacant or abandoned, the property will cease to be subject to the non-utilization tax until such time as it again is determined to be vacant and abandoned. This section is not intended to modify any taxes which have already accrued. 
(Code 1994, § 36-74; Ord. of 5-13-2002; Ord. of 6-12-2017(2) , § 2) 
Sec. 34-72. - Transfer of property. 
    Notwithstanding the foregoing, any property that is vacant and abandoned and which is sold to a new owner, shall not be subject to this non-utilization tax for the first 60 days subsequent to the transfer of ownership to the new owner. Failure by the new owner to have the property removed from its vacant and abandoned status within that 60-day period will again subject that property to this tax. 
(Code 1994, § 36-75; Ord. of 5-13-2002; Ord. of 6-12-2017(2) , § 2) 
Sec. 34-73. - Date on which taxes due. 
    The tax imposed under authority of this article shall be due and payable in the same manner as other municipal taxes are due in the city. 
(Code 1994, § 36-76; Ord. of 5-13-2002; Ord. of 6-12-2017(2) , § 2) 
Sec. 34-74. - Appeals. 
(a)  In any appeal from the imposition of the tax set forth in this article, the tax review board of the city shall find in favor of an appellant who shows the following with regard to the property assessed: 
(1)  Was actively marketed during the privilege year; 
(2)  Was occupied for substantial portions of the privilege year, notwithstanding its designation by the department of code enforcement; or 
(3)  Was exempt pursuant to G.L. 1956, § 44-5.1-4(i) from the imposition of the tax. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to enlarge or diminish any other right of appeal that an appellant may possess pursuant to the general or public laws, or city ordinances. 
(Code 1994, § 36-77; Ord. of 5-13-2002; Ord. of 6-12-2017(2) , § 2) 
Sec. 34-75. - Severability. 
    The provisions of this section are severable and if any provision, sentence, clause, section, or part of the section shall be held illegal, invalid, unconstitutional, or inapplicable to any person, circumstance, or time period, that illegality, invalidity, unconstitutionality, or inapplicability shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections, or parts of the section or its application. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that this section would have been adopted had those provisions not been included or that person, circumstance, or time period been expressly excluded from its coverage. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2017(2) , § 2) 
Chapter 36 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Motor Vehicle Code, G.L. 1956, § 31-1-1 et seq.; uniformity of vehicle regulations, G.L. 1956, § 31-12-11; powers of local authorities, G.L. 1956, § 31-12-12; local regulations to be posted, G.L. 1956, § 31-12-13. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 36-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Whenever any words and phrases used in this chapter are not defined in this section, but have the meaning respectively ascribed to them by G.L. 1956, § 31-1-2, any such definitions therein shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases in this chapter. 
    Alley or alleyway means a narrow street, usually without sidewalks, on which the rears or sides of buildings adjoin. 
    Authorized emergency vehicle means vehicles of the fire department (fire patrol), police vehicles, vehicles used by state marshals in the department of corrections, vehicles used by the state bomb squad within the division of state fire marshal, vehicles of municipal departments or public service corporations designated or authorized by the administrator as ambulances and emergency vehicles; and privately owned motor vehicles of volunteer firefighters or privately owned motor vehicles of volunteer ambulance drivers or attendants, as authorized by the department chief or commander and permitted by the state association of fire chiefs and state association of police chiefs joint committee for volunteer warning light permits. 
    Bus stop means an area on the roadway, adjacent to the curb or edge of the roadway, set aside for the boarding of, or alighting of, passengers from busses. 
    Commercial vehicle means any vehicle registered for commercial purposes, designed and used primarily for the transportation of goods, wares, and/or merchandise. 
    Curb means a stone or concrete edging of the sidewalk or pavement. 
    Curb loading zone means a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of a vehicle during the loading or unloading of materials and/or passengers. 
    Curbline means the prolongation of the lateral line of a curb, or in the absence of a curb, the lateral boundary line of the roadway. 
    Dismantled, junked, inoperable, or abandoned vehicles mean vehicles legally or physically incapable of being operated or which have not been duly registered according to law, or which do not have legal evidence of said lawful registration affixed thereto, or which lack to a substantial degree the equipment in good operating condition as required by laws to enable them to be registered, and further shall be deemed to include major parts thereof including bodies, engines, transmissions, rear ends, and the like, or any such vehicle which is leaking fuel or other harmful substance, or creates a substantial hazard which, if allowed to remain, is a detriment to the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city. 
    District. 
Rural district means any territory not included in a business or residence district, whether or not within the boundaries of a municipality. 
Urban district means territory continuous to and including any street which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry, or dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than 100 feet, for a distance of a quarter of a mile or more. 
    Freight curb loading zone means a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight. 
    Highway. 
Controlled access highway means every highway, street or roadway in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting land and other persons do have legal right of access to or from the same except at such points only and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such street, highway and/or roadway. 
Divided highway means a highway, roadway or street with separate roadways for traffic in opposite directions. 
Major highway means the roadway approach or approaches at an intersection normally carrying the greater (major) volume of vehicular traffic. 
Minor highway means the roadway approach or approaches at an intersection normally carrying a lessor (minor) volume of vehicular traffic. 
    Median means the portion of a divided street, roadway or highway separating the traveled ways of traffic in opposite directions. 
    No passing zone means a section of any street, roadway or highway designated by the public body or official having jurisdiction as one where overtaking and passing, or driving to the left of such roadway, street or highway, would be especially hazardous. 
    Pavement means that part of the roadway, street or highway having a constructed surface for the facilitation of vehicular traffic. 
    Police officer means every officer of the municipal police department, or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic, or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
    Public parking lot means a plot of land, or building, owned and/or leased by this city, not including highways, roadways and streets, upon which the parking of vehicles is regulated by signs. 
    Ramp means an inclined section of the way, over which traffic passes for the primary purpose of ascending or descending so as to make connections with other ways; or, an interconnecting roadway or traffic interchange, or any connection between highway facilities of different levels on which vehicles may enter or leave a designated highway. 
    Safety zone means the area or space officially set apart within the roadway, street or highway for the exclusive use of pedestrians, and which is protected, or is so marked or indicated, by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone. 
    Taxi stand means an area in the roadway, street or highway adjacent to the curb or edge of the roadway, street or highway set aside for the exclusive use of taxicabs for the stopping, standing, boarding or alighting of passengers. 
    Traffic division means the division of the department of public works of the city that is responsible or erection or maintenance of traffic signs, signals, devices and markings. 
    Traffic zone means a strip of roadway, street or highway intended to accommodate the forward movement of a single line of vehicles. 
(Code 1973, §§ 16-1-1-16-1-25, 16-13-4; Code 1994, §§ 38-1, 38-12; Ord. of 9-18-2017(1) , § 1) 
State Law reference- Definitions, G.L. 1956, § 31-1-2 et seq. 
Sec. 36-2. - Penalties. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section or elsewhere in this chapter, any person who violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $50.00 for parking related violations, and a fine not exceeding $100.00 and/or imprisonment for a period not exceeding ten days, or both such fine and imprisonment, for non-parking-related violations. 
(b)  The following are penalties for violations of the indicated provisions: 
Section Description Fine 36-7 Vehicle out of use $100.00 36-627 Trucking prohibited $40.00 36-282 Traffic obstructed $40.00 36-373(a)(1) Parked on sidewalk $40.00 36-373(a)(18) At an angle w/curb $40.00 36-373(a)(9) 50ft of rail crossing $40.00 36-373(a)(10) 20ft of driveway $40.00 36-373(a)(11) Obstructing traffic $40.00 36-373(a)(13) Parking at bridge $40.00 36-373(a)(5) Parked in crosswalk $40.00 36-373(a)(19) Parallel w/any curb painted yellow $40.00 36-373(a)(20) Prob. area/municipal lot $100.00 36-373(a)(14) Prohibited area $40.00 36-373(a)(21) Parked left wheel to curb $40.00 36-373(a)(2) Driveway parked or obstructing $40.00 36-373(a)(3) Within an intersection $40.00 36-373(a)(4) Parked in front of fire hydrant $100.00 36-373(a)(6) Parked within 20ft of crosswalk $40.00 36-373(a)(7) 30 ft. of a flashing light $40.00 36-373(a)(8) 30 ft. of safety zone $40.00 36-373(a)(11) Parking not to obstruct traffic $40.00 36-373(a)(12) Double parked $100.00 36-379 Parked commercial vehicle $100.00 36-380 Private property (1st offense) $100.00 36-382 Sweeper Tag $40.00 36-380 Private property (2nd offense) $200.00 36-417 Freight curb loading $40.00 36-419 Parked at bus/taxi stand $40.00 36-8 Abandonment of vehicle of public highway/property $250.00 36-438 Parking during/after snowstorm (1st offense) $50.00 36-438 Parking during/after snowstorm (2nd offense) $100.00 36-438 Parking during/after snowstorm (3rd offense) $200.00 36-439 Interfere with removal ice/snow (1st offense) $50.00 36-439 Interfere with removal ice/snow (2nd offense) $100.00 36-439 Interfere with removal ice/snow (3rd offense) $200.00 36-372 Obstructing roadway $40.00 36-386 Vehicle creating a nuisance (1st offense) $100.00 36-386 Vehicle creating a nuisance (2nd offense) $200.00 36-386 Vehicle creating a nuisance (3rd offense) Municipal Court Appearance 36-387 Winter parking ban $40.00  
(Code 1973, §§ 16-2-7, 16-2-9; Code 1994, § 38-7; Ord. of 2-28-2005(2); Ord. of 12-19-2011(1) ; Ord. of 9-18-2017(1) , § 1) 
Sec. 36-3. - Payment of fines; multiple violations relating to operation of vehicles; maintenance and equipment replacement fund. 
(a)  Payment of fines. Generally, a person charged with a violation of any traffic regulation relating to stopping, standing, parking and/or operation of vehicles, and notified in writing by a police officer to appear to answer such charges before the municipal court of the city, may, in lieu of such appearance, elect to appear, in person or through someone duly authorized by him in writing, before the clerk of the municipal court, admit the truth of the charge, and pay to such clerk of the court the designated fine, provided that such appearance, admission and payment be made at the office of such clerk of the court during the regular business hours, within seven days of such notification, and failure to appear shall be deemed a waiver of the right to dispose of such charge without personal appearance before the municipal court of the city. 
(b)  Notice of violation. The notice of violation provided in this section shall indicate the offense charged, the schedule of fines for such violations, the time within which the privilege of paying such fine by mail may be exercised, the place to which such fine may be mailed, and shall also contain such information as will enable the person charged to take advantage of the provisions of this section. Such notice shall be affixed to the motor vehicle that is the cause of the violation. 
(c)  Effect of payment of fines. The payment of a fine to the clerk of the municipal court, or by mail to the clerk of the police department, as provided in this chapter, for the violation of a traffic regulation pertaining to the stopping, standing, parking or operation of a motor vehicle shall be a final disposition of the charge, and such proceedings shall not be deemed criminal. 
(d)  Mailing payments. Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, any person charged with any of the aforesaid violations relating to stopping, standing or parking of vehicles may elect to mail in the violation tag to the clerk of the police department, accompanied by the payment of the designated fine, plus an additional $5.00 for processing, and the name and address of the violator. The privilege of paying such fine by mail, exercised within seven days from the date of the offense, and the date of depositing the payment of such fine in a depository maintained by the United States Postal Department for the collection of mail, and the postage cancellation, shall be prima facie evidence of the time of deposit. When mail is used for the payment of such fines, the payment may be made in cash or by check or money order. When such payment is attempted with a check drawn against insufficient funds, an additional penalty of $10.00 shall be imposed against the violator. When such payment is made in cash, it shall be at the risk of the sender, and the record of the clerk of the police department shall be conclusive as to receipt of such payment, and the amount thereof, in the absence of written evidence to the contrary. 
(e)  Effect of multiple violations relating to operation of motor vehicles. Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, disposition of a traffic violation charge relating to operation of a motor vehicle without personal appearance before the municipal court of the city may not be exercised by any person who, in the consecutive period of 12 months next preceding such charge, has been two times in the aggregate adjudged guilty by such municipal court of any violation of any regulation pertaining to operation of vehicles, or by any such person who has admitted the truth of such charge made against him under the provisions of this chapter. Further, notwithstanding anything contained in this section, no person shall dispose of or answer to a traffic violation charge relating to the operation of motor vehicles except by personal appearance in the municipal court of the city. In those cases where such a citation is issued for a violation relating to or preceding an accident which results in injury to a person or property damage, in all such cases, personal appearance must be made before a judge of the municipal court of the city, who, upon a plea, or finding of guilty, may impose any penalty authorized by ordinance or law. 
(f)  Maintenance and equipment replacement fund (C.A.R.E.). The municipal court and the city will deposit all funds earmarked for the police department equipment fund, which would be established as $10.00 from each citation issued and appearing before such municipal court, as well as the set payment of $10.00 from each citation issued and paid through the use of mail-in payments to the municipal court, or to the city. The chief of police and the administrative officer of the police department will be codirectors of such equipment fund, accountable to the director of public safety. The administrative officer of the police department will maintain the C.A.R.E. equipment fund, and make expenditures through a special account, as established. All expenditures shall be signed by the chief of police or the administrative officer and the director of public safety. 
(Code 1973, §§ 16-2-6, 16-2-8; Code 1994, § 38-8; Ord. of 1-10-2005(2); Ord. of 9-18-2017(1) , § 1) 
State Law reference- Nonmoving violations, G.L. 1956, § 45-6.1-1 et seq. 
Sec. 36-4. - Obedience to police officers; removal of vehicles. 
(a)  No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any police officer invested by law with authority to direct, control, or regulate traffic, including any order or direction pertaining to fire lane parking violations whether on private or public property. 
(b)  Any police officer, in his discretion, may remove, or cause to be removed, any vehicle left upon any roadway, street or highway, and not in the apparent charge of any person, or in violation of any of the regulations set out in this chapter, to another place on such street, or from such street to another street, or to any garage, which shall provide for the same, or to the police station, and there shall leave it, and possession of any such vehicle shall be withheld from any person entitled to possession thereof until any expenses incurred in the removal thereof shall have been paid. 
(Code 1973, § 16-3-1; Code 1994, § 38-9; Ord. of 9-18-2017(1) , § 1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions (as to subsection (a)), G.L. 1956, § 31-12-9; authority to regulate traffic by means of police officers, G.L. 1956, § 31-12-12(a)(2). 
Sec. 36-5. - Safety belt use; child restraints. 
(a)  Any person transporting a child under the age of seven, less than 54 inches in height and less than 80 pounds in a motor vehicle operated on the roadways, streets, or highways of this state, shall transport the child in any rear seating position of the motor vehicle properly restrained in a child restraint system approved by the United States Department of Transportation under Federal Standard 213. If the child is under seven years old but at least 54 inches in height, or at least 80 pounds the child shall be properly wearing a safety belt and/or shoulder harness approved by the Department of Transportation pursuant to Federal Standard 208 in any rear seating position of the motor vehicle. For the purpose of this section, applying to all parts of this section, the term "rear seating position" means any seating positions located behind the driver and front seat passenger. Under this subsection, a child must be properly restrained in the front seat if: 
(1)  The vehicle is not equipped with a back seat; or 
(2)  All rear seating positions are being utilized by other children. 
(b)  Any operator of a motor vehicle transporting a child who has attained the age of seven years but is under 18 years of age in any seating position within a motor vehicle operated on the roadways, streets, or highways of the state shall ensure that the passenger is properly wearing a safety belt and/or shoulder harness system, as defined by Federal Standard 208. Any operator of a motor vehicle under 18 years old shall properly wear a safety belt and/or shoulder harness system. This subsection applies only to those motor vehicles required by federal law to have safety belts. 
(c)  Any person deemed in violation of subsection (a) of this section shall be issued a citation. If the cited person presents proof of purchase of a federally approved child restraint system under Standard 213 to the police department within seven days of issuance, the department shall void the violation. If the individual fails to present proof of purchase, he or she shall be required to appear for a hearing before the traffic tribunal. 
(d)  Any operator of a motor vehicle transporting a person 18 years of age and older in any seating position of a motor vehicle operated on the roadways, streets or highways of this state shall ensure that the person be properly wearing a safety belt and/or shoulder harness system, as defined by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 208. The provisions of this subsection shall apply only to those motor vehicles required by federal law to have safety belts. 
(e)  Any person who is an operator of a motor vehicle shall be properly wearing a safety belt and/or shoulder harness system as defined by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 208 while the vehicle is in operation on any of the roadways, streets, or highways of this state. The provisions of this subsection shall apply only to those motor vehicles required by federal law to have safety belts. 
(f)  The provisions of subsections (b), (d) and (e) of this section shall not apply to a driver or passenger of: 
(1)  A passenger motor vehicle manufactured before July 1, 1966; 
(2)  A passenger motor vehicle in which the driver or passenger possesses a written verification from a licensed physician that the driver or passenger is unable to wear a safety seat belt system for physical or medical reasons. The verification time period shall not exceed 12 months at which time a new verification may be issued; 
(3)  A passenger motor vehicle which is not required to be equipped with a safety seat belt system under federal laws; or 
(4)  A passenger motor vehicle operated by a letter carrier of the United States Postal Service while performing the duties of a letter carrier. 
(g)  Violations of subsections (d) and (e) of this section shall be considered secondary offenses and no motor vehicle may be stopped by law enforcement agency for failure of an operator or passenger to wear a safety belt system or for any violation of subsections (c) or (d) of this section; provided, that a motor vehicle may be stopped for failure to comply with the child restraint system as described in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(Code 1973, § 16-9-22; Code 1994, § 38-101; Ord. of 9-18-2017(1) , § 1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-22-22. 
Sec. 36-6. - Opening and closing vehicle doors in streets. 
    No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the roadways, streets, or highways, available to moving traffic, unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done without interfering with the movement of other traffic, including pedestrians and bicycles on sidewalks, shoulders, or bicycle lanes. No person shall leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic, including pedestrians and bicycles on sidewalks, shoulders or bicycle lanes, for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers. 
(Code 1973, § 16-9-8; Code 1994, § 38-88; Ord. of 9-18-2017(1) , § 1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-21-14. 
Sec. 36-7. - Unattended vehicles; registration plates; dismantled, junked, inoperable, or abandoned vehicles. 
    A person owning, possessing, or having care of any vehicle of any description shall not store, or permit such vehicle to remain unoccupied, and out of use, in any roadway, street or highway, or part thereof, or in any parking lot owned and/or leased by the city, for a period in excess of 24 hours, and a person shall not allow any motor vehicle to stand or be parked on any roadway, street or highway unless it has thereon proper registration plates, front and rear. 
    Whenever it comes to the attention of the police department or the department of code enforcement and zoning that any dismantled, junked, inoperable, or abandoned vehicle is located on any property, public or private, without the consent of the property owner, the police department or the division of code enforcement and zoning, shall post or attach to the vehicle 48 hours prior to towing, a notification of a dismantled, junked, inoperable or abandoned motor vehicle indicating that the vehicle will be towed. If said vehicle is not moved within 48 hours, the police department or the division of code enforcement and zoning shall, through a licensed tow company, have the vehicle towed to the place of business and/or storage of the tow company. At that time, if a structure is located within or upon the premises at which the vehicle was located, a notice shall be left at the structure. If the name and address of the current registered owner has been determined, similar notice shall be sent by regular mail, postage prepaid, to that owner, which shall indicate the location at which the vehicle shall be redeemed. 
    Whenever it comes to the attention of the police department or the department of code enforcement and zoning that any dismantled, junked, inoperable, or abandoned vehicle exists on private property in the city with the consent of the property owner, a notice in writing shall be served upon the owner of the land where said motor vehicle is located and upon the vehicle's owner or last known owner notifying them of the existence of the violation and requesting its removal within three days. Said notice shall also include a summons to appear in the city municipal court, on a date certain, if the vehicle is not removed within the prescribed time. 
    Whenever it comes to the attention of the police department or the department of code enforcement and zoning that any dismantled, junked, inoperable, or abandoned vehicle is located on any property, public or private, with or without the consent of the property owner, and said vehicle is leaking fuel or other harmful substance, or creates a substantial hazard which, if allowed to remain, is a detriment to the health, safety, and welfare of the city, the police department of the division of code enforcement and zoning shall immediately tow the motor vehicle in question without prior notification. However, the owner of said vehicle shall be entitled to a full and fair hearing in the city municipal court within 14 days of the date that the owners have been given notice that the vehicle has been towed. 
(Code 1973, § 16-3-2; Code 1994, § 38-10; Ord. of 9-18-2017(1) , § 1) 
Sec. 36-8. - Abandonment of vehicle without removing trunk or locks prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon, on a premises accessible to children, any vehicle or conveyance which has a snaplock, or lock on a trunk, or rear deck lid, which may not be released or opened from inside such trunk, or rear deck lid, without first removing such locks, trunk, or deck lid from the vehicle. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the discarding or abandonment of any vehicles or motor vehicles on any public roadway, street or highway, or any other place or premises otherwise prohibited by ordinance or law. 
(Code 1973, § 16-3-3; Code 1994, § 38-11; Ord. of 9-18-2017(1) , § 1) 
Sec. 36-9. - Depositing debris on roadway. 
    No person shall throw or deposit upon any highway any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans, or any other substance likely to injure any person, animal, or vehicle upon the highway, or likely to deface the beauty or cleanliness of the highway, nor shall any person in removing snow from any driveway, public or private, leave the snow in any condition so as to constitute a hazard on the highway. 
(Code 1973, § 16-9-14; Code 1994, § 38-94; Ord. of 9-18-2017(1) , § 1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-22-9. 
Sec. 36-10. - Storage license required. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall deposit, store, keep or permit to be deposited, stored or kept in the open upon public or private property a dismantled, junked, inoperable, or abandoned vehicle, unless a license for such storage has theretofore been obtained from a proper authority. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2017(1) , § 1) 
Sec. 36-11. - Permission required for storage or keeping. 
    No person shall deposit, store, keep or permit to be deposited, stored or kept in the open upon public or private property a dismantled, unserviceable, junked or abandoned vehicle or one legally or physically incapable of being operated, unless permission for such storage has been obtained from the chief of police or the director of the department of code enforcement and zoning. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2017(1) , § 1) 
Secs. 36-12-36-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 36-37. - Powers and duties of public safety director. 
    Except as otherwise provided by the city council or by this article, the director of public safety shall have the power, and it shall be his duty, to designate one-way streets, loading zones, restricted and prohibited areas, through streets, pedestrian crosswalks, parking lanes, hospital zones, school zones, and restricted speed areas. The director of public safety shall also have the authority to determine the necessity for, and location of, stop signs, traffic lights, street markings, and all other signs, signals, markings and devices regulating traffic within the boundaries of the city. In making such decisions, the director shall consider the public safety and the need for adequate traffic flow and parking. 
(Code 1973, § 16-2-1; Code 1994, § 38-2) 
Sec. 36-38. - Training and certification of school crossing guards. 
(a)  Qualifications. Be it ordained that all school crossing guards shall: 
(1)  Be 18 years or older; 
(2)  Must clear in a criminal background check; 
(3)  Be physically capable of performing the duties and activities involved with performing this position; 
(4)  Must pass a pre-employment drug test; 
(5)  Shall be identifiable to the public by wearing assigned uniforms; and 
(6)  Must be certified by the police department as having successfully completed the training program. 
(b)  Authority of police department. The police department is hereby empowered to: 
(1)  Create a uniform crossing guard training program; and 
(2)  Issue certificates of completion to successful trainees. 
(c)  Funding. Costs associated with this program will be funded by the school district. 
(Code 1994, § 38-321; Ord. of 6-1-2005(4)) 
Sec. 36-39. - Designation of one-way streets, restricted parking zones, traffic control devices, etc.; notice to chief of police, traffic division. 
    When the director of public safety, in the exercise of his power given through section 36-37, has designated a one-way street, loading zone, restricted or prohibited parking area, through street, pedestrian crosswalk, taxicab stand, bus stop, parking lane, hospital zone, school zone, or restricted speed area, or has determined the necessity for, and the location of, a stop sign, traffic signal, street marking, or any other sign, signal, marking or device regulating traffic, he shall notify the chief of police, in writing, of such designation or determination. It shall then be the duty of the chief of police to notify the traffic division of the city of such order, and compliance with this section will be followed as provided in section 4-501 of the charter. 
(Code 1973, § 16-2-2; Code 1994, § 38-3) 
Sec. 36-40. - Signs or markings indicating angle parking. 
(a)  The director of public safety shall determine upon what streets, if any, angle parking shall be permitted, and shall mark or sign such streets, but such angle parking shall not be indicated upon any federal aid or state highway within the city unless the state traffic commission has determined, by resolution or order entered in its minutes, that the roadway is of sufficient width to permit angle parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic. 
(b)  Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the left side of the roadway. 
(Code 1973, § 16-12-2; Code 1994, § 38-232) 
Sec. 36-41. - Authority to temporarily close streets and detour traffic. 
    The city traffic division shall have the authority to declare any roadway, street, highway, or any part thereof, closed for the purpose of moving buildings, demolition of buildings, rebuilding of highways, sewer construction, water construction, gas construction, or telephone or electrical duct construction, because of the impossibilities of hazardous conditions of regular travel over the roadway, at the construction site, and shall detour traffic to another street, roadway or highway as may be deemed necessary. 
(Code 1973, § 16-4-11; Code 1994, § 38-52) 
Sec. 36-42. - Designation of public carrier stops and stands. 
    The traffic division and public safety director are hereby authorized to establish bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands, and stands for other passenger common carrier motor vehicles or conveyances on such public streets, in such places, and in such numbers as they deem necessary to the greater benefit and convenience of the public, and every such bus stop, stand and taxicab stand shall be designated by appropriate signs. 
(Code 1973, § 16-14-4; Code 1994, § 38-246) 
Sec. 36-43. - Traffic division to regulate, designate and maintain taxicab stands. 
    The city traffic division is hereby authorized to establish taxicab stand locations, and designate the number of taxicabs allowed to operate from any such stand. The traffic division shall place and maintain appropriate signs for such taxicab stands, as directed by the public safety director. 
(Code 1973, § 16-14-5; Code 1994, § 38-247) 
Secs. 36-44-36-73. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS, DEVICES AND MARKINGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Traffic control devices on local highways, G.L. 1956, § 31-13-3; authority to regulate traffic by means of police officers, G.L. 1956, § 31-12-12(a)(2). 

Sec. 36-74. - Drivers to obey traffic control devices. 
    The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable to him placed in accordance with the provisions law, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency. 
(Code 1973, § 16-4-1; Code 1994, § 38-41) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-13-4. 
Sec. 36-75. - Specifications. 
(a)  All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual and specifications under the state motor vehicle code act or by the legislative body of the city. 
(b)  All signs, signals and devices required under this article for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to the type and location throughout the city. 
(c)  All traffic control devices erected pursuant to this chapter and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this chapter shall be official traffic control devices. 
(Code 1973, § 16-4-2; Code 1994, § 38-42) 
State Law reference- Manual of traffic control devices, G.L. 1956, § 31-13-1. 
Sec. 36-76. - Presumption of authority. 
(a)  Whenever official traffic control devices are placed in position, approximately conforming to the requirements of this article, such devices shall be presumed to have been placed by the official act or direction of lawful authority. 
(b)  Any official traffic control device placed pursuant to the provisions of this article and purporting to conform to the lawful requirements pertaining to such devices shall be presumed to comply with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 16-4-2.1; Code 1994, § 38-43) 
Sec. 36-77. - Traffic control signal legend. 
(a)  Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting the words "go," "caution," or "stop," or exhibiting different colored lights successively one at a time, or with arrows, the following colors only shall be used, and the terms and lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows: 
(1)  Green alone or "go." 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at the place prohibits either a right or left turn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time the signal is exhibited. 
b.  Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk. 
(2)  Yellow alone or "caution" when shown following the green or "go" signal. 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal is warned by it that the red or "stop" signal will be exhibited immediately afterwards, and the vehicular traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection when the red or "stop" signal is exhibited. 
b.  Pedestrians facing the signal are advised by it that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway, and any pedestrian then starting to cross shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles. 
(3)  Red alone or "stop." 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until the green or "go" is shown alone, and shall not, prior to reaching the intersection, make any turn over or through private property in order to avoid the signal. A right hand turn shall be permitted after vehicular traffic reaches a complete stop, at intersections when safety would permit the a turn and no sign forbids it. 
b.  No pedestrian facing the signal shall enter the roadway unless he can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic. 
(4)  Red with green arrow. 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by the arrow, but shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection. 
b.  No pedestrian facing the signal shall enter the roadway unless he can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic. 
(5)  Red arrow. Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop and shall remain standing until the red arrow turns green. 
(b)  In the event an official traffic control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of the sign or marking, the stop shall be made at the signal 
(Code 1973, § 16-4-3; Code 1994, § 38-44) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, §§ 31-13-6, 31-13-7. 
Sec. 36-78. - Pedestrian control signs. 
    Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words "walk," "wait" or "don't walk" are in place, such signals shall indicate as follows: 
(1)  Pedestrians facing a "walk" signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal, and shall be given the right-of-way by drivers of all vehicles. 
(2)  No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction of a "wait" or "don't walk" signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the "walk" signal shall proceed to a sidewalk safety zone while the "wait" or "don't walk" signal is showing. 
(Code 1973, § 16-4-4; Code 1994, § 38-45; Ord. of 4-11-2005(5)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-13-8. 
Sec. 36-79. - Pedestrians crossing specific streets. 
    No pedestrian shall cross a roadway, street or highway on Broad Street and Dexter Street, other than in a crosswalk. 
(Code 1973, § 16-4-4; Code 1994, § 38-45(3); Ord. of 4-11-2005(5)) 
Sec. 36-80. - Flashing signals. 
    Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic sign or signal it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows: 
(1)  Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, or, if none, then before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign. 
(2)  Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past the signal only with caution. 
(3)  Flashing green (pedestrian signal). When a green lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or crosswalk past the signal only with caution. 
(Code 1973, § 16-4-5; Code 1994, § 38-46) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-13-9. 
Sec. 36-81. - Unauthorized signs, signals or markings. 
(a)  No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal, and no person shall place or maintain upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing on it any commercial advertising without the consent of the chief of police. This shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs. 
(b)  Every prohibited sign, signal, or marking is declared to be a public nuisance, and authorized agents of the city shall remove it or cause it to be removed without notice. 
(Code 1973, § 16-4-6; Code 1994, § 38-47) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-13-10. 
Sec. 36-82. - Injury to signs or devices. 
    No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to, or in fact, deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic control device, or any railroad sign or signal, or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or a part thereof. 
(Code 1973, § 16-9-30; Code 1994, § 38-109) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-13-11. 
Secs. 36-83-36-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DRIVERS' LICENSES, VEHICLE REGISTRATION, ETC. 

Sec. 36-106. - Operation of vehicle without evidence of registration. 
    No person shall operate, nor shall an owner knowingly permit to be operated, upon any roadway, street, highway, bicycle path or trail, any vehicle required to be registered under this article unless there has been issued a valid registration card therefor, and unless there shall be attached thereto, and displayed, a valid registration plate therefor by the registry of motor vehicles for the current year. 
(Code 1973, § 16-3-8; Code 1994, § 38-16) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-3-1. 
Sec. 36-107. - Display of plates. 
(a)  Registration plates issued for a motor vehicle or other conveyance, other than a motorcycle, trailer, transporter vehicle, in-transit vehicle or bailee engaged in business, or a motor vehicle owned by a duly authorized dealer in motorcycles and which is used in such dealer's business, shall be attached thereto one in the front and the other in the rear. The registration plate issued for a motorcycle, trailer, bailee, and a dealer's motor vehicle shall be attached to the rear thereof. 
(b)  Every registration plate shall at all times be securely fastened in a horizontal position to the vehicle for which it was issued, so as to prevent the plate from swinging at a height of not less than 12 inches from the ground measured from the bottom of such plate, in a place and position to be clearly visible, and shall be maintained free from foreign materials and in a condition to be clearly legible. 
(c)  All vehicles registered as passenger, commercial, trailer, motorcycle, suburban, farm, combination, taxi, radio operator, camper, public, racer tow, jitney, and antique must have displayed on them the registration plate commonly known as the general issuance "wave plate." This subsection does not apply to those registrants in possession of an alternative design plate as described in G.L. 1956, § 31-3-60 or any other specially authorized plate described in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 16-9-28; Code 1994, § 38-107) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-3-18. 
Sec. 36-108. - Driver's license. 
(a)  Every licensee shall have his operator's or chauffeur's license in his or her immediate possession at all times when operating a motor vehicle and shall display the license upon the demand of any peace office or inspector of the state division of motor vehicles and shall, upon request by any proper officer, write his name in the presence of that officer for the purpose of being identified. However, no person charged with violating this section shall be convicted if he produces in court or the office of the arresting officer an operator's or chauffeur's license previously issued to him and valid at the time of his arrest. 
(b)  Every school bus operator shall display in a prominent place in the bus he is operating both a valid chauffeur's license or a reasonable facsimile of it, and a valid school bus driver's certificate, both of which have been issued by this state under the provisions of this article. A display case shall be provided to display these documents by the registered owner. 
(Code 1973, § 16-3-19; Code 1994, § 38-19) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-10-27. 
Sec. 36-109. - Notice of change of address or name to the state. 
    Whenever any person, after applying for and receiving an operator's or chauffeur's license, shall move from the address named in such application or in the license issued to him, or when the name of the licensee is changed due to marriage or otherwise, such person shall, within ten days thereafter, notify the state division of motor vehicles, in writing, of his old and new addresses, or of such former and new names, and of the number of any license then held by him. 
(Code 1973, § 16-9-29; Code 1994, § 38-108) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-10-32. 
Sec. 36-110. - Permitting unauthorized persons to drive. 
    No person shall authorize or knowingly permit a motor vehicle owned by him or under his control to be driven upon any roadway, street or highway of the city by any person who is not authorized to drive such vehicle as set forth by state statutes. 
(Code 1973, § 16-3-17; Code 1994, § 38-18) 
Secs. 36-111-36-133. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - VEHICLE OPERATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 36-134. - Privileges of emergency vehicles. 
(a)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may: 
(1)  Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of any law; 
(2)  Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation; 
(3)  Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as he does not endanger life or property; 
(4)  Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions. 
(b)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an alleged violator of the law or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in G.L. 1956, § 31-12-7, but subject to the conditions stated in this section and in G.L. 1956, §§ 31-12-8 and 31-12-9. 
(Code 1973, § 16-2-4; Code 1994, § 38-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, §§ 31-12-7, 31-12-6(a). 
Sec. 36-135. - Operation on roadways laned for traffic. 
    Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for traffic, the following rules in addition to all others consistent with them shall apply: 
(1)  A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practical entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from the lane until the driver has first ascertained that the movement can be made with safety. 
(2)  Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway is clearly visible and the center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left turn or where the center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is proceeding and is sign-posted to give notice of the allocation. 
(3)  If official signs are erected directing slow-moving traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway, drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of the signs. 
(Code 1973, § 16-4-10; Code 1994, § 38-51(b)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-15-11. 
Sec. 36-136. - Driving through safety zone. 
    No vehicle shall, at any time, be driven through or within a safety zone. 
(Code 1973, § 16-9-10; Code 1994, § 38-90) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-22-5. 
Sec. 36-137. - Operation on play streets. 
    No person shall drive a vehicle upon any play street, or portion thereof, except drivers of vehicles having business, or whose residences are within such closed areas, and then any such driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof. 
(Code 1973, § 16-4-7; Code 1994, § 38-48) 
Sec. 36-138. - Driving on limited access roadway. 
    No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited-access roadway, street or highway, except at such entrances and exits as are established by the public authority. 
(Code 1973, § 16-9-11; Code 1994, § 38-91) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-15-14. 
Sec. 36-139. - Restrictions upon use of streets by certain vehicles. 
(a)  The city traffic division and public safety director are hereby authorized to determine and designate those heavily traveled streets, or parts thereof, upon which shall be prohibited the use of the roadway by motor-driven cycles, bicycles, horse-drawn vehicles, or other nonmotorized traffic, and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
(b)  When signs are so erected giving notice thereof, no person shall disobey the restrictions stated in such signs and so stated in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 16-17-4; Code 1994, § 38-113) 
Sec. 36-140. - One-way streets. 
(a)  Upon those streets, roadways and highways, or parts thereof, and in those alleys designated as being one-way, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction, when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(b)  No person shall park a vehicle on any one-way streets or highways, except in the places designated. 
(Code 1973, §§ 16-3-24, 16-7-2; Code 1994, §§ 38-123, 38-182) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions (as to subsection (a)), G.L. 1956, §31-15-9; authority to establish one-way streets, G.L. 1956, § 31-12-12(a)(4). 
Sec. 36-141. - Intervals between vehicles. 
    The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard of the speed of such vehicles and traffic, and conditions of the roadway, street or highway, and shall, whenever traveling within a business or residential district, and whenever traffic permits, leave sufficient space so that an overtaking vehicle may enter and occupy such space without danger. This provision shall not apply to a caravan under escort, or to a funeral procession. 
(Code 1973, § 16-3-15; Code 1994, § 38-119) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-15-12. 
Secs. 36-142-36-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OPERATION ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROAD; OVERTAKING AND PASSING 

Sec. 36-166. - Passing of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions. 
    Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right, and upon roadways having width for more than one line of traffic in each direction. Each driver shall give to the other at least one-half of the main traveled portion of the roadway, as nearly as possible. 
(Code 1973, § 16-3-10; Code 1994, § 38-114) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-15-3. 
Sec. 36-167. - Overtaking on the left. 
    The following rules shall govern overtaking of vehicles proceeding in the same direction, subject to the limitations, exceptions and special rules stated in this section: 
(1)  The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall give a timely audible signal, and shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance, and shall not again drive to the right of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. 
(2)  Except when overtaking and passing to the right is permitted, the driver of the overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right, in favor of the overtaking vehicle on audible signal, and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. 
(Code 1973, § 16-3-12; Code 1994, § 38-116 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-15-4. 
Sec. 36-168. - Overtaking on the right. 
(a)  The driver of a motor vehicle may overtake and pass on the right of another vehicle only under the following conditions: 
(1)  When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn. 
(2)  Upon a one-way street, or upon any roadway on which traffic is restricted to one direction of movement, where the roadway is free from obstructions and of sufficient width to allow for two or more lines of moving vehicles. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle proceeding in the same direction upon the right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. In no event shall such movement be made by driving off the pavement or traveled portion of the roadway. 
(Code 1973, § 16-3-11; Code 1994, § 38-115) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-15-5. 
Sec. 36-169. - Clearance for overtaking. 
    No vehicle shall be driven to the left of the center of the roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless such left-hand portion of the roadway is completely visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction, or any vehicle overtaken. In every event, the overtaking vehicle must return to the right side of the roadway before coming within 100 feet of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction. 
(Code 1973, § 16-3-22; Code 1994, § 38-122) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-15-6. 
Sec. 36-170. - Places where overtaking prohibited. 
(a)  No vehicle shall, at any time, be driven to the left of the roadway, street or highway under the following conditions: 
(1)  When approaching the crest of a grade, or upon a curve in the highway, where the driver's view is obstructed within such distance as to create a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach in the opposite direction. 
(2)  When approaching within 100 feet of, or traversing, any intersection or railroad crossing. 
(3)  When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any bridge. 
(b)  The limitations in subsection (a) of this section shall not apply upon a one-way street, roadway or highway. 
(Code 1973, § 16-3-14; Code 1994, § 38-118) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-15-7. 
Secs. 36-171-36-193. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SPEED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Speed restrictions, G.L. 1956, § 31-14-1 et seq. 

Sec. 36-194. - State speed laws applicable; posted speed limits. 
    The state laws regulating the speeding of vehicles shall be applicable upon all roadways, streets and highways within the city, except as provided under G.L. 1956, § 31-14-5, in which event it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of any speed so declared by this division, when signs are in place giving notice thereof. Those roadways, streets and highways, or parts thereof so designated by the city traffic division are hereby regulated by posted speeds. 
(Code 1973, § 16-5-1; Code 1994, § 38-141) 
Sec. 36-195. - Regulation of speed by traffic signals; obedience to posted speed signs. 
(a)  The city traffic division is hereby authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner, at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district, or at intersections, and erect appropriate signs or signals giving notice thereof. 
(b)  The city traffic division shall hereby have the authority to regulate speed conditions on streets deemed hazardous and unsafe by traffic, pedestrians, or other investigations, so that certain speed regulations shall be applicable upon specified streets, or in certain areas, in which event it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle or other conveyance at a speed in excess of any speed so declared in this division when signs are in place giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1973, § 16-5-2; Code 1994, § 38-142) 
Sec. 36-196. - Reasonable and prudent speeds; penalty for violation. 
(a)  No person shall drive a vehicle or conveyance upon a roadway, street or highway of the city at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the existing conditions, and having regard to the actual and potential hazards thereof. In any event, speed shall be controlled as may be deemed necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle, or other conveyance, on, or entering, the roadway, street or highway, in compliance with all legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care. 
(b)  Violation of this section shall carry the following penalties: 
(1)  One to ten miles per hour over the speed limit: $50.00. 
(2)  Eleven or more miles per hour over the speed limit will require a municipal court appearance. Upon a plea or finding of guilty, such violator may be fined, but not limited to, $10.00 per mile for each and every mile per hour over the speed limit. 
(Code 1973, § 16-5-3; Code 1994, § 38-143) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-14-1. 
Sec. 36-197. - Slow traffic. 
    Upon all roadways, streets and highways of the city, any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall be driven in the right-hand lane, if available for traffic, or as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, street or highway, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction, or when preparing for a left turn at an intersection, or a turn into a private road or driveway. 
(Code 1973, § 16-5-4; Code 1994, § 38-144) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-15-2. 
Secs. 36-198-36-217. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RIGHT-OF-WAY; STOP SIGNS; YIELD SIGNS 

Sec. 36-218. - Yielding to emergency vehicle. 
(a)  Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle equipped with at least one lighted lamp exhibiting any one or combination of red, blue, or white light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle, and producing an audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle, or bell, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in that position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway. 
(Code 1973, § 16-2-4; Code 1994, § 38-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-17-6. 
Sec. 36-219. - Right-of-way in absence of signs or signals. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection from a different roadway, street or highway. 
(b)  When two vehicles enter an intersection from different roadways, streets or highways at approximately the same time, the driver on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the driver on the right. 
(c)  The right-of-way rules declared in subsections (a) and (b) of this section are modified at through roadways, and as otherwise stated in this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 16-8-9; Code 1994, § 38-209) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 31-17-1. 
Sec. 36-220. - Obedience to stop and yield signs. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign is required to stop before entering the crosswalk, on the near side of the intersection, or, if there is no crosswalk, at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. 
(b)  Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway, before entering the intersection. 
(Code 1973, § 16-8-3; Code 1994, § 38-203) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions (as to subsection (b)), G.L. 1956, § 31-20-9. 
Sec. 36-221. - Vehicles entering stop intersection. 
    Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian intending to cross the lane of traffic in a crosswalk or any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another highway or which is approaching so closely on the highway as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when the driver is moving across or within the intersection. 
(Code 1973, § 16-8-4; Code 1994, § 38-204) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-7-4(b). 
Sec. 36-222. - Vehicles entering yield intersection. 
    The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall, in obedience to the sign, slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and, if required for safety to stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. After slowing or stopping, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian intending to cross the lane of traffic in a crosswalk or any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the intersection. 
(Code 1973, § 16-8-5; Code 1994, § 38-205) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-7-4(c). 
Sec. 36-223. - Signs required at through streets. 
    Whenever any ordinance of the city designates and describes a through street, it shall be the duty of the traffic division to place and maintain a stop or, on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation at any intersection, a yield sign, on each and every street and roadway intersecting such through street, unless traffic at any such intersection is controlled at all times by traffic control signals; provided, however, that at the intersection of two such through streets or at the intersection of a through street and a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs shall be erected at the approaches of either of such streets, as may be determined by the city traffic division upon the basis of an engineering and traffic study. 
(Code 1973, § 16-8-1; Code 1994, § 38-201) 
Sec. 36-224. - Through streets designated. 
    The following streets are hereby designated as through streets: 
(1)  Broad Street, from the Pawtucket city line north to the Cumberland town line. 
(2)  Dexter Street, from the Pawtucket city line north to Lonsdale Avenue. 
(3)  Lonsdale Avenue, from the Pawtucket city line north to the Lincoln town line. 
(4)  Roosevelt Avenue, from the Pawtucket city line north to the Pawtucket city line. 
(Code 1973, § 16-8-10; Code 1994, § 38-210) 
State Law reference- Authority to designate through streets, G.L. 1956, § 31-12-12(a)(6). 
Secs. 36-225-36-241. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - TURNING AND SIGNALING 

Sec. 36-242. - Required position and method of turning at intersections. 
(a)  Right turns are as follows: 
(1)  Both the approach for the right turn, and a right turn, shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, street or highway. 
(2)  Pedestrians intending to cross a lane of traffic which is required to stop or yield by a red traffic light, stop or yield sign or other traffic control device shall be granted the right-of-way. 
(b)  Left turns onto two-way streets are as follows: 
(1)  At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof, and bypassing to the right of such centerline where it enters the intersection, and after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made within that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection. 
(2)  Pedestrians intending to cross a lane of traffic which is required to stop or yield by a red traffic light, stop or yield sign or other traffic control device shall be granted the right-of-way. 
(c)  Left turns onto other than two-way roadways: 
(1)  At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways, the driver of the vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle, and after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered. 
(2)  Pedestrians intending to cross a lane of traffic which is required to stop or yield by a red traffic light, stop or yield sign, or other traffic control device, shall be granted the right-of-way. 
(Code 1973, § 16-6-1; Code 1994, § 38-161) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-16-2. 
Sec. 36-243. - Obedience to turning markers, authority to place. 
    When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the direction of such indications. 
(Code 1973, § 16-6-2; Code 1994, § 38-162) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-16-3. 
Sec. 36-244. - Obedience to no-turn signs. 
    Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left, or U-turns are permitted, no driver of a vehicle or conveyance shall disobey the directions of such signs. 
(Code 1973, § 16-6-4; Code 1994, § 38-164) 
State Law reference- Obedience to traffic control devices, G.L. 1956, § 31-13-4. 
Sec. 36-245. - Limitations on turning around. 
    The driver of any vehicle or conveyance shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any roadway, street or highway in a business district, and shall not, upon any other street, so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(Code 1973, § 16-6-5; Code 1994, § 38-165) 
State Law reference- U-turns generally, G.L. 1956, § 31-16-4; authority to regulate turns, G.L. 1956, § 31-12-12(a)(9). 
Sec. 36-246. - Prohibited turning movements. 
    Restricted turning movements are hereby established within the city and made a part of this division, in which case the turning of vehicles and/or conveyances upon the roadways, streets or highways of the city are prohibited. 
(Code 1973, § 16-6-6; Code 1994, § 38-166) 
Sec. 36-247. - Method of turning; use of turn signals. 
(a)  No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle is in proper position upon the roadway, as required in the general laws of the state, or turn a vehicle to enter a private road or driveway, or otherwise turn a vehicle from a direct course, or move right or left upon a roadway, unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. 
(b)  No person shall turn any vehicle or conveyance without giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided in this division, if any other traffic may be affected by such movement. 
(Code 1973, § 16-6-7; Code 1994, § 38-167) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions (as to subsection (a)), G.L. 1956, § 31-16-5. 
Sec. 36-248. - Time of signaling turn. 
    A signal of intention to turn right or left when required shall be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the vehicle before turning. 
(Code 1973, § 16-6-7; Code 1994, § 38-167) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-16-6. 
Sec. 36-249. - Method of giving signals. 
    Any stop or turn signal when required in this division shall be given either by means of the hand and arm or by a signal lamp or mechanical signal device, except as otherwise provided. 
(Code 1973, § 16-6-7; Code 1994, § 38-167) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-16-8. 
Sec. 36-250. - Vehicles on which mechanical signal devices required. 
    Any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be equipped with, and required signal shall be given by, a signal lamp or mechanical signal device when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left outside limit of the body, cab, or load of the motor vehicle exceeds 24 inches, or when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit of the body or load of it exceeds 14 feet. The latter measurement shall apply to any single vehicle, and/or to any combination of vehicles. 
(Code 1973, § 16-6-7; Code 1994, § 38-167) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-16-9. 
Sec. 36-251. - Manner of giving arm signals. 
    All signals required in this division when given by hand and arm shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner and the signals shall indicate as follows: 
(1)  Left turn: Hand and arm extended horizontally; 
(2)  Right turn: Hand and arm extended upward; 
(3)  Stop or decrease speed: Hand and arm extended downward. 
(Code 1973, § 16-6-7; Code 1994, § 38-167) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-16-9. 
Secs. 36-252-36-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - SPECIAL STOPS 

Sec. 36-281. - Emerging from alley, driveway or building. 
    The driver of a vehicle within a business or residential district, emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk, or onto a sidewalk area extending across any alley or driveway, and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision; and upon entering the roadway, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such roadway, street or highway. 
(Code 1973, § 16-8-6; Code 1994, § 38-206) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-20-10. 
Sec. 36-282. - Entering intersection or crosswalk when traffic obstructed. 
    No driver shall enter an intersection or marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. 
(Code 1973, § 16-8-7; Code 1994, § 38-207) 
Sec. 36-283. - Obedience to signal indicating approach of train. 
(a)  Whenever a person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver of such vehicle shall stop within 50 feet, but not less than 15 feet, from the nearest rail of such railroad, and shall not proceed until he can do so safely. The foregoing requirements shall apply when: 
(1)  A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train. 
(2)  A crossing gate is lowered, or when a human flagman gives or continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train. 
(3)  A railroad train approaching within approximately 1,500 feet of the roadway, street or highway crossing emits a signal audible from a distance and such railroad train, by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing, is an immediate hazard. 
(4)  An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to such crossing. 
(b)  No person shall drive any vehicle or conveyance through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier that is closed or is being opened or closed. 
(Code 1973, § 16-8-8; Code 1994, § 38-208) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, §§ 31-20-1, 31-20-2. 
Secs. 36-284-36-314. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - PROCESSIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate or prohibit processions or assemblages on highways, G.L. 1956, § 31-12-12(a)(3). 

Sec. 36-315. - Driving through a funeral or other procession. 
    No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while such procession is in motion, and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required by this division. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signs or police officers. 
(Code 1973, § 16-9-3; Code 1994, § 38-83) 
State Law reference- Driving between vehicles in funeral processions, G.L. 1956, § 31-27-16. 
Sec. 36-316. - Driving in a procession. 
    Each driver of a vehicle in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway, street or highway as practicable, and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practicable and safe. 
(Code 1973, § 16-9-4; Code 1994, § 38-84) 
Sec. 36-317. - Funeral processions to be identified. 
    A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other identifying insignia, or by the display of the vehicles' headlights and taillights in operation, or by such other method as may be determined and designated by the traffic division. 
(Code 1973, § 16-9-5; Code 1994, § 38-85) 
Secs. 36-318-36-337. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - MISCELLANEOUS 

Sec. 36-338. - Starting parked vehicle. 
    No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked unless or until such movement can be done with reasonable safety. 
(Code 1973, § 16-3-20; Code 1994, § 38-121) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-16-1. 
Sec. 36-339. - Following fire apparatus. 
    The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500 feet, or drive into or park such vehicle within the block area where such fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(Code 1973, § 16-9-1; Code 1994, § 38-81) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-22-7. 
Sec. 36-340. - Crossing fire hose. 
    No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the fire department, when laid down on any roadway, street or highway, or private driveway, to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department officer in command. 
(Code 1973, § 16-9-2; Code 1994, § 38-82) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-22-7. 
Sec. 36-341. - Vehicles not to be operated over streets closed for repairs. 
    No person shall drive, or cause to be driven, any vehicle over that roadway, street or highway, or part thereof, which is being mended, repaired or paved, if such street, roadway or highway is wholly closed to travel. 
(Code 1973, § 16-3-26; Code 1994, § 38-125) 
Sec. 36-342. - Driving on sidewalks. 
    The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon or within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway. 
(Code 1973, § 16-9-6; Code 1994, § 38-86) 
State Law reference- Right-of-way on sidewalks, G.L. 1956, § 31-18-18; stop when crossing sidewalk, G.L. 1956, § 31-20-10. 
Sec. 36-343. - Restrictions on backing. 
    The driver of a vehicle shall not back such vehicle unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(Code 1973, § 16-9-7; Code 1994, § 38-87) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-22-2. 
Sec. 36-344. - Turning and backing prohibited on certain streets. 
    No person shall turn around or back up, or cause to be turned around or backed up, any vehicle into any of the following specified streets, except in an emergency: Broad Street, Dexter Street, Lonsdale Avenue, Roosevelt Avenue. 
(Code 1973, § 16-3-25; Code 1994, § 38-124) 
Sec. 36-345. - Coasting prohibited. 
    The driver of a motor vehicle, when traveling upon a downgrade, shall not coast with the gears of such vehicle in neutral. The driver of a commercial vehicle, when traveling upon a downgrade, shall not coast with the clutch disengaged. 
(Code 1973, § 16-3-18; Code 1994, § 38-120) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-22-6. 
Secs. 36-346-36-363. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Stopping, standing and parking, G.L. 1956, § 31-21-1 et seq.; violation of parking regulations, G.L. 1956, § 12-14-12; authority to regulate standing or parking of vehicles, G.L. 1956, § 31-12-12(a)(1). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 36-364. - Application of article. 
    The provisions of this article prohibiting the standing, stopping and/or parking of a vehicle or conveyance shall apply at all times, or at those times specified in this article, or as indicated on official signs, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or official traffic control device. 
(Code 1973, § 16-15-1; Code 1994, § 38-250) 
Sec. 36-365. - Regulations not exclusive. 
    The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles or conveyances in specified places or at specified times. 
(Code 1973, § 16-15-2; Code 1994, § 38-251) 
Sec. 36-366. - Parking signs required. 
    Whenever, by this article or any other ordinance of the city, any parking time limit is imposed, or parking is prohibited on designated roadways or in municipal parking lots, it shall be the duty of the city traffic division to erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are erected and in place at the time of the alleged offense. 
    Except that no such signs shall be required for the prohibition of parking or leaving of a vehicle of any type unattended on any street, road alley, lane, thoroughfare, park or public grounds in the City of Central Falls during the period of December 1st through April 1st of the next year between the hours of 1:00 am and 6:00 am. 
(Code 1973, § 16-15-8; Code 1994, § 38-257; Ord. of 12-19-2011(2) ) 
Sec. 36-367. - Measurements controlling parking and prohibited parking areas. 
    Whenever there appears, in this article, a reference to the distance along one street, or from the intersection of another street, then such measurement shall be construed to mean the point of tangency of the curve of such street in question and along such street the appropriate distance stated. 
(Code 1973, § 16-15-10; Code 1994, § 38-260) 
Sec. 36-368. - Parking privileges for disabled. 
    No penalty shall be imposed upon any person with a disability issued a disability parking privilege placard or sticker pursuant to G.L. 1956, §§ 31-28-7, 31-27-7.1 or 31-29-5, nor from the motor vehicle transporting the person with a disability, provided that upon that vehicle there is displayed a disability parking placard or sticker for parking on the highways or in a space for a longer period of time than other persons are permitted to park on the highways or in a space. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorize that person to park in any place at any time where parking is prohibited. 
Sec. 36-369. - Standing or parking close to curb. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway, street or highway in the city where there are adjacent curbs shall be stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of such vehicle parallel to and within 12 inches of the right-hand curb. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a one-way street, roadway or highway in the city, where there are adjacent curbs and left-hand parking is permitted upon such a roadway, shall be so stopped or parked with the left-hand wheels of such vehicle parallel to and within 12 inches of the left-hand curb. 
(Code 1973, § 16-12-1; Code 1994, § 38-231) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions (as to subsection (a)), G.L. 1956, § 31-21-7; authority to provide (as provided in subsection (b)), G.L. 1956, § 31-21-8. 
Sec. 36-370. - Obedience to angle parking signs and markings. 
    On those streets which have been signed or marked by the city traffic division for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. 
(Code 1973, § 16-12-3; Code 1994, § 38-233) 
Sec. 36-371. - Parking not to obstruct traffic. 
    No person shall park a vehicle upon a roadway, street or highway, other than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of such roadway, street or highway for the free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1973, § 16-13-2; Code 1994, § 38-235) 
Sec. 36-372. - Vehicles obstructing the roadway. 
    The operator of a truck, semitrailer or tractor-trailer shall not stop, stand or park such vehicle at any time for the purpose of loading or unloading debris, construction materials, merchandise or equipment, so as to obstruct more than one-half of the traveled roadway, street or highway. 
(Code 1973, § 16-9-13; Code 1994, § 38-93) 
Sec. 36-373. - Stopping, standing or parking prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk; 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway; 
(3)  Within an intersection; 
(4)  Within eight feet of a fire hydrant; 
(5)  On a crosswalk; 
(6)  Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection; 
(7)  Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway; 
(8)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb, or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the traffic authority indicates a different length by signs or markings; 
(9)  Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing; 
(10)  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station, and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of the entrance (when properly sign-posted); 
(11)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic; 
(12)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street; 
(13)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel; 
(14)  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping; 
(15)  At any curb cut or ramp for persons with disabilities; 
(16)  On any bicycle lane, trail or path; 
(17)  Upon any crosshatched access aisle adjacent to disability parking spaces; 
(18)  At an angle with the curbing where legal parking is permitted, unless otherwise indicated by signs and/or markings; 
(19)  Parallel with any curbing that is painted yellow; 
(20)  In any prohibited parking area of a municipal parking lot, when posted; or 
(21)  With the left wheels thereof next to the curb. 
(b)  The following vehicles are exempt from the prohibitions contained in subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)  School buses or worker transport buses that are loading or unloading children or workers, provided that the school bus or worker transport bus operates its flashing bus safety lights; 
(2)  Subject to the provisions of G.L. 1956, § 31-21-6, vehicles that are momentarily stopped, standing, or parked to admit or discharge passengers; 
(3)  Vehicles that are momentarily stopped, standing, or parked for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property; 
(4)  Vehicles that are owned or operated by the state or a city or town when the vehicle must stop, stand, or park to perform maintenance or repair work on an area where stopping, standing or parking is prohibited under the provisions of subsection (a) of this section; 
(5)  Vehicles that are disabled in such a manner and to such extent that the vehicle operator cannot avoid stopping or temporarily leaving the disabled vehicle in an area where stopping, standing or parking is prohibited under the provisions of subsection (a) of this section; 
(6)  Vehicles that are momentarily stopped to allow oncoming traffic to pass before making a right or left-hand turn, or in preparation for or while negotiating an exit from the road. 
(c)  No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any prohibited parking area, or away from a curb such a distance as is unlawful. 
(Code 1973, § 16-13-1; Code 1994, § 38-234) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, §§ 31-21-4, 31-21-5. 
Sec. 36-374. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
    No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway, street or highway of the city for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying such vehicle for sale. 
(2)  Displaying of commercial advertising signs on any parked vehicles for the purpose of directing customers to any business establishment. 
(3)  Washing, greasing or repairing of vehicles, except repairs necessitated by emergency. 
(Code 1973, § 16-13-3; Code 1994, § 38-236) 
Sec. 36-375. - Parking adjacent to schools. 
(a)  The city traffic division is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school property, when such parking, in their opinion, interferes with traffic or creates a hazardous situation. 
(b)  When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon either side of a street adjacent to any school property, as authorized in this section, no person shall park a vehicle or conveyance in any such designated place. 
(Code 1973, § 16-13-4; Code 1994, § 38-237) 
Sec. 36-376. - Parking prohibited on narrow streets. 
(a)  The city traffic division is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking, either side, on two-way streets when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet, or upon one side of a street, as indicated by such signs, when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet. 
(b)  When official signs are erected prohibiting parking on narrow streets, as authorized in this section, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of such sign. 
(Code 1973, § 16-13-5; Code 1994, § 38-238) 
Sec. 36-377. - Standing or parking on one-way streets. 
    The city traffic division is hereby authorized to erect signs upon the left-hand side of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles, and when such signs are in place, no person shall stand or park any vehicle or conveyance upon such left-hand side in violation of such sign. 
(Code 1973, § 16-13-6; Code 1994, § 38-239) 
Sec. 36-378. - No stopping, standing or parking near hazardous or congested areas. 
    When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places, as authorized in this section, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle or conveyance in any such designated place or area. 
(Code 1973, § 16-13-7; Code 1994, § 38-240(b)) 
Sec. 36-379. - Parking of commercial vehicles. 
(a)  No person shall park a commercial vehicle upon any roadway or street of any residential district between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(b)  No person shall park or cause to be parked upon any roadway, street or highway of the city a vehicle with a load capacity in excess of three-fourths of a ton. 
(Code 1973, § 16-13-8; Code 1994, § 38-241) 
Sec. 36-380. - Parking on private property. 
    To stop illegal parking on private property, and the inconvenience to homeowners, the following method is hereby established: 
(1)  The owner or caretaker of the private property shall sign an official complaint with the police department designating the illegally parked vehicle and the registration number and physical description thereof. 
(2)  The police department shall tow, or cause to be towed, such vehicle, and such vehicle shall be impounded and stored with the towing company. The cost of such towing and storage of such vehicle shall be paid by the last registered owner of such vehicle. 
(Code 1973, § 16-13-9; Code 1994, § 38-242) 
Sec. 36-381. - Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets. 
    When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets described in such schedule of streets and made part of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 16-15-3; Code 1994, § 38-252) 
Sec. 36-382. - Parking prohibited during certain times on certain streets. 
    When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle between the hours or days specified upon any streets described in such schedule of streets and made a part of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 16-15-4; Code 1994, § 38-253) 
Sec. 36-383. - Stopping, standing, parking prohibited at all times on certain streets. 
    When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle at any time upon the streets described in such schedule of streets and made a part of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 16-15-5; Code 1994, § 38-254) 
Sec. 36-384. - Stopping, standing, parking prohibited at certain times on certain streets. 
    When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle between the hours specified, upon any of the streets described in such schedule of streets and made a part of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 16-15-6; Code 1994, § 38-255) 
Sec. 36-385. - Parking time limited on certain streets and municipal parking lots. 
    When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for longer than the hours specified in the municipal parking lots, or upon those streets described in such schedule of streets and made a part of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 16-15-7; Code 1994, § 38-256) 
Sec. 36-386. - Vehicles stopping in roadway. 
    The operator of a vehicle shall not stop such vehicle in the traveled portion of the roadway, street or highway of the city for the purpose of conducting a conversation, dropping off passengers, or picking up passengers, thereby interfering with the normal flow of traffic. 
(Code 1973, § 16-9-15; Code 1994, § 38-95; Ord. of 3-14-2005(2)) 
Sec. 36-387. - Winter parking ban on city streets. 
(1)  No person shall park or leave unattended a vehicle of any type on any street, road, alley, lane, thoroughfare, park or public grounds in the City of Central Falls during the period of December 1st through April 1st of the next year between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(2)  The parking or leaving of any vehicle in violation of this section shall subject the owner of the vehicle any and all sanctions and fines imposed for violations of city parking ordinances including but not limited to; section 36-440 of the Code of Ordinances empowering the chief of police the authority to summarily remove or cause to be removed any vehicle in violation of this ordinance. 
(3)  Any vehicle so removed may be redeemed by the owner of said vehicle upon payment of all towing charges, storage charges and other expenses as required by law. 
(Ord. of 12-19-2011(3) ) 
Secs. 36-388-36-415. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LOADING ZONES, TAXICAB STANDS, ETC. 

Sec. 36-416. - Standing in passenger curb loading zone. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time, other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone or bus stop, during hours when the regulations are applicable to such curb zone. 
(Code 1973, § 16-14-2; Code 1994, § 38-244) 
Sec. 36-417. - Standing in freight curb loading zone. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, other than a registered commercial vehicle, for any purpose or length of time, other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery, or pickup, and loading of materials, in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone, during hours when the regulations are applicable to such zone. 
(Code 1973, § 16-14-3; Code 1994, § 38-245) 
Sec. 36-418. - Stopping, standing, parking of buses and taxicabs regulated. 
(a)  The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any roadway, street or highway at any place other than a bus stop or stand so designated as provided in this division. 
(b)  The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any roadway at any place for the purpose of loading/unloading passengers and/or baggage other than at a bus stop or passenger loading zone so designated as provided in this division, except in cases of emergency. 
(c)  The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop on a public street in such a manner that the bus, when stopped to load or unload passengers and/or baggage, shall be in a position with the right front wheel of such vehicle not further than 18 inches from the curb, and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not to impede the movement of vehicular traffic. 
(d)  The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any roadway at any place other than in a stand so designated in this division. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations, for the purpose of expeditious loading or unloading passengers. 
(Code 1973, § 16-14-6; Code 1994, § 38-248) 
Sec. 36-419. - Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop or stand, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the loading or unloading of passengers, when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(Code 1973, § 16-14-7; Code 1994, § 38-249) 
Secs. 36-420-36-436. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SNOWSTORM EMERGENCIES 

Sec. 36-437. - Implementation of emergency parking ban. 
    Whenever the forecast by the United States Weather Bureau or any other special weather service predicts a snowstorm disturbance of severity for this area*, it shall be the duty of the public safety director and/or the chief of police to declare an emergency parking ban, for the purpose of preservation of the public safety and/or the removal of snow, ice, sleet, and/or slush, on all public streets, roadways or highways of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 16-19-1; Code 1994, § 38-291; Ord. of 9-14-2015(1) , § 1) 
Sec. 36-438. - Parking prohibited during/after certain snowstorms. 
    All parking is prohibited on all roadways, streets or highways of the city between the hours of 12:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. during the months of November, December, January, February and March during a snowstorm whenever the snow may reach a depth of two or more inches, and whenever such parking occurs less than six hours after such snowstorm of such two-inch depth. 
(Code 1973, § 16-19-2; Code 1994, § 38-292; Ord. of 12-14-1987(3), § 1; Ord. of 9-14-2015(1) , § 1) 
Sec. 36-439. - Parking interfering with the removal of snow, ice and slush prohibited. 
    No person shall park a motor vehicle, or other conveyance or other vehicle by whatsoever means propelled, so as to interfere with the orderly removal of snow, ice, slush, etc., from the roadways, streets or highways of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 16-19-3; Code 1994, § 38-293; Ord. of 12-14-1987(3), § 1; Ord. of 9-14-2015(1) , § 1) 
Sec. 36-440. - Removal of vehicles. 
    The chief of police is hereby authorized and shall summarily remove, or cause to be removed, from the roadways, streets or highways of the city, as well as public places, any vehicle, by whatsoever means propelled, which is parked or located in violation of the provisions of this division, or any other traffic ordinance of the city, or whenever such vehicle shall interfere with the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(Code 1973, § 16-19-5; Code 1994, § 38-295; Ord. of 12-14-1987(3), § 1; Ord. of 9-14-2015(1) , § 1) 
Sec. 36-441. - Penalties. 
    In addition to the potential removal of a vehicle pursuant to section 36-440, the penalty for the first violation of this division shall be a fine of $100.00. A second violation of this division shall be a fine of $200.00 and a third violation shall be a fine of $500.00. Each fine shall be appealable to the municipal court. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2015(1) , § 1) 
Secs. 36-442-36-463. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - BICYCLES AND SIMILAR VEHICLES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Operation of bicycles, G.L. 1956, § 31-19-1 et seq.; municipal authority to regulate bicycles, G.L. 1956, § 31-12-12(a)(8). 

Sec. 36-464. - Effect of article. 
(a)  It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this article. 
(b)  The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize, or knowingly permit, any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this article. 
(c)  The regulations in this article applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any roadway, street or highway of the city, or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 16-11-1; Code 1994, § 38-341) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions (as to subsections (a) and (b)), G.L. 1956, §§ 31-19-1, 31-19-2. 
Sec. 36-465. - Traffic laws applicable to persons riding bicycles. 
    Every person riding an electric personal assistive mobility device ("EPAMD"), riding an electric motorized bicycle, or propelling a vehicle by human power shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of any other vehicle, except as to special regulations in this chapter and except as to those provisions of which by their nature can have no application. This section shall not forbid a bicyclist, EPAMD or electric motorized bicycle from traveling upon the shoulders of the highway except for those highways which prohibit bicyclists; provided, that an EPAMD shall possess all the rights and obligations of a pedestrian, but shall not have the rights and responsibilities of the operator of a motor vehicle and that cities and towns may regulate the operation of an EPAMD. 
(Code 1973, § 16-11-2; Code 1994, § 38-342) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-19-3. 
Sec. 36-466. - Obedience to traffic control devices. 
(a)  Any person operating a bicycle shall have to obey the instructions of official traffic control signs, signals and other control devices applicable to vehicles and conveyances, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the direction of any such sign, except where such person dismounts from the bicycle to make such turn, in which event such person shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians. 
(Code 1973, § 16-11-3; Code 1994, § 38-343) 
Sec. 36-467. - Riding on roadways, streets or highways. 
(a)  Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway, street or highway in the city shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction except where official traffic control devices (signs or pavement markings) specifically direct bicyclists to do otherwise. 
(b)  Persons riding a bicycle upon a roadway, street or highway in the city shall not ride more than two abreast except on bicycle trails or paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles. Persons riding two abreast shall not unduly impede traffic and, on a laned roadway, shall ride within a single lane. 
(Code 1973, § 16-11-4; Code 1994, § 38-344) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, §§ 31-9-6, 31-9-7. 
Sec. 36-468. - Motorized devices. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motorized device on any public sidewalk or street. For the purpose of this section, the term "motorized device" means a device that may be propelled by human power or helper power or both, with a motor rated not more than 11/2 brake horsepower or two (S.A.E.) horsepower, which is capable of a maximum speed of not more than 30 miles per hour, except for devices that are moved exclusively by human power, or electric personal assisted mobility devices, including segways and authorized wheelchairs. 
(Code 1994, § 38-354; Ord. of 8-31-2004(1)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-19-5. 
Sec. 36-469. - Riding on controlled-access highways. 
    No person shall ride a bicycle on any roadway, or the areas adjacent to the roadways, of a controlled-access highway. 
(Code 1973, § 16-11-5; Code 1994, § 38-345) 
State Law reference- Authority to so provide, G.L. 1956, § 31-15-15. 
Sec. 36-470. - Riding on sidewalks. 
(a)  No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business district. 
(b)  No person 15 or more years of age shall ride a bicycle upon any sidewalk in any district. 
(Code 1973, § 16-11-10; Code 1994, § 38-350(a), (b)) 
Sec. 36-471. - Bicycles on sidewalks and crosswalks; rights and duties. 
    A person propelling a vehicle by human power or operating an electric personal assistive mobility device ("EPAMD") upon and along a sidewalk, or across a roadway upon and along a crosswalk, shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all the duties applicable to a pedestrian under the same circumstances; provided, however, that a person riding an EPAMD on a sidewalk or a bicycle path or trail shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians or give an audible signal before overtaking any passing pedestrian. Pedestrians using an EPAMD shall exercise a high degree of care when passing a pedestrian using a wheelchair, walker or other mobility aid and only pass when the width of the sidewalk exceeds five feet. 
(Code 1973, § 16-11-10; Code 1994, § 38-350(c)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-19-12. 
Sec. 36-472. - Riding on bicycles. 
(a)  A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride upon or astride other than a permanent and regular seat attached to such bicycle. 
(b)  No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed or equipped, except when transporting a child six years of age or younger in a rear-mounted bicycle carrier and/or trailer that meets mandatory and various industry standard specifications as developed by the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM). 
(Code 1973, § 16-11-11; Code 1994, § 38-351) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-19-4. 
Sec. 36-473. - Speed. 
    No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. 
(Code 1973, § 16-11-6; Code 1994, § 38-346) 
Sec. 36-474. - Emerging from alley or driveway. 
    The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on such sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such roadway. 
(Code 1973, § 16-11-7; Code 1994, § 38-347) 
Sec. 36-475. - Carrying articles. 
    No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or other article which prevents the use of both hands in the control and operation of the bicycle. A person operating a bicycle shall keep at least one hand on the handlebars at all times. 
(Code 1973, § 16-11-8; Code 1994, § 38-348) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-19-9. 
Sec. 36-476. - Clinging to vehicles. 
(a)  No person riding upon a bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon any roadway. 
(b)  This section shall not prohibit attaching a trailer or semitrailer to a bicycle if that trailer or semitrailer has been designed for this attachment. 
(Code 1973, § 16-11-12; Code 1994, § 38-353) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-19-5. 
Sec. 36-477. - Parking. 
    No person shall park a bicycle upon a street, roadway or highway other than upon the roadway against the curb, or upon the sidewalk in a rack support for the bicycle, or against a building, in such a manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. 
(Code 1973, § 16-11-9; Code 1994, § 38-349) 
Sec. 36-478. - Lamps and other equipment on bicycles. 
(a)  Front lamp. Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front. 
(b)  Rear reflector. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a red reflector of a type approved by the state division of motor vehicles which shall be visible for 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector. 
(c)  Pedal reflectors. No person shall sell a new bicycle or a pedal for use on a bicycle that is not equipped with a reflector of a type approved by the state, on each pedal of the bicycle which is visible from the front and rear of the bicycle during darkness from a distance of 200 feet nor shall any person operate a bicycle without reflective pedals. 
(d)  Sirens or whistles. A bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall any person use a bicycle equipped with, a siren or whistle. 
(e)  Brakes. No person shall sell a bicycle, new or used, that is not equipped, and every bicycle, excluding bicycles that are especially designed and made for off-road use, shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to stop the bicycle within 25 feet at a speed of ten miles per hour on dry, level, clean pavement. 
(f)  Side reflectors. Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a minimum of 20 square inches on each side of the bicycle of white reflective material on the wheels or tires to indicate as nearly as possible the continuous circular shape and size of the wheels or tires of each bicycle. All reflective materials used in compliance with this statute shall be visible during the hours of darkness from 500 feet when viewed under lawful low beam headlamps under normal atmospheric conditions on a straight, level, unlighted roadway, and shall meet the requirements as prescribed by the state division of motor vehicles. 
(Code 1973, § 16-11-13; Code 1994, § 38-352) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-19-10. 
Secs. 36-479-36-509. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - MOTORCYCLES 

Sec. 36-510. - Riding on motorcycles. 
(a)  A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent and regular seat attached to it. The operator shall not carry any other person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless the motorcycle is designed to carry more than one person, in which event a passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for two persons, or upon another seat firmly attached to the rear or side of the operator. 
(b)  In no event shall a motorcycle passenger ride in front of the operator. 
(Code 1973, § 16-9-9; Code 1994, § 38-89) 
Sec. 36-511. - Required equipment. 
    Operators of motorcycles, motor scooters, and motor-driven cycles shall use eye protection of a type approved by the administrator of the division of motor vehicles when operating their vehicles on streets and highways. Every motorcycle, motor scooter, and motor-driven cycle shall be equipped with a rear view mirror. Any operator under the age of 21 shall wear a helmet of a type approved by the state administrator of motor vehicles. In addition, all new operators, regardless of age, shall be required, for a period of one year from the date of issuance of the first license pursuant to G.L. 1956, § 31-10.1-1, to wear a helmet of a type approved by said administrator. 
(Code 1973, § 16-3-21; Code 1994, § 38-20) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-10.1-4. 
Sec. 36-512. - Handlebars. 
    No person shall operate on a highway or in any parking area for ten or more motor vehicles, any motorcycle, motor scooter, or motor driven cycle equipped with handlebars that are more than 15 inches in height above the uppermost portion of the seat when depressed by the weight of the operator. 
(Code 1973, § 16-3-21; Code 1994, § 38-20) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-10.1-5. 
Sec. 36-513. - Passengers. 
    Any passenger on a motorcycle, motor scooter, or motor-driven cycle must be provided with a separate rear seat, a separate foot-rest, and an appropriate handlebar or grip for his use, and must wear a properly fitting helmet of a type approved by the administrator of the division of motor vehicles. No person shall operate a motorcycle, motor scooter, or motor-driven cycle unless any passenger on it wears a helmet and is able to rest his feet upon a foot-rest. Any passenger on a motorcycle, motor scooter, or motor-driven cycle under 12 years of age must have a properly secured back-rest or equivalent, shall have his feet placed upon the foot-rest, and shall be seated behind the operator unless a side car is provided. When, however, a side car is provided this age requirement shall not apply to any passenger in the sidecar. 
(Code 1973, § 16-3-21; Code 1994, § 38-20) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-10.1-6. 
Secs. 36-514-36-534. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - PEDESTRIANS 

Sec. 36-535. - Due care by drivers. 
    Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian or any person propelling a human-powered vehicle upon any roadway, and shall give an audible signal when necessary, and shall exercise proper precaution, upon observing any child or any obviously confused, intoxicated or incapacitated person. 
(Code 1973, § 16-3-9; Code 1994, § 38-17) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-18-8. 
Sec. 36-536. - Pedestrians subject to traffic control signals. 
    Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals, as declared in sections 36-76 and 36-77, but at all other places, pedestrians shall be granted those rights, and be subject to the restrictions, stated in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 16-10-1; Code 1994, § 38-311) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-18-1. 
Sec. 36-537. - Right-of-way in crosswalks. 
(a)  When traffic control signals are not in place, or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle or conveyance shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway, street or highway within a crosswalk, when the pedestrian is upon the half of such roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger. No pedestrian shall suddenly leave the curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply under the conditions stated in G.L. 1956, § 31-18-6. 
(Code 1973, § 16-10-2; Code 1994, § 38-312(a)-(c)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-18-3. 
Sec. 36-538. - Obstruction of walkways. 
    No person shall stand on any footwalk, sidewalk, doorway, doorstep or driveway in such a manner so as to cause obstruction, hindrance, delay, disturbance or annoyance to any passerby or other persons residing or doing business in the vicinity. 
(Code 1973, § 16-2-5; Code 1994, § 38-6) 
Sec. 36-539. - Overtaking of vehicles stopped for pedestrians. 
(a)  Whenever a vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, street or highway, the driver of any vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. 
(b)  Whenever there are no markings to the contrary, there shall be a presumption that there is an unmarked crosswalk at any intersection. 
(Code 1973, §§ 16-3-13, 16-10-2; Code 1994, §§ 38-117, 38-312(d)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-18-4. 
Sec. 36-540. - When pedestrian to yield right-of-way. 
(a)  Every pedestrian crossing a roadway, street or highway in the city at any point other than within a marked crosswalk, or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon such roadway. 
(b)  The provision of subsection (a) of this section has no application under the conditions stated in section 36-541 when pedestrians are prohibited from crossing at certain designated places. 
(Code 1973, § 16-10-5; Code 1994, § 38-315) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-18-5. 
Sec. 36-541. - Prohibited crossing. 
(a)  Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a crosswalk. 
(b)  No pedestrian shall cross a roadway, street or highway in the city, other than in a crosswalk, in any business district. 
(c)  No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless authorized by official traffic control devices, and when authorized to cross diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the official traffic control devices pertaining to such crossing movements. 
(Code 1973, § 16-10-6; Code 1994, § 38-316) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions (as to subsection (a)), G.L. 1956, § 31-18-7. 
Sec. 36-542. - Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalk. 
    Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of the crosswalk. 
(Code 1973, § 16-10-3; Code 1994, § 38-313) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-18-9. 
Sec. 36-543. - Crossing street at right angles. 
    No pedestrian shall cross a roadway, street or highway of the city at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb, or by the shortest route to the opposite curb, except in a marked crosswalk. 
(Code 1973, § 16-10-4; Code 1994, § 38-314) 
Sec. 36-544. - Pedestrians walking along roadways. 
    Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to walk along and upon any adjacent roadway, street or highway in the city. Where sidewalks are provided it shall be lawful for a person to run or jog along and upon an adjacent roadway, and if the person shall begin to walk he shall walk upon an available sidewalk. 
(Code 1973, § 16-10-7; Code 1994, § 38-317(a)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-18-10. 
Sec. 36-545. - Walking, jogging, or running on left. 
(a)  Where sidewalks are not provided any person walking, jogging, or running along and upon a highway shall, when practicable, walk, jog or run only on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite direction. Under no circumstances shall anyone walk, run, or jog on any interstate. 
(b)  Any person jogging or running during the time from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise, shall, in addition, wear reflective material which is visible by low beam headlamps from a distance of at least 500 feet. In no event, shall the failure to wear reflective clothing be considered as contributing negligence, nor shall the failure to wear reflective clothing be admissible as evidence in the trial of any civil action. 
(c)  If the person has been charged with failure to wear reflective material, the person shall be issued a citation. If any person issued a citation presents proof of purchase of reflectorized clothing or the minimum amount of reflectorized material to the issuing police department within ten days, the city shall void the violation. 
(Code 1973, § 16-10-8; Code 1994, §§ 31-317(b), 38-318) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-18-10. 
Sec. 36-546. - Soliciting rides or business. 
    No person shall stand, walk or linger in a roadway, street or highway in the city for the purpose of soliciting a ride, or business of any type, from the occupant or driver of a vehicle. 
(Code 1973, § 16-10-9; Code 1994, § 38-319; Ord. of 12-10-1990, § 1) 
State Law reference- Hitchhiking in road, G.L. 1956, § 31-18-12. 
Secs. 36-547-36-570. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - VEHICLE CONDITION AND EQUIPMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 36-571. - Overloading of vehicles. 
    No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there are in the front seat such number of persons, exceeding three, as to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(Code 1973, § 16-9-16; Code 1994, § 38-96) 
Sec. 36-572. - Obstructions to driver's view. 
    Except as otherwise authorized by law, no person shall drive any motor vehicle or conveyance with any sign, poster, or other nontransparent material, dirt, snow or ice upon the front windshield, side wings, or side or rear windows of such vehicle, which obstructs the driver's view of the highway or intersecting highway. No person shall drive any motor vehicle or conveyance with any significant amounts of snow, ice or sleet upon such vehicle; the term "significant" shall be construed as meaning any amount of accumulation which might reasonably be expected, when blowing off the vehicle when driving, to obscure the vision of the operator of another vehicle; provided, however, that the natural accumulation of snow while driving during adverse weather conditions shall not constitute a violation of this section. 
(Code 1973, § 16-9-18; Code 1994, § 38-97) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-23-16. 
Sec. 36-573. - Prevention of excessive fumes and/or smoke. 
    The engine and power mechanism of every motor vehicle or conveyance shall be so equipped and adjusted as to prevent the escape of excessive fumes and/or smoke. 
(Code 1973, § 16-9-19; Code 1994, § 38-98) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-23-14. 
Sec. 36-574. - Mufflers. 
    Every motor vehicle or conveyance shall at all times be equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise and annoying smoke. No person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass, or similar device upon a motor vehicle or conveyance on a highway. Any exhaust system shall be deemed defective if any changes, modifications, alterations, deletions, or adjustments have been made which would thereby cause any exhaust system to generate a higher or louder sound level than would be generated by the exhaust system customarily installed by the manufacturer as original equipment. Any such defective exhaust system shall be replaced or repaired to restore such exhaust system to the performance specifications of the original equipment. 
(Code 1973, § 16-9-20; Code 1994, § 38-99) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-23-13. 
Sec. 36-575. - Rearview mirror. 
    Every motor vehicle or conveyance which is so constructed or loaded as to obstruct the driver's view to the rear thereof from the driver's position shall be equipped with a mirror so located as to reflect to the driver's view of the highway, for a distance of at least 200 feet to the rear of such vehicle or conveyance. Every motor vehicle or conveyance, the primary function of which is the carrying of passengers, shall be equipped with a rearview mirror on the left door or fender, so located as to reflect a view of the roadway, street or highway for at least 200 feet to the rear of such vehicle. 
(Code 1973, § 16-9-21; Code 1994, § 38-100) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-23-15. 
Secs. 36-576-36-598. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LIGHTS 

Sec. 36-599. - Time when lights required. 
    Every motor vehicle or conveyance upon a roadway, street or highway of the city at any time from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise, and at any time when there is not sufficient light or visibility because of rain or any other conditions to clearly see persons and vehicles upon the highway at a distance of 500 feet ahead, shall display lighted lamps and illuminating devices as hereinafter respectively required for different classes of vehicles, subject to exceptions with respect to parked vehicles as stated in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 16-9-24; Code 1994, § 38-103) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-24-1. 
Sec. 36-600. - Display of lighted lamps. 
    At all times specified in G.L. 1956, § 31-24-1, at least two lighted lamps shall be displayed, one on each side of the front of every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-24-4. 
Sec. 36-601. - Taillights. 
    Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer and pole trailer, and any other vehicle or conveyance which is being drawn at the end of a train of vehicles, shall be equipped with at least one tail lamp mounted on the rear, which when lighted as required, shall emit a red light plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear; provided, that in the case of a train of vehicles, only the tail lamp on the rear-most vehicle need actually be seen from the distance specified. 
(Code 1973, § 16-9-26; Code 1994, § 38-105) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-24-7. 
Sec. 36-602. - Illumination of rear registration plate. 
    Either a tail lamp or a separate lamp shall be so constructed and placed as to illuminate, with a white light, the rear registration plate of a vehicle and render it clearly legible from a distance of 60 feet to the rear. Any tail lamp used for illuminating the rear registration plate shall be so wired as to be lighted whenever the headlamps of auxiliary driving lamps are lighted. 
(Code 1973, § 16-9-27; Code 1994, § 38-106) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-24-9. 
Sec. 36-603. - Interior light to be operated after dark during police stop. 
    The operator of any motor vehicle or conveyance upon a roadway, street or highway of the city, upon the stopping of such vehicle by any police officer shall, at any time from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise, display and operate such vehicle's interior lights until such time as such officer allows such vehicle to continue in its operation. 
(Code 1973, § 16-9-23; Code 1994, § 38-102) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-22-24. 
Secs. 36-604-36-624. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - VEHICLE LOAD AND WEIGHT LIMITS 

Sec. 36-625. - Observance of vehicle weight limits. 
    When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any commercial vehicle with a gross weight in excess of the amount specified upon any roadway, street or highway of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 16-17-2; Code 1994, § 38-111) 
Sec. 36-626. - Restricted collection, deliveries, loading/unloading of materials. 
(a)  When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any commercial vehicle within the specified time upon any of the streets, or parts thereof, made a part of this chapter. 
(1)  Collection of debris on certain streets. A person shall not operate a vehicle for the purpose of collecting ashes, rubbish or garbage on certain streets or parts thereof during such times as specified in this article. 
(2)  Delivery of fuels on certain streets. A person shall not operate a vehicle for the purpose of the delivery of coal or oil on certain streets, or parts thereof, during such times as specified in this article. 
(3)  Loading/unloading merchandise on certain streets. A person shall not operate a truck, trailer, semitrailer or tractor-trailer for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or other equipment on certain streets, or parts thereof, during the times specified in this article. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section will not apply when the director of public safety grants permission under extreme hardships. 
(Code 1973, § 16-17-3; Code 1994, § 38-112) 
Sec. 36-627. - Commercial vehicle operation in restricted areas. 
    When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any commercial vehicle at any time upon any of the streets, or parts thereof, described and made a part of this chapter, during the hours of 8:00 p.m. through 6:00 a.m., unless otherwise authorized by special permit issued by the public safety director or designee. 
(Code 1973, § 16-17-1; Code 1994, § 38-110; Ord. of 12-11-2006) 
Sec. 36-628. - Weight limits on bridges. 
    The following bridges are limited to vehicles with gross weights no greater than as designated herein: 
Bridge RIDOT 
Number Route Restrictions Broad Street Bridge 305 030501 RI 114 (Broad Street) a) 2 axles, 12 tons 
b) 3 axles, 16 tons  
(Ord. of 4-18-2011(5)) 
Chapter 38 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1-38-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Administrator means the director of public works in the city or his authorized deputy or representative, who shall hereinafter be referred to as the director. 
    Applicant means any person requesting approval to discharge wastewaters into municipal facilities or for a new connection to the public system. 
    ASTM means the American Society for Testing Materials. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of dissolved oxygen, expressed in milligrams per liter, used in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter in wastewater in five days at 20 degrees Celsius (68 degrees Fahrenheit) under standard laboratory procedures, as determined by standard methods. 
    Blackstone Valley District or district means and includes the cities of East Providence, Pawtucket, and Central Falls, and that portion of the Town of Smithfield lying northeast of the Douglas Pike, also called State Route No. 7, the Towns of Lincoln and Cumberland, or such portion or portions thereof as may, from time to time, be designated by the commission. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a sanitary wastewater system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other sanitary pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys into the building sewer beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside from the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means a pipe connecting a public sewer with a building for the purpose of conveying sewage of any kind from said building to the public sewer. Building sewers, after completion of construction of a building sewer lateral as defined in this section, shall be maintained by the owners of the property served. That portion of the building sewer which lies within the boundaries of the property served shall be constructed by said property owner. 
    Building sewer lateral means a pipe or conduit laid incidental to the original construction of a public sewer, from that public sewer to some point at the side of the street, highway or similar location, and there capped, having been provided and intended for extension and for use at some time thereafter as part of a building sewer as defined in this section. When a building sewer lateral has been connected with and extended for the purpose of installing a building sewer, the lateral shall continue to be owned, controlled, and maintained by the city. 
    Chemical oxygen demand (COD) means the measure of the oxygen consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in water or wastewater. It is expressed as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific test and does not differentiate between stable and unstable organic matter; thus it does not necessarily correlate with biochemical oxygen demand. 
    Chlorine demand means the amount of chlorine, expressed in parts per million (ppm) by weight, and is required to produce a residual of 0.5 ppm of chlorine after 15 minutes contact of chlorine with sewage, as determined by standard methods. 
    Combined sewage or combined wastewater means wastewater, water-carried wastes, or a mixture of them from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments together with such stormwater as may be present. 
    Combined sewer means a sewer intended to receive and convey both wastewater and surface runoff from storms. 
    Commission means the Blackstone Valley District Commission, its executive secretary, or its authorized deputy, agent, or representative. 
    Contamination means the introduction of pathogenic or potentially pathogenic organisms, or of toxic or potentially toxic substances into a watercourse that will render the water hazardous and, therefore, unfit for human consumption or for domestic usage of any kind. 
    Contractor means either an individual, partnership or corporation, and the proper agents and representatives thereof, approved by the director and to whom the director shall have issued a license to install and repair sewers, during the period when such license is valid. 
    Cooling water means the clean wastewater from air-conditioning, industrial cooling, condensing and similar apparatus, and from hydraulically powered equipment. Cooling water includes only water which is sufficiently clean, uncontaminated, and unpolluted to admit of being discharged without treatment or purification, into any natural open stream or watercourse without offense. 
    Drain. See Storm sewer. 
    Drainage field means a system of perforated drains laid in trenches and backfilled with broken stone or screened gravel, into which the discharge from a septic tank or tanks flow. 
    Easement means the acquired legal right to use for a specific purpose land owned by others. 
    Excessive means the amounts or concentration of a constituent of a wastewater which in the judgment of the municipality: 
(1)  Will cause damage to any facility; 
(2)  Will be harmful to a wastewater treatment process; 
(3)  Cannot be removed in the treatment works to the degree required in the limiting stream classification standards of the Blackstone River, upper Narragansett Bay water quality; 
(4)  Can otherwise endanger life or property; or 
(5)  Can constitute a nuisance. 
    Executive secretary means the executive secretary of the Blackstone Valley District Commission, or his authorized deputy, agent, or representative. 
    Floatable oil means oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
    Garbage shall include the wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and serving of food, and from handling, storage, and sale of produce. It is composed largely of putrescible organic matter, usually with a high natural moisture content. 
    Garbage disposal unit means a mechanical device used for the grinding, shredding, or macerating or any kind of material or waste preparatory to disposal thereof into the public sewerage system. 
    Grease means volatile and nonvolatile residual fats, oils, fatty acids, soaps, waxes, mineral oils, and other materials of like repute. 
    Grit means heavy inorganic matter such as stones, gravel, cinders, sand, silt, ashes, or other inert materials. 
    Industrial wastewater or industrial sewage means the liquid or wastewater carrying any quantity of oils, grease, fats, abrasives, chemicals, residues of manufacturing processes, wastes from commercial food preparation, preserving or canning, wastes from slaughter houses or meat processing plants, and similar substances, whether dissolved, in suspension, or mechanically carried by water, as distinct from and not clearly included within the definitions of sanitary sewage, stormwater or cooling water. 
    Interceptor means a common sewer controlled by the Blackstone Valley District. 
    May is permissive. (See the term "Shall" in this section.) 
    Municipal or municipality or any other word in common usage designating a legally constituted unit of local government or pertaining or belonging to said government means the City of Central Falls. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or groundwater. 
    NPDES permit means the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit issued by the director of the enforcement division, Region I, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Boston, Massachusetts. 
    Person means any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, group, trust, municipality, or governmental authority. 
    pH means the reciprocal of the logarithm (to the base ten) of the hydrogen ion concentration in grams per liter (gm/l) of solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of 7 and a hydrogen ion concentration of 10 -7 . 
    Pollution means the introduction of substances of such character and of such quantity into a watercourse such that its natural quality is so altered as to impair its usefulness or to render it offensive to the senses of sight, taste, or smell. 
    Private drain includes any drain located on private property and not under the care and control of the city. 
    Private sewer means any sewer located on private property that collects and conveys wastewater from two or more building sewers, discharges into a public sewer, and is not under the care and control of the city. 
    Properly shredded garbage means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
    Property owner or owner of property or owner, as used herein, includes both the owner of fee in any real estate and all tenants, lessees or others in control, or possession and use of the property in question, or having any interest therein, and his, her, its, or their agents or representatives, as the interest, duties, powers or liabilities of each may be. 
    Public sewer shall be used only with respect to the main line of pipe or conduit including laterals to the property line which are owned, controlled, and maintained by the city for the conveyance of waste or sewage from several properties, and shall not be understood to include the building sewers up to the property line as defined in this section. 
    Receiving waters means any watercourse, river, pond, ditch, lake, aquifer, or other body of surface water or groundwater receiving discharge of wastewaters. 
    Relief sewer or relief drain means a sewer or storm drain constructed to supplement the capacity of an existing sewer or drain by conveying part of the wastes which would otherwise be discharged into and be conveyed by said existing sewer or drain. The particular wastes to be conveyed by any such relief sewer or drain shall be determined by the wastes for which it was designed, laid out or intended to receive and convey, as may appear in the records of the city or other body under which it was created. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer intended to convey only sanitary sewage or, if so stipulated with respect to the particular sewer, sanitary sewage plus industrial or other wastes, but excluding stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters. 
    Sanitary wastewater or sanitary sewage means the common wastewater and water-carried wastes from residences, and from toilet and lavatory fixtures, commercial and noncommercial kitchens and laundries, car washes, and similar sanitary facilities of business and industrial buildings. 
    Seepage or subsoil drainage means water from soil percolating into subsoil drains and through foundation walls, basement floors, or underground pipes or from similar sources. 
    Septic tank means an approved type of watertight compartment made of concrete or other approved material into which the outflowing sewage from dwellings or other buildings may be discharged. 
    Septic tank cleanings or solids means contents of a settling tank in which settled sludge is in immediate contact with the wastewater flowing through the tank and the organic solids are decomposed by anaerobic bacterial action. 
    Sewage shall be held to mean and to include any human or animal or vegetable matter, garbage, offal, filth, waste, chemicals, acid, dyestuff, starch, coloring matter, oil and tar, radioactive substances, and any compound, solution, mixture or product thereof, and every substance which may be injurious to public health or comfort, or which would injuriously affect the natural and healthy propogation, growth, or development of any fish or shellfish in the waters of this state, or of the nourishment of the same, or which would injuriously affect the flavor, taste, or value as food of any such fish or shellfish; or which would defile said waters or injure or defile any vessel, boat, wharf, pier, or any public or private property upon, in or under said waters, or any shore thereof. The preferred term is "wastewater"; see definition of "Wastewater" in this section. 
    Sewer means the main pipe or conduit, manholes and other structures and equipment appurtenant thereto, provided to carry sewage, industrial wastes, stormwater, cooling water or similar wastes, subject in each particular case to the purposed and limitations imposed upon the particular pipe or conduit. 
    Shall is mandatory. See May. 
    Slug means any discharge of water, wastewater, sewage, or industrial sewage which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour concentration, or flow, during normal operation and adversely affect the collection system and/or the performance of the wastewater treatment facility. 
    Standard methods means the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, as published by the American Public Health Association. 
    Storm sewer or storm drain or drain means a sewer provided and intended for the conveyance of stormwater with or without other clean wastewaters, as may be stipulated for any particular drain or sewer, but excluding sewage or contaminated or polluted industrial wastes. 
    Stormwater includes the runoff or discharge of rain and melted snow or other clean water from roofs, surfaces of public or private lands or elsewhere, and only such water which is sufficiently clean, uncontaminated and unpolluted to admit of being discharged, without treatment or purification, into any natural open stream or natural brook, rivulet or stream. 
    Suspended solids (SS) means the solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, wastewater, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering, as determined by standard methods. 
    Toxic means any material lethal to humans, animals, or to aerobic and anaerobic bacteria required for biological treatment processes. 
    Turbidity includes the following: 
(1)  Condition in water or wastewater caused by the presence of suspended matter, resulting in the scattering and absorption of light rays; 
(2)  Measure of fine suspended matter in liquids; and 
(3)  Analytical quantity usually reported in arbitrary turbidity units determined by measurements of light diffraction. 
    Unpolluted water means water of quality equal to or better than the effluent limitations in effect and/or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
    Wastes means substances in liquid, solid or gaseous form that can be carried in water. 
    Wastewater means the spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present. 
    Wastewater facilities means all public facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of wastewater and for the control of water pollution. 
    Wastewater treatment facility means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating wastewater and for the control of water pollution. 
    Watercourse means a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water, either continuously or intermittently. 
    WPCF is the abbreviation for the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. II) 
Sec. 38-32. - Purpose. 
    In order to ensure proper removal and disposal of sewage wastes and wastewaters within the region; to ensure the proper operation and maintenance of public sewers, drains, treatment facility and other drainage or sewerage works within the region; and to provide for keeping adequate records of sewers, drains and appurtenances and connections thereto, this article regulating the construction, use, repair, alteration and discontinuance or abandonment of sewers, drains and appurtenances; the connections thereto, including drains and pipes discharging directly or indirectly into said sewers or drains; and the substances to be discharged directly or indirectly into and through sewers, drains and appurtenances of the public sewerage system and storm drainage system of the region, cost recovery program, is hereby enacted by the city council, as provided by the Charter of the city, including special acts approved by the state. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. I) 
Sec. 38-33. - Amendment to rules and regulations. 
    The rules and regulations set down herein may be amended, from time to time, as may, in the opinion of the director, be necessary. Whenever the director shall amend any such rules and regulations, it shall do so and give notice of such in accordance with existing laws. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. XII, § 1) 
Sec. 38-34. - Vandalism; protection from damage. 
    No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment; or dump garbage, refuse, or other objectionable material on land or right-of-way which is a part of the wastewater facilities. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest, charged with the malicious destruction of public property. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. VII, § 1) 
Sec. 38-35. - Inspection on private property; powers and authority of director. 
(a)  The director and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds an easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(b)  The director or other duly authorized employees are authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection system. The industry may withhold information considered confidential. However, the industry must establish that the revelation to the public of the information in question might result in an advantage to competitors. 
(c)  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection (a) of this section, the director or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees, and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in section 38-148. 
(d)  The director shall be responsible for the operation and maintenance of the wastewater works, the administration of contracts and agreements between the city and municipalities and industries served by the city, and the administration of this article. He shall make all rules and regulations required to satisfactorily implement and enforce the provisions of this article and the intent thereof. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. VIII, §§ 1-4) 
Sec. 38-36. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Violation, notification, and time limit. Any person found to be violating any provision of this article, except section 38-34, shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the satisfactory correction thereof. A reasonable time limit shall be determined by the director, depending upon the nature of the violation. The director shall set the reasonable time limit not to exceed 30 days from the date of receipt of the notice to correct. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations and take action as is recommended or necessary to ensure that there will be no recurrence of such violation. All such work in connection therewith shall be performed by said person without delay and without expense to the city. 
(b)  Liabilities. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation, so that if the director shall have caused the disconnection of a building sewer or drain from the public sewerage system, the director may collect the cost of making such disconnection from any person responsible for or willfully concerned in or who profited by such violation of the requirements of this article and may thereafter refuse to permit the restoration of the former connection or of any new connection to the property concerned in the violation of this article until the claim of the city for the cost of making such disconnection shall have been paid in full plus interest and the reasonable cost of any legal expenses incurred by the city in connection therewith. 
(c)  Penalties. 
(1)  Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $100.00. Each day in which such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense for the purpose of applying the above penalties. In addition, the director may direct the person to disconnect or otherwise act to prevent the building sewer, from the premises in which said violation of the requirements of this article shall have occurred, from discharging to the public sewerage system. 
(2)  If any person shall construct, install, alter, or repair any sewer or connection to any interceptor in violation of the requirements of these rules and regulations, the director may, in his discretion, order or direct such person to uncover and fully expose any or all portions of such sewer or connection and afford the director and his representatives adequate opportunity for examination and inspection of the work. If the sewer or connection and appurtenances thereof shall be found not to be in full accord with the requirements of these rules and regulations and the standards established under its provisions, then the director may serve the offender with a written notice as provided in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. X, §§ 1-4) 
Sec. 38-37. - Commercial and industrial rates. 
(a)  The director shall establish the user charge and industrial cost recovery system in accordance with appropriate federal and state rules and regulations pertaining to the costs associated to the use of the sewer by an industry. 
(b)  The director shall establish the user charge system in accordance with appropriate federal and state rules and regulations pertaining to the costs associated to the use of the sewer by a nonindustrial user. 
(c)  The director shall, in establishing the rates referred to in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, make specific reference to the sewer use rate structure in force at the time of any connection. 
(d)  Subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section pertain only to those rates imposed by the city for using city's sewers. This does not abrogate any responsibility the city users have in complying with the current rate structure of the Blackstone Valley District Commission. 
(e)  Assessments for use of Blackstone Valley District Commission facilities shall be in accordance with the regulations of the commission in force at the time of the use. Section 38-38 includes relevant portions of the Blackstone Valley District Commission Regulation No. 5, effective January 1, 1976. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. XIV, §§ 1-5) 
Sec. 38-38. - Blackstone Valley District Commission Regulation No. 5. 
(a)  Assessments for use of project. 
(1)  Assessments for use of the Blackstone Valley District Project are hereby made against any person, firm or corporation holding legal title to real estate as of the day and date of the assessment, provided that said real estate had a direct or indirect connection with said project at any time during the use period for which the assessment is made. Assessment for use of the Blackstone Valley District Project are hereby made also against each and every municipality which has a connection with the project for the debt service costs of the Blackstone Valley District Commission based on the flow of inflow and infiltration waters, which is computed as the excess of the total flow of those wastes collected and treated from all indirect and direct connectors with the said project in each municipality. The time and date of making assessments to all indirect connectors and municipalities shall be 12:00 noon on December 31 of each year. For indirect connectors in the city of Pawtucket and also for the said city, the use period shall begin on September 1 of the previous year and terminate on August 31 of the same year as the assessment time and date. For all indirect connectors located in municipalities other than the City of Pawtucket, the use period shall begin on January 1 and end on December 31 of the same year as the assessment time and date. Assessments against all direct connectors whose wastes are metered are hereby made the last day of each month of the year. For direct connectors whose wastes are metered, the use period shall be the calendar month in which the assessment is made. In all cases not explicitly covered in the foregoing, the Blackstone Valley District Commission shall determine the proper date and amount of assessments, and the beginning and terminal dates of use periods. 
(2)  The commission will use the official records in each of the municipalities involved for the purpose of determining persons, firms or corporations holding legal title to real estate which is directly or indirectly connected to the project. 
(b)  Metered direct connector users. The rate and charge of $319.00 per million gallons of sewage and/or industrial wastes collected and treated shall be assessed against each and every person, firm or corporation whose property has a direct metered connection with said project. 
(c)  Municipalities. The rate and charge of $311.00 per million gallons of inflow and infiltration waters collected and treated from each and every municipality in said district shall be assessed against each municipality in said district for that part of the metered flow of wastes from each municipality which is in excess of the total flows of those wastes collected and treated from all indirect and direct connectors in each municipality in accordance with the following formula: 
FORMULA 
Total metered flow of wastes for use period from individual municipality xx Less: Metered flow of wastes of direct and indirect connectors in that municipality xx Less: Flows of wastes in that municipality of users of more than 440,000 gallons of water for the use period xx Less: Average water consumption for each class of classified users in that municipality times number of users in each class xx  
Remainder equals flow to be billed to that municipality. 
(d)  Classified users. The following table sets forth the rates and charges to be assessed against the direct or indirect connectors with said project who shall be known as classified users. This table includes the schedule of rates and charges to apply to all users of said project, except those whose wastes are metered, whose water consumption is less than 440,000 gallons annually. 
CLASSIFIED USER RATE STRUCTURE 
Type of User Water Use Allowance Minimum Annual Rate per Type T-1* 8,500 cubic feet $24.00 T-2** 12,750 cubic feet 36.00 T-3 17,000 cubic feet 48.00 T-4 21,250 cubic feet 60.00 T-5 25,100 cubic feet 70.00 T-6 28,500 cubic feet 80.00 T-7 31,900 cubic feet 90.00 T-8 35,300 cubic feet 100.00 T-9 38,700 cubic feet 110.00 T-10 42,100 cubic feet 120.00 T-11 45,500 cubic feet 130.00 T-12 58,700 cubic feet (440,000 gals.) 140.00  
* T-1 One-family dwelling or other property having characteristics similar thereto. 
** T-2 Two-family dwelling or other property having characteristics similar thereto. 
T-3, 4, etc. 
TC-1, 2, 3, 4, etc., or C-1, 2, 3, 4, etc. Combinations of users not classifiable as regular T-types. Each to be placed in appropriate T-type classification for billing purposes either by using number of separate units contained in each property or by the use of the property's water use data, whichever results in the higher T-type classification. 
Examples: 
(1)  TC-1 Drug Store: To be billed at T-1 rate or placed in a higher class by use of water consumption data. 
(2)  T-1, C-1, Drug Store with one-family dwelling above: To be billed at T-2 rate or placed in a higher class by use of water consumption data. 
Commercial and industrial establishments using 440,000 gallons or less of water annually will be classified within an appropriate T-type by use of their water consumption data or by using the number of separate units contained in the property, whichever results in the higher T-type classification. 
T-rate applicable to water users of 440,000 gallons or less annually. 
(e)  Metered indirect connector users. 
(1)  All users of said project who have an indirect connection with the project whose total water use from either public or private sources is more than 440,000 gallons annually shall be assessed at the rate of $319.00 per million gallons of water used or wastes metered. Water meter readings will be the basis for making assessments except where sewage meters are installed. It is recommended that suitable metering devices for measuring sewage be installed whenever and wherever such an installation is practicable. Direct sewage meter readings will be the basis for assessments in all such cases. 
(2)  If the installation of sewage meters is not possible or practicable, water meters must be installed in such a fashion and to such an extent that amounts of wastes reaching sewers can be accurately measured. Meters of whatever type must be installed and maintained by the user of the project. All water sources, whether private or public, must be metered by the user except when specifically exempted by the commission. Notification must be given the commission immediately upon installation of any water metering device. The installation must be inspected and approved by the commission. For the purpose of computing bills for those users of the project who will be billed on the basis of metered water consumption as outlined above, the commission will as necessary use the records of the water departments of the various municipalities, and/or meter readings made by the commission's staff. 
(3)  When using municipal water consumption records for sewer use, bills will be computed using the one year water consumption period which most nearly approximates the commission's use period, except in cases where the commission's staff makes meter readings, then the commission's meter readings will be used. 
(f)  Surcharge user rate structure. All users of the Blackstone Valley District Project whose wastes exceed the designed strength of 378 MG/L BOD and 228 MG/L SS will be assessed in addition to the regular treatment charges a surcharge for the amount in which their wastes exceeds the above designed strength. These surcharges will be computed as additional pounds of BOD and SS over the designed strength as follows; 
BOD = Users sewage strength/parts per M.G. Less: Designed strength/parts per M.G. 378 Excess Strength/parts per M.G. Multiplied by/lbs. per M.G. × 8.34 Excess/lbs. per M.G. Rate per lb. × $0.0326 Surcharge amount per M.G. $ Multiplied by users flow × Amount of surcharge $ SS = Users sewage strength/parts per M.G. Less: Designed strength/parts per M.G. 228 Excess strength/parts per M.G. Multiplied by/lbs. per M.G. × 8.34 Excess/lbs. per M.G. Rate per lb. × $0.0413 Surcharge amount per M.G. $ Multiplied by users flow × Amount of surcharge $  
Surcharges shall be assessed quarterly except when the commission shall determine a user should be assessed on some other calendar period. 
(g)  Industrial cost recovery rate structure. 
(1)  All industrial users whose wastes are treated by the Blackstone Valley District Commission by works of which federal grant construction assistance was awarded after March 1, 1973, shall be assessed a grant cost recovery surcharge at a rate per thousand gallons of flow based on the following formula: 
Amount of Federal Grant Rate = _____Average flow of designed works per thousand gallons/day × 365 days/year × 30 years  
(2)  In the case of any user of the above mentioned works whose peak to average flow ratio is greater than the design ratio of the works, the grant cost recovery surcharge rate applied in the form of a demand charge on the peak flow of the user is based on the following formula: 
Amount of Federal Grant Rate = _____Peak to average flow of designed works per thousand gallons/day × 30 years  
(3)  The flow from an industrial user is exempt from the above grant cost recovery surcharge if his waste is of a domestic nature only or that portion of waste that is domestic of nature is exempt from the charges if his wastes are segregated. 
(4)  An industrial user under the above-mentioned works who contributes greater than ten percent of the design pollutant loading of the works or a peak to average flow greater than the design of the works must submit signed letters of intent to pay that portion of the grant amount allocable to the treatment of its wastes along with a statement of the user's intended period of use of the works. 
(h)  Abatements. 
(1)  Requests for abatement of assessments or any portion thereof claimed on any basis by users of more than 440,000 gallons of water annually will be considered only upon presentation to the commission within 60 days after the terminal date of the use period of evidence substantiating such claims for abatement of assessments, together with a sworn affidavit attesting to the accuracy and truth of such evidence. Evidence may take form of deduction water meter readings or properly audited production records. No abatement of assessments will be considered affecting users with any private water sources unless the sources are metered or specifically exempted from metering by the commission personnel. 
(2)  There will be no abatements for use of the project for vacancies in dwellings and/or commercial units unless said dwellings and/or commercial units have been vacant for the full year's use period or period covered by the billing, and a notarized affidavit so stating is made to the commission within 30 days of the date of the bill covering the assessment relating to said unit or units. 
(i)  Proration. Classified users who are new connectors to the project or who cease to be users of the project shall be assessed from or to the closest full month for use of the project by proration of the annual charges for the type of user involved. 
(j)  Buildings assessed individually. For the purpose of assessing classified users, each building shall be classified and assessed individually. 
(k)  Billing; due date; lien. 
(1)  Assessments are due and payable net within 30 days of the date of the invoice. An interest penalty at the rate of six percent per annum will be added from 30 days after date of the invoice to date of payment. 
(2)  The commission reserves the right, for the purposes of billing, to use the official records of water consumption of any real estate as obtained from the water departments of the municipalities of the district. 
(3)  The commission has a lien upon the real estate of each and every user of the project for all unpaid charges, which lien operates as liens resulting from failure to pay real estate taxes. This lien is effective at the time of the establishment of an indirect or direct connection between the real estate of any person, firm or corporation and the project. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. XVII, §§ 1-14) 
Secs. 38-39-38-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 38-61. - Local building and plumbing codes. 
    The requirements of local building and plumbing codes shall be observed with respect to fixtures inside of and immediately adjacent to buildings and within the areas of jurisdiction of said several codes, subject only to the general requirements of this article. Pipe more than five feet (1.5 meters) outside from the inner face of the building walls shall conform to the requirements of this article as to permits, materials and workmanship. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. III, § 1) 
Sec. 38-62. - Permits. 
(a)  No person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or drain or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining an appropriate written permit from the director. Applicants shall apply for separate permits for sewers and drains. 
(b)  There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: class A permits, which shall authorize the connection of establishments generating essentially sanitary wastewater, as defined in section 38-31, to the public sewer; and class B permits, which shall authorize the connection of establishments producing industrial wastewater, as defined in section 38-31, to the public sewer. 
(c)  Application for a building sewer permit shall be made by a licensed plumber and/or licensed drain layer for the building to be connected and shall be made on an application form provided by the director. Each application shall be supplemented with the plans and specifications for the sewer connection and such other information relating to the building and the wastes to be discharged as may be considered pertinent by the director. At his discretion, the director may also require that all plans, specifications, and data so submitted shall bear the seal and signature of a professional engineer registered in the state. A permit and inspection fee of $50.00 for a class A permit and of $100.00 for a class B permit shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. III, §§ 2-4) 
Sec. 38-63. - Notification of discharge. 
(a)  Any person proposing a new discharge into the system or a substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants that are being discharged into the system shall notify the director at least 45 days prior to the proposed change or connection. 
(b)  The director shall be notified by the owner of the proposed discharge of water from a swimming pool to the public sewer. The director shall have the right to approve or deny the request, designate the time and rate of flow permitted, and to enter upon the premises to inspect the project prior to and during the operation. If an owner fails to provide such notification or disregards instructions whether accidental or intential, the owner will be held responsible for any damage that may be caused from such discharge subject to the enforcement powers contained in these rules and regulations, and the director shall not be held liable for said violation. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. III, §§ 5, 6) 
Sec. 38-64. - Installation, maintenance, repair or replacement charges. 
    All costs and expenses incidental to the installation, connection, maintenance, repair, or replacement of a building sewer shall be borne by the owner, and the issuance of a building sewer permit shall be contingent upon the owner indemnifying the city against any loss or damage that may be caused directly or indirectly by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. III, § 7) 
Sec. 38-65. - Independent building sewers. 
    A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on a single lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway. Under these circumstances, and upon approval of the director, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. Any such approval shall be by written agreement and shall be recorded in the county registry of deeds. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. III, § 8) 
Sec. 38-66. - Reuse of existing building sewers. 
    Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the director, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. III, § 9) 
Sec. 38-67. - Construction requirements for building sewers and private sewers; inspection. 
(a)  The size, slope, alignment and materials of construction of a sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall conform to the applicable rules and regulations of the city. The private sewer or building sewer shall not be connected to the public sewer prior to certification by the director that the entire sewer has been properly constructed, inspected for conformance, and tested, and is ready for use. In the absence of specific rules and regulations or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the latest edition of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9, shall apply. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the director before installation. 
(b)  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(c)  All excavations for sewer installation shall be adequately guarded by the licensed contractor with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the director. All such excavations shall not be performed without obtaining a permit for such work from the director. 
(d)  No building sewer or connection to a public sewer shall be covered until it has been inspected by the director and found to conform to the requirements and established standards of the city in all respects and be satisfactory as to the quality of the workmanship and materials. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. III, §§ 10-12) 
Sec. 38-68. - Connection of building sewer to public sewer; records. 
(a)  No connection shall be made between any private sewer or building sewer and any public sewer, or between a private drain and any public drain unless it is of such size, material, construction, depth and location, as the director may direct, and until the appropriate permit has been obtained from the director and all fees, charges, and assessments have been paid. 
(b)  The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the director when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The director shall be notified not less than 48 hours in advance of the time any connection is to be made to any public sewer or drain of the city, or to any existing drain, pipe or similar structure to so discharge, and such connection shall be made only in the presence of the director and according to his instructions. The director shall be afforded all reasonable opportunity to oversee the construction of all parts of any sewer connected directly, or indirectly, or intended to be connected, to any public sewer or drain of the city and to obtain and record the location and other pertinent facts with respects to such drain and sewer. This requirement also shall apply to repairs or alterations to sewers, drains or pipes discharging thereto. 
(c)  All private sewers and drains laid by private parties in any street, court or way, open, or proposed to be opened for public travel and accommodation, shall become public sewers or drains when connected to public sewers or drains. After the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, no such sewer shall be connected with a public sewer and no such drain shall be connected with a public drain until plans showing size, material, construction, depth and location are approved by the director and until the owner shall convey in writing to the director exclusive control over the same, with the right to enter such street, court or way and dig up the same so far as necessary for repairing and controlling such sewer or drain and making connections therewith. 
(d)  The director shall keep a record of all connections made to public sewers under this article and all repairs and alterations made to sewers and building sewers connected to or discharging into public sewers of the city or intended to so discharge. All persons concerned shall assist the director in securing data needed for such records. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. III, §§ 13-16) 
Sec. 38-69. - Sanitary building sewer restrictions. 
(a)  No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary or combined sewer unless such connection is approved. 
(b)  In all new construction, and in all reconstruction and remodeling involving building sanitary facilities, as directed by the director, separate piping systems shall be provided for wastewater and for stormwater and shall be extended from the building as separate systems to the public sewer and each, in turn, connected to the appropriate sanitary sewer or storm sewer. Where the public sewer is presently a combined sewer, the requirements for separate wastewater and stormwater system shall apply also, even though the separate systems will connect to the same combined sewer. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. III, §§ 17-18) 
Sec. 38-70. - Sealing abandoned or unused drains. 
    When any building or other structure previously served by a connection to any public sewer or drain is demolished, destroyed, abandoned or altered so that any drain or portion of any abandoned plumbing system which is directly or indirectly connected to any public sewer or drain is no longer connected to the drainage system of the building or structure, the open end of such drain which discharges, directly or indirectly, into a public sewer or drain shall be promptly closed and sealed to the satisfaction of the director, so that no water or wastes not otherwise permitted to enter the public sewer or drain shall be so discharged thereinto. The director shall be notified of such drain, and shall be afforded an opportunity to see such work performed. All said work shall be done by the person or party who demolishes the building or structure or who alters the drainage of the premises so as to make such closing and sealing necessary, and, in the event of failure of such person to do so, shall be done by the owner, lessee or tenant of the premises to the satisfaction of the director, all without expense to the city. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. III, § 19) 
Sec. 38-71. - Private sewers and drains. 
(a)  A private sewer for the collection of two or more building sewers shall be constructed only upon receipt of written approval by the director and shall be recorded in the county registry of deeds. 
(b)  A copy of such approval and a plan prepared in accordance with all the requirements of this article shall be kept on file in the office of the director, department of public works. 
(c)  The requirements of public drains, section 38-64, sections 38-66 through 38-68, and this section shall also apply to private drains. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. III, §§ 20-21) 
Secs. 38-72-38-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PUBLIC SEWERS AND DRAINS 

Sec. 38-111. - Requiring building sewer or drain connection. 
(a)  The city council, and the director are each hereby authorized, in all cases where there is a public sewer or drain in any street of the city or easement held by the city, to cause every owner of land adjoining such street, or easement, his agent or tenant to provide, subject to the provisions of this article, a sufficient building sewer or drain from his house, yard, or lot, to and into such public sewer or drain, whenever, in the opinion of the city council and the director the same shall be necessary for the protection of the public health, and shall, thereupon, give such owner, agent, or tenant notice in writing, specifying the time within which such building sewer or drain shall be constructed. The city council and the director may, whenever, in their opinion, the protection of the public health requires, prohibit the maintenance of any privy or cesspool on any premises connected with a public sewer or drain. Any person who neglects to construct a building sewer or drain under the provisions of this article within the time specified in such notice to do so, or maintains a privy in violation of such prohibition, shall forfeit and pay a penalty as provided in section 38-36(c). 
(b)  The owner of any house, building or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purpose, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or in the future may be located a public sanitary sewer of the city, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable sanitary facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is determined to be accessible and available by the director and located within 100 feet (30.5 meters) from the property line. Extensions greater than 90 days may be granted by the director to individual property owners upon appeal. Said extension shall be granted only when it can be demonstrated that the connection to the public sewer system would create an undue financial hardship upon the owner and that an agreement between the owner and the director be enacted. Said agreement shall be conditioned on the following: 
(1)  That the wastewater from the subject property not be discharged directly to receiving waters. 
(2)  That the property is served by an acceptable subsurface disposal system, as determined by the director. 
(3)  That the agreement is nontransferable; that is, a new owner must connect up to the sewer system within 90 days of the passing of papers. 
(4)  That the owner agrees to pay the city sewer assessment charge as determined by the city's cost recovery program. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. IV, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 38-112. - Procedure for laying out or constructing new public sewers and drains by the city. 
(a)  Whenever the laying out or construction of a new public sewer or drain by city is wanted, application therefor shall be made by petition in writing to the mayor signed by not less than six inhabitants of the city or by the city planning director or by the city engineer. Upon filing of said petition, the mayor may refer the petition to the department of public works for investigation, hearing and report thereon. After hearing all interested parties, the department of public works shall report to the mayor whether, in the director's opinion, the public convenience or the public health require the layout out or construction of a new public sewer or drain by the city. (See also subsection (b) of this section.) 
(b)  No new public sewer or drain shall be constructed by the city unless the question of such construction or making shall first be referred to the department of public works, who shall report to the mayor an estimate of its cost, the materials of which, and the manner in which the same should be constructed or made, and an estimate of the damage likely to be occasioned by construction, taking land, or encroachment of watercourses, and if the sewer or drain or any portion thereof shall be outside the limits of the streets, it shall not be constructed or made otherwise then by the consent of all persons interested, without the same proceedings being followed as are required for laying out streets as required by the department of public works. 
(c)  Whenever any public drain or sewer is to be built, the director shall make or cause to be made a plan of the same, showing the form, mode of construction, depth below the surface, relation of the sewer invert elevations to the city base, the alignment and general direction of the drain or sewer relative to the street lines or neighboring property, and the sill elevations of all houses to be served, which plan shall be kept on file in his office. This plan shall be the basis of the evaluation and report by the director required under subsection (b) of this section. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. IV, §§ 3-5) 
Sec. 38-113. - Construction requirements. 
(a)  All public sewers which shall be ordered by mayor and city council in any street or highway shall, whenever practical, be laid out in such a way as to not hinder traffic and utilities in such street or highway, and shall be constructed of such materials and of such dimensions as the director shall direct. 
(b)  Whenever any street shall be opened for the laying of pipes for water, gas or other purposes, or for the performance of any works of construction or repairs, such laying of pipes and repairs and work connected therewith, or such work of construction shall be executed so as not to obstruct the course, capacity or construction of a public sewer or drain, and whenever pipes for any purpose or any work of construction shall hereafter be found to exist at such depth or in such location as to interfere with any existing sewer or with the building of any public sewer of the required size, and at the proper depth and grades, the person maintaining the same shall, upon notice thereof, at once remove, change and alter such pipes or other works in such manner as the director may direct. If such person neglects to immediately remove, change or alter such pipes in accordance with the terms of notification, then the director may make such removal, change or alteration, and the cost thereof shall be paid by such person. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. IV, §§ 6-8) 
Secs. 38-114-38-140. - Reserved 
DIVISION 4. - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS 

Secs. 38-141. - Unpolluted discharges. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters such as stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer other than such discharge as is present at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived. All new or altered connections, excluding ordinary repairs, to the sanitary wastewater system shall conform with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such drains as are specifically designated as storm drains or to a natural outlet approved by the director. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the administrator, to a storm drain, combined sewer, or natural outlet. However, no materials, the discharge of which into natural streams, ponds, lakes, or other natural bodies of water is prohibited by state or federal law or regulations, shall be discharged into any storm drain. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. V, § 1) 
Secs. 38-142. - Discharges to a natural outlet. 
(a)  The owner of any house, building or property situated within the city and presently discharging, either directly or indirectly, to any river, canal, stream, lake or other surface or subsurface watercourse within the city, any industrial wastewater, as defined in section 38-31, or any polluted discharges described in sections 38-144 and 38-145(a) shall, within 90 days after the passage and adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, file a permit with the state division of water supply and pollution control and the Environmental Protection Agency and send a copy of the permit to the department of public works. The permit shall be in conformance with the NPDES requirements. 
(b)  To ensure subsequent compliance with this article, it is intended that all industrial, business, and commercial establishments within the city file such a permit, even though they now may not specifically discharge such industrial wastewater. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. V, § 2) 
Secs. 38-143. - Separate sewer usage. 
(a)  No person shall discharge into or put into any public sewer or drain of the city, or into any sewer, drain, or fixture which thereafter discharges into any public sewer, drain or appurtenance thereof, any waste or substance other than such kinds or types of waters or water-carried wastes for the conveyance of which the particular sewer, drain or appurtenance is intended, designed, and provided. 
(b)  Except as specifically provided with reference to some particular sewer, sanitary sewers shall be used only for the conveyance and disposal of sanitary wastewater, as defined in section 38-31, and for diluted, water-carried industrial sewage which are not objectionable as hereinafter provided. No sanitary sewer shall be used to receive and convey or dispose of any storm or surface water (as defined in section 38-31), subsoil drainage, any large continuous flow of water seeping into buildings or excavations from soils or other underground sources, flows of natural springs or groundwaters, surplus from flowing wells, the discharges from roofs, roof conductors, yard drains, street or highway drains, or of cooling water (as defined in section 38-31). 
(c)  If the original proceedings for the layout and construction of any particular sewer or for its acquisition by the city did not indicate what kind of sewer or drain it was intended to be, or what wastewaters could or could not be discharged therein, the director shall consider the pertinent facts and shall determine the kind of sewer or drain said sewer is for the purposes of this article and what waste or wastewaters shall be permitted to be discharged thereinto or be excluded therefrom. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. V, §§ 3-5) 
Secs. 38-144. - Polluted discharges prohibited. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas. 
(2)  Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any waste treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment facility. 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the wastewater works. 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, fats and shortening, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(5)  Any septic tank solids or pumpings. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. V, § 6) 
Secs. 38-145. - Polluted discharges restricted. 
(a)  Limitations. The following described substances, materials, waters, or waste shall be limited in discharges to public sewers to concentrations or quantities which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. the director may set limitations lower than the limitations established in the regulations below if in its opinion such more severe limitations are necessary to meet the above objectives. In forming its opinion as to the acceptability, the director will give consideration to such factors as the quantity of subject waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, the wastewater treatment process employed, capacity of the wastewater treatment facility, degree of treatability of the waste in the wastewater treatment facility, and other pertinent factors. The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the director are as follows: 
(1)  Wastewater having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius). 
(2)  Wastewater containing more than 25 milligrams per liter of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or product of mineral oil origin, or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (0 and 65 degrees Celsius). 
(3)  Wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oils, fat, or grease in excess of 100 milligrams per liter. 
(4)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded (see definition in section 38-31). Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the director. 
(5)  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes having concentrations of objectionable or toxic substances including, but not necessarily limited to, those in excess of the limits listed below; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine demand, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the wastewater treatment facility exceeds the limits established by the director as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters. 
Max. Limit Concentration (mg/l) Cadmium 0.8 Chromium (trivalent) 3.0 Chromium (hexavalent) 1.0 Copper 1.0 Gold 3.0 Iron 15.0 Lead 0.1 Nickel 3.0 Silver 0.03 Tin 0.0 Zinc 1.2 Metals (not mentioned above) 2.0 Cyanides 0.5 Floating Oil 0.0 Fluroide 5.0 Mercuric Chloride (As mercury, Hg) 0.5 Phenols (not to exceed) 1.0 Solvents 0.0 Sulfates 500.0 Sulfides 100.0  
(7)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the director in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(8)  Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance which is, in the opinion of the director, capable of creating a public nuisance. 
(9)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances in such concentrations as to exceed the limits established by the director and/or the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies or jurisdictions for such discharge to the receiving waters. 
(10)  Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.0. 
(11)  Materials which exert or cause: 
a.  Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate), and wastewaters having suspended solids concentrations in excess of 228 mg/l. 
b.  Color or turbidity in such an amount that it will prevent the city from discharging a treated effluent in compliance with its NPDES permit (such as, but not limited to, dyewastes and vegetable tanning solutions). 
c.  Wastewaters having BOD concentrations in excess of 378 mg/l, and unusual, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine demand in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment facilities and/or may cause the effluent limitations of the commission's NPDES permit to be exceeded. 
d.  Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a "slug" as defined herein (see section 38-31). 
(12)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(13)  Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form suspended solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes. 
(b)  Options of director. If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or posses the characteristics enumerated in subsection (a) of this section, and which, in the judgment of the director, may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the director may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes, 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers. 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge, and/or 
(4)  Require payment to cover added cost of handling and treating the waste. 
If the director permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the director and/or other regulatory agencies. 
(c)  Excluding polluted discharges from public sewers. In determining whether any waste discharged or proposed to be discharged into any public sewer or drain would have a deleterious effect as described in subsection (b) of this section, and therefore, should be excluded from the public sewers, consideration shall be given to the quantity, time, or times of discharge; rate and manner of discharge; dilution; the biological, chemical, and physical composition of the wastewater in question; the size of the sewer or drain into which it is or is to be discharged; the probable quantity of other sewage or objectionable wastes in said sewer or drain at the time of discharge; and other pertinent facts. Minute quantities of a waste which would be objectionable in larger quantity may be permitted upon specific permission of the director if sufficiently diluted when and as discharged, or if the quantity discharged is very small in comparison to the receiving sewer and the flow therein at the time of discharge. Any permission to discharge minute quantities of an otherwise excluded waste shall be revocable at any time by the director. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. V, §§ 7-9) 
Secs. 38-146. - Pretreatment. 
(a)  Where necessary, in the opinion of the director, the owner shall, at his expense, provide such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to reduce such objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in this division, or to control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastewaters. Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted to the director for review and approval and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approval is obtained in writing. 
(b)  In all premises where wastes or substances specified to be excluded from sewers or drains by this article are customarily present and liable to be discharged directly or indirectly into any public sewer or drain, suitable and sufficient piping layouts, oil or grease traps or separators, screens, sedimentation chambers, diluting devices, storage and regulating, treatment, cooling or condensing equipment and similar devices or equipment shall be provided, maintained and operated, as required by the director to ensure that no waste, substance, or water required to be excluded from said sewer or drain shall be discharged thereinto in violation of the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. V, §§ 10, 11) 
Secs. 38-147. - Accessibility, operation and maintenance of pretreatment facilities. 
(a)  Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in a condition satisfactory to the director and be effectively operated by the owner at the owner's expense. 
(b)  Grease, oil and sand removal facilities (traps, etc.) shall be provided when, in the opinion of the director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, as specified in section 38-145(a)(3), or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such facilities shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All facilities shall be of a type and capacity approved by the director, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these facilities the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records of the dates, and means of disposal which are subject to review by the director. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by the owner must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. V, §§ 12, 13) 
Secs. 38-148. - Measuring, sampling and other devices. 
    At premises where any of the substances or wastes prescribed as being or to be excluded for any sewer or drain are present and liable to be discharged contrary to the limitations of this article, the director may require that the owner of said premises provide, operate, and maintain a sampling well or wells, a flow measuring device, manholes, catch basins, or other suitable devices or treatment facilities on any or all building sewers or drains from said premises near the point or points where said sewers connect to any public sewer or drain. By means of said sampling well or wells, or other devices, the owner of said premises and the director or any public officer charged with the duty of supervising the disposal of wastewaters, may secure samples of or examine the wastes and wastewaters discharged into said public sewer and measure the quantities thereof for the purpose of ascertaining the compliance or noncompliance with the requirements of this article. All such devices and facilities shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. V, § 14) 
Secs. 38-149. - Description of pretreatment facilities and measuring or sampling devices in building sewer permit. 
    To facilitate compliance with the requirements of this division, the director shall require that the owner applying for a permit to install a new connection to any sewer or drain, or to alter or extend an existing building sewer, in any case, where a sampling well, oil or grease trap or separator, diluting device or similar appurtenance is or may be required, to furnish the director as part of the application for said permit a plan or satisfactory description, or both, of the device of whatever kind it is proposed to provide, and a description of the proposed operation thereof. Said plan, description, or both shall become part of said application and the installation of the device in accordance therewith shall be a condition attached to the granting of said permit. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. V, § 15) 
Secs. 38-150. - Analyses of industrial wastewaters. 
(a)  All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of water and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer or private sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
(b)  Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the wastewater works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pH is determined from periodic grab samples. 
(c)  Furnishing required analyses, flow data, etc. shall be the responsibility of the applicant. The director will stipulate the minimum analyses and other data that shall be obtained. At the request of the applicant, the director shall conduct wastewater sampling and measuring programs. Expenses thus incurred by the city shall be assessed to the applicant. 
(d)  All industries discharging into a public sewer shall perform such monitoring of their discharges as the director and/or other duly authorized employees of the city may reasonably require, including installation, use, and maintenance of monitoring equipment, keeping records and reporting the results of such monitoring to the director. Such records shall be made available upon request by the director or by other agencies having jurisdiction over discharges to the receiving waters. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. V, §§ 16-18) 
Secs. 38-151. - Treatment of industrial wastewaters by city. 
    No statement contained in this division shall be construed as preventing any agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the industrial concern. Such agreement or arrangement shall first be approved by the director, provided that arrangements do not contravene any requirements of existing federal laws and are compatible with any user charge and industrial cost recovery system in effect. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. V, § 19) 
Secs. 38-152. - Cesspool and septic tank cleanings. 
    Cesspool and septic tank cleanings may be discharged to the wastewater facilities at septic waste dumping stations designated and in a manner approved by the Blackstone Valley District Commission (BVDC). The composition of these wastes shall be subject to those limitations enumerated in section 3, article IV of the BVDC ordinance, with no industrial wastes, wastes considered to be detrimental to the treatment process, or wastes from chemical tanks permitted. Hauling and unloading of cleanings shall be performed by currently licensed waste disposal contractors. Unloading shall be made according to the arrangements and methods designated by the BVDC and the area shall be cleaned after each unloading. An unloading slip shall be turned in to the BVDC office for each unloading. The slips, provided by the BVDC, shall show the date, time, hauler's name, origin of load, capacity of truck, approximate gallons being unloaded, names and addresses where collected and signature of the driver. The capacity of the contractor's truck may be calculated by the BVDC and any part of a load will be billed as a full load. The BVDC may assess such fees or charges as it may deem reasonable and proper for the acceptance, handling, and treating of such wastes. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. V, § 20) 
Secs. 38-153. - Request for information. 
    The director may require a user of sewer services to provide information needed to determine compliance with this article. These requirements may include: 
(1)  Wastewaters discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time period. 
(2)  Chemical analyses of wastewaters. 
(3)  Information on raw materials, processes, and products affecting wastewater volume and quality. 
(4)  Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent, or other materials important to sewer use control. 
(5)  A plot plan of sewers of the user's property showing sewer and pretreatment facility location. 
(6)  Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities. 
(7)  Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials through spills to the municipal sewer. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. V, § 21) 
Secs. 38-154-38-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - GARBAGE DISPOSAL UNITS 

Sec. 38-181. - Permit. 
(a)  No garbage disposal unit as defined in section 38-31 shall be installed in a commercial or industrial establishment without first having obtained a permit from the director. Persons desiring to install a domestic garbage disposal unit in a one- or two-family dwelling unit do not need a permit unless the director has previously, by legal public notice in a newspaper of general circulation, declared that the capacity of the public sewerage system in that particular sewer district is insufficient and that the installation of garbage disposal units is likely to impair such sewerage system. 
(b)  Any person desiring to install a garbage disposal unit shall first make application in writing to the director upon a form provided by him for that purpose, which application shall state the name and address of the applicant, the address of the premises in which such installation is desired, and a general description of the premises and the existing sewerage system within the premises affected. 
(c)  Upon the filing of such application, the director shall, within a reasonable time, cause the premises and the available sewer system to be inspected and surveyed and, from the findings so obtained, determine upon such change or alteration in such system as, in his opinion, shall be necessary before issuing an approval of the application. No such approval shall be issued in any instance where the capacity of the public sewerage system, within the particular sewer district, shall be insufficient, or where the additional demand and service caused by the use of such garbage disposal unit shall be likely to impair the efficiency of such sewerage system. A reasonable time in this case, shall be considered to mean no more than two weeks from the date of application. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. VI, §§ 1-3) 
Secs. 38-182-38-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - SEWER CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIRS 

Secs. 38-201. - Effect of division on plumbers and others. 
    The limitations as to person who may construct, alter or repair public sewers and drains, as provided in section 38-203(c) and (d) shall not restrict the usual work of plumbers or others when operating in accordance with the plumbing and building codes of the city; provided no plumber or other person shall make any connection to a public sewer or drain of the city without a permit therefor, even if said sewer or drain is located under or immediately adjacent to any building or similar structure; and provided all drains and fixtures within said building or structures and all use made of them shall conform to the requirements of this article as to what may and may not be permitted to be discharged into public sewers and drains. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. IX, § 1) 
Secs. 38-202. - Building sewer application and permit. 
(a)  Every application for building sewer permit shall be made in writing on forms to be provided by the director for that purpose and shall be signed by the licensed plumber. The application shall state the location and ownership of the property to be served by the sewer or drain in question, the post office address of said property owner, a brief description of the work to be done, and shall contain an agreement that the permittee will do the work in accordance with the local laws, ordinances, regulations and permits of the city as those local laws may apply to the particular location or work, and will save the city and others harmless from damages, loss, or damage claims of every name and nature, all in such form and detail as may be directed by the director on the form provided. The director in his discretion, may require, as a prerequisite to the issuance of any permit, that he be furnished: 
(1)  Evidence that any and all permissions and necessary permits to open public streets, public or private grounds or property have been or will be issued; 
(2)  Evidence that the agent of the applicant is properly authorized to sign the application in question; 
(3)  Evidence that the devices or provisions to prevent the entry into public sewers or drains of any substances forbidden entry by this article will be provided, maintained and operated as required by this article; and 
(4)  Any other information or proof pertinent to the particular job in question. 
(b)  Each permit to construct, alter or repair any sewer, building sewer, or drain under this division shall be issued only after an application as hereinbefore provided has been made. It shall state the limit of time within which the work must be performed and at the expiration of which the privileges for construction under the permit shall terminate, unless such time limit shall have been extended in writing by the director. Permits shall not be transferable or assignable by the permittee. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. IX, §§ 2, 3) 
Secs. 38-203. - Authorized persons. 
(a)  To ensure compliance with this article and to faciliate the supervision of the construction, operation, and repair of sewers and drains and the keeping of records thereof, no person other than those described in this division, shall construct, repair, alter or remove any sewer, building sewer or drain connected to or with, or discharging directly or indirectly to or into any public sewer or drain of the city or intended to discharge thus, at some future time, regardless of whether said work is located in a public street or in public or private land. 
(b)  No person, other than those working for and under the direction of the director, shall make any excavation for or construct, install, lay, repair, alter or remove any sewer, drain, sewer connection, or appurtenances thereof within the city which is in any way connected to or discharge directly or indirectly to or into any public sewer or drain of the city, or is intended at some future time to be so connected or to so discharge, until said person shall have applied for and secured from the director a permit for doing such work. Such permits may be issued only to those qualified to perform such work as provided in subsections (c) and (d) of this section. 
(c)  The following persons may, as indicated, construct, repair, alter or remove public sewers and drains, except building sewers, subject to supervision and approval by the director: 
(1)  Regular forces of a contractor employed by the city operating under orders of the director and in the performance of work for the city. 
(2)  Regular forces of the city or the state department of health operating under and subject to permit for the particular job to be issued by the director. 
(3)  Regular forces of any public utility corporation authorized by state law to construct, maintain and operate pipes or ducts within public highways within the city, while engaged in work incidental to the regular structures of said utility company and operating under and subject to the conditions of the permit for the particular job issued by the director. 
(4)  Any contractor or person who shall have been duly licensed by the director to perform work of the type in question during the period provided in such license and when operating under and subject to the conditions of a permit for the particular job issued therefore, by the director. Such licenses shall be valid for one year and subject to revocation for cause. Fees for such licenses shall be established by the director and approved by the city council. 
(5)  Building sewers must be constructed by a licensed plumber as outlined in section 38-62(c). 
(d)  The connection of all private drains or sewers within the street limits and all connections to any public drain or sewer shall be performed by the director, or his agent, and all material therefore shall be furnished by the city, and the cost thereof and of the labor of laying the same shall be included in the sum paid for the permit. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. IX, §§ 4-6) 
Secs. 38-204. - Duties and responsibility of the contractor. 
    Each contractor or person shall be responsible for the faithful performance of all work performed under the license or permits issued and for the conduct of all work and all materials furnished on work by his employees or agents. No work shall be sublet by a contractor or person under any permit issued under such license in any manner to divest said contractor or person of full control and responsibility for all parts of said work. Only competent persons shall be employed on work performed under such license and only suitable material conforming to the standards established by the director shall be furnished or used on such work. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. IX, § 7) 
Secs. 38-205. - Revoking contract or license. 
    Should the director find that any contractor or person has failed to conform to the requirements of this article and to the conditions of any permit issued thereunder, or that such contractor has not been faithful in the performance of work or furnishing of materials under his license, the director may suspend, cancel or revoke such license and/or permit, and may extend the suspension of such license and/or permit for such period, or limit the activities of such contractor or person in such manner a may appear to be to the public interest after a duly conducted hearing before the director and upon their direction. Suspension, cancellation, or termination of a permit shall not entitle the permittee to any compensation or reimbursement from the city or its agents for any alleged loss or expense incurred thereby, and licenses and permits shall be issued only on this condition. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. IX, § 8) 
Secs. 38-206-38-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL 

Sec. 38-231. - Permit. 
(a)  Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of division 3 of this article, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this division. The term "director" in this division shall refer to the director of the state department of health or his authorized representative. 
(b)  Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system, the owners shall first obtain a written permit signed by the director. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the director, state department of health, including application fee. 
(c)  A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the director. The director shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction, and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the director when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 96 hours of the receipt of notice by the director. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. XV, §§ 1-3) 
Sec. 38-232. - Compliance with state recommendations. 
    The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the department of health of the state. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. XV, § 4) 
Sec. 38-233. - Requiring building sewer connection to public sewer. 
    At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, as provided in division 3 of this article, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 60 days in compliance with this article, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. XV, § 5) 
Sec. 38-234. - Operation and maintenance of private wastewater disposal facilities. 
    The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. XV, § 6) 
Sec. 38-235. - Additional requirements. 
    No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the director, and by the state department of health. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1982, art. XV, § 7) 
Chapter 40 - REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY, REDEVELOPMENT AREA, AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN 
ARTICLE I. - CITY REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY 

Sec. 40-1. - The city redevelopment agency; creation and membership. 
    There shall be a Central Falls Redevelopment Agency ("agency"). The agency shall consist of five members appointed by the mayor and approved by the council from among persons who are residents and domiciliaries of the city. The members who are first appointed following adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter derives shall be designated to serve for terms of one, two, three, four, and five years respectively. Thereafter members shall be appointed for a term of office of five years such that the term of one member shall expire each year, except that all vacancies occurring during a term shall be filled for the unexpired term. A member holds office until his or her successor has been appointed and has qualified. No member of the agency may be an elected officer or an employee of the city. The powers of the agency shall be vested in the members thereof then in office. Members shall receive their actual and necessary expenses including travel expenses and may receive such other compensation as the city council may prescribe. Upon passage of the ordinance from which this chapter derives, the current terms of the members are null and void and five members shall be reappointed pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-27-2017(1) , § 1) 
Sec. 40-2. - Officers. 
    The agency shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson from among its members. The agency shall elect or appoint a secretary who need not be a member of the agency. The term of office of the chairperson, vice-chairperson, and secretary, shall be for the calendar year, or for that portion remaining after each such officer is designated or elected. 
(Ord. of 2-27-2017(1) , § 1) 
Sec. 40-3. - Agency powers. 
    The agency shall have all of the powers, duties and responsibilities in connection with the redevelopment of blighted and substandard areas in the city, and for all other purposes, as set forth in the applicable laws of the state and of the federal government, the City of Central Falls Home Rule Charter, and any applicable municipal ordinances, now or hereinafter in effect for redevelopment agencies generally or the agency in particular. 
(Ord. of 2-27-2017(1) , § 1) 
Secs. 40-4-40-33. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REDEVELOPMENT AREAS 

Sec. 40-34. - Authority; designation of areas. 
    The city council hereby designates, in accordance with G.L. 1956, § 45-32-4, the redevelopment areas as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. of 2-27-2017(1) , § 1) 
Sec. 40-35. - Redevelopment area 1. 
    The following area in the city shall be designated as redevelopment area 1: 
The boundaries of the city, excepting the area bounded and identified as redevelopment area 2, shall be the boundaries of the redevelopment area hereby created. This area shall be designated as redevelopment area 1 and includes the entire city except that portion of the city bounded and designated as redevelopment area 2. In connection therewith, the city council hereby finds that such redevelopment area is a blighted and substandard area whose redevelopment is necessary to effectuate the public purposes declared in G.L. 1956, chs. 45-31, 45-32 and 45-33. 
(Ord. of 2-27-2017(1) , § 1) 
Sec. 40-36. - Redevelopment area 2. 
    The following area in the city shall be designated as redevelopment area 2: 
Starting at the Pawtucket/Central Falls city line on Lonsdale Avenue and heading north along Lonsdale Avenue to a point that is halfway between Rand Street and Watson Street, then turning easterly and running along property lines to the intersection of Rand Street with Pine Street, then turning northwesterly and running along Pine Street to a point that is halfway between Mowrey Street and Richardson Street, then turning northeasterly and running along property lines to the intersection with Dexter Street, then turning southeasterly and running down Dexter Street to the intersection with Cross Street, then turning northeasterly and running down Cross Street approximately 400 feet, then turning southeasterly and running along the property lines until it intersects with Clay Street, then turn southwesterly and run down Cross Street until it intersects with Dexter Street, then southeasterly down Dexter Street across the city line until it meets Main Street Pawtucket, then continue on Main Street until Park Place West and then turning westerly and following Main Street westerly until it intersects with Mineral Spring Avenue, then along Mineral Spring Avenue westerly until it intersects with Conant Street, then northwesterly along Conant Street until it intersects with Weeden Street, then westerly along Weeden Street until it intersects with Coleman Street, then northerly along Coleman Street until it intersects with Beecher Street, then along Beecher Street northerly and westerly until it intersects with Lonsdale Avenue, then northerly along Lonsdale Avenue to the point and place of beginning on the Pawtucket/Central Falls city line. 
    In connection therewith, the city council hereby finds that such redevelopment area is a blighted and substandard area whose redevelopment is necessary to effectuate the public purposes declared in G.L. 1956, chs. 45-31, 45-32 and 45-33. 
(Ord. of 2-27-2017(1) , § 1) 
Secs. 40-37-40-66. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REDEVELOPMENT PLANS 

Sec. 40-67. - Central falls redevelopment plan; adoption. 
    The "Central Falls Redevelopment Plan," attached hereto as appendix B, is incorporated herein by this reference and is hereby adopted. The area covered by the Central Falls Redevelopment Plan is within, and comprises the entirety of redevelopment area 1. 
(1)  The city council hereby designates the project area affected by the Central Falls Redevelopment Plan as the Central Falls Project Area No. 1. 
(2)  The city council hereby finds that the area which makes up the Central Falls Project Area No. 1 is blighted and substandard, evidencing arrested blighted conditions, slum blighted conditions and deteriorated blighted conditions as defined in G.L. 1956, § 45-31-8, including without limitation deterioration of structures, vandalism and graffiti, tax delinquencies, and vacant, unmaintained and overgrown lots littered with abandoned property, such that the area requires clearance, replanning, redevelopment, rehabilitation and/or improvement, all as more specifically provided in the Central Falls Redevelopment Plan. 
(3)  It is the purpose and intention of the city council in adopting the ordinance from which this chapter derives to foster the elimination and prevention of blighted and substandard conditions in the Central Falls Project Area No. 1, which shall protect and promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the aforesaid project area and of redevelopment area 1, all as more specifically provided in the Central Falls Redevelopment Plan. 
(4)  The city council hereby finds that the Central Falls Redevelopment Plan is feasible and conforms to the comprehensive plan for the city, and that if the Central Falls Redevelopment Plan is implemented as provided it would promote the public health, safety, morals and welfare of the city, and would effectuate the purposes set forth in G.L. 1956, chs. 45-31, 45-32 and 45-33. 
(5)  The Central Falls Redevelopment Plan does not call for any expenditures of funds outside of the existing funds on hand of the city redevelopment agency, and therefore no authorization for the appropriation of funds by the city council is required in connection with the implementation of the Central Falls Redevelopment Plan. 
(6)  The city council finds that the Central Falls Redevelopment Plan makes adequate provision for the retention of controls and the establishment of any restrictions or covenants which may run with real property sold, leased or otherwise disposed of. 
(Ord. of 2-27-2017(1) , § 1) 
Editor's note- Appendix B is not attached hereto but is available for viewing at the city clerk's office. 
Appendix A - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the amended zoning ordinance for the City of Central Falls originally adopted on October 1, 1993, and readopted by the City Council on October 15, 2007; effective the same date. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform, and citations to state statutes as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. A consistent scheme of capitalization has also been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference- Zoning, G.L. 1956, § 45-24-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 100. - Statement of purpose and consistency with comprehensive plan. 
    The zones and regulations set forth in this ordinance are made in accordance with the comprehensive plan for the following purposes: 
(A)  Promote the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(B)  Provide for a range of uses and intensities of use appropriate to the character of the city and reflecting current and expected future needs. 
(C)  Provide for orderly growth and development which recognizes: 
(1)  The goals and patterns of land use contained in the comprehensive plan of the city adopted pursuant to chapter 45-22.2 of the general laws of Rhode Island [G.L. 1956, § 45-22.2-1 et seq.]; 
(2)  The natural characteristics of the land, including its suitability for use based on soil characteristics, topography, and susceptibility to surface or ground water pollution; 
(3)  The values and dynamic nature of coastal and freshwater ponds, the shoreline, and freshwater and coastal wetlands; 
(4)  The values of unique or valuable natural resources and features; 
(5)  The availability and capacity of existing and planned public and/or private services and facilities; 
(6)  The need to shape and balance urban and suburban development; and, 
(7)  The use of innovative development regulations and techniques. 
(D)  Provide for the control, protection, and/or abatement of air, water, groundwater, and noise pollution, and soil erosion and sedimentation. 
(E)  Provide for the protection of the natural, historic, cultural, and scenic character of the city or areas therein. 
(F)  Provide for the preservation and promotion of open space. 
(G)  Provide for the protection of public investment in transportation, water, stormwater management systems, sewage treatment and disposal, solid waste treatment and disposal, schools, recreation, public facilities, open space, and other public requirements. 
(H)  Promote a balance of housing choices, for all income levels and groups, to assure the health, safety, and welfare of all citizens and their rights to affordable, accessible, safe and sanitary housing. 
(I)  Promote safety from fire, flood, and other natural or manmade disasters. 
(J)  Promote a high level of quality in design in the development of private and public facilities. 
(K)  Promote implementation of the comprehensive plan of the city. 
(L)  Provide for coordination of land uses with contiguous municipalities, other municipalities, the state and other agencies. 
(M)  Provide for efficient review of development proposals, to clarify and expedite the zoning approval process. 
(N)  Provide for procedures for the administration of this ordinance, including but not limited to variances and special use permits. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 45-24-30; required provisions, G.L. 1956, § 45-24-32(1). 
Sec. 101. - Establishment of zoning districts. 
    For the purpose of this Ordinance, the City is divided into zoning districts designated and described as follows: 
    101.1. Residential zoning districts. 
    R-1 one-household district. This zone is intended for low density residential areas comprising single dwelling unit detached structures located on lots with a minimum land area of 5,000 sq. ft. 
    R-2 two-household district. This zone is intended for medium density residential areas comprising single dwelling unit and two-dwelling unit detached structures located on lots with a minimum land area of 5,000 sq. ft. 
    R-3 multi-household dwelling district. This zone is intended for medium density residential areas comprised of structures containing single dwelling units, two-dwelling units and multiple-dwelling units located on lots with a minimum land area of 5,000 sq. ft. and a minimum land area of 2,000 sq. ft. per dwelling unit. 
    101.2 - Commercial zoning districts. 
    C-1 limited commercial district. This zone is intended for neighborhood commercial areas that primarily serve local neighborhood needs for convenience retail, services and professional office establishments. 
    C-2 general commercial district. This zone is intended for commercial areas that serve citywide needs for retail, services and professional office establishments. 
    C-D commercial-downtown district. This zone is intended to encourage revitalization and restoration of core business areas in the city. A variety of business, financial, institutional, public, quasi-public, cultural, residential (upper floors only) and other related uses are encouraged in the C-D district. Compatible and appropriate mixed uses are encouraged to promote commercial, retail and other business activity including office uses. 
    101.3 - Industrial zoning districts. 
    M-1 industrial district. This zone is intended for general industrial uses that accommodate a variety of manufacturing, assembly, storage of durable goods and related activities, provided that they do not pose toxic, explosive or environmental hazard in the city. 
    M-2 heavy industrial district. This zone is intended to provide for areas for heavy industrial uses, especially for those uses that are potentially hazardous, noxious or incompatible with the uses in any other zone. 
    101.4 - Overlay zoning districts. 
    These are districts that are superimposed on existing zoning district(s) or part of a district and which impose specified requirements in addition to those otherwise applicable and/or allow alternate uses. 
    HD historic district. This overlay zone is intended to preserve structures of historic and architectural value by regulating the construction, alteration, repair, moving and demolition of such structures. This overlay zone may include single buildings and/or lots. 
    MBRD mill building re-use district This overlay zone allows the development of obsolete industrial sites according to a plan for mixed use. 
    101.5 - Open space zoning district. 
    P park district. This zone is intended to preserve open space recreation use and in certain instances public education uses. 
    CM cemetery. This zone is intended to retain cemetery land for its designated purposes. 
State Law reference- Districts generally, G.L. 1956, § 45-24-36. 
Sec. 102. - Official zoning map. 
    The official zoning map of the city shall consist of an official zoning map in the office of the city clerk entitled "Central Falls Zoning Map," dated August 1, 2007, and shall depict all zoning districts and overlay zoning districts. The Central Falls Zoning Map shall constitute the official zoning map of the city and is hereby adopted and made part of this ordinance. 
State Law reference- Zoning map required, G.L. 1956, § 45-24-32(8). 
Sec. 103. - Zone group classification. 
    Whenever the terms "R zone," "C zone," or "M zone" are used, they shall be deemed to refer to all zones containing the same letters in their names; e.g., C zones shall include C-1, C-2, and C-D zones. 
Sec. 104. - Zone boundaries. 
    Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of the zoning districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
A)  Zone boundaries are generally intended to follow lot lines. 
B)  Zone boundaries, where indicated, are the center lines of streets, parkways, waterways, or railroad rights-of-way. 
C)  Where the street layout on the ground varies from the layout as shown on the zoning map, the director of the planning division shall interpret said map according to the reasonable intent of this ordinance. 
D)  Where the zone boundary divides a lot so that 50 percent or more of its frontage is on a street in a more restrictive zone, the provisions of this ordinance relating to the more restrictive zone shall be extended to the entire lot. 
E)  Where the zone boundary divides a lot so that more than 50 percent of its frontage is on a street in a less restrictive zone, the provisions of this ordinance relating to the less restrictive zone may be extended to the entire lot. 
Sec. 105. - Compliance with ordinance. 
    105.1. Conformance with permitted use. No building or structure shall be erected, reconstructed, or enlarged for any use other than that which is permitted in the zone in which such building, structure or land is located. No building or structure shall be moved to [a] new site unless that site is zoned to permit the use intended for such building or structure. Nor shall any building, structure or land be used for any use other than is permitted in the zone in which it is located. 
    105.2. Dimensional conformance. Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure shall be erected, enlarged, or reconstructed to exceed the dimensional limits established for the zone wherein such building or structure is located. 
    105.3. Lot area conformance. No new lot shall be created, nor shall an existing lot be reduced or diminished, except in conformance with the dimensional requirements of this ordinance, nor shall the number of dwelling units or occupancy thereon be increased in any manner except in conformance with the dimensional requirements of this ordinance. The lot or yard areas of buildings existing at the time this ordinance became effective shall not be diminished below the requirements herein provided. The required yard area for a building shall not be included as a part of the required yard or parking area of any other building. 
Sec. 106. - Interpretation of ordinance. 
    It shall be the duty of the building official to interpret and apply the provisions of this ordinance. Such interpretation and application shall be subject to appeal to the board [zoning board of review]. In interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of health, safety, morals, convenience or the general welfare. 
    This ordinance shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan of the city adopted pursuant to G.L. 1956, ch. 45-22.2, and in the instance of uncertainty in the construction or application of any section of this ordinance, this ordinance shall be construed in a manner that will further the implementation of, and not be contrary to, the goals and policies and applicable elements of such comprehensive plan. 
ARTICLE II. - NONCONFORMANCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Provision for nonconforming development required, G.L. 1956, § 45-24-39. 

Sec. 200. - Nonconformance. 
Sec. 201. - Lawfully established. 
    A building, structure or the use of land was lawfully established if it was in existence prior to December 8, 1968, or was established in conformance with the zoning ordinance in effect at the time the use was established. A lot was lawfully established if it was of record or shown on a recorded plat prior to December 8, 1968, and was separately owned. All other lots that were not lawfully established are not protected by this section. 
Sec. 202. - Nonconforming by use. 
    A use of land or use of a building or structure which is in nonconformance with the requirements of this ordinance pertaining to use is nonconforming by use. A nonconforming use which exists by virtue of a variance or special use permit (formerly special exception) granted by the board shall not be considered a nonconforming use for the purposes of this section. Such use shall be considered a use by variance or special use permit and any moving, addition, enlargement, expansion, intensification or change of such use to any use other than a permitted use shall require a further variance or special use permit from the board. 
Sec. 203. - Nonconforming by dimension. 
    A building or structure or parcel of land which is in nonconformance with the dimensional regulations of this ordinance is nonconforming by dimension. Dimensional regulations include those regulations of this ordinance not pertaining to use. 
Sec. 204. - Nonconforming by dwelling units. 
    A building or structure containing more dwelling units than are permitted by the use regulations of this ordinance shall be nonconforming by use. A building or structure containing a permitted number of dwelling units by the use regulations of this ordinance, but not meeting the area and dimensional requirements, shall be nonconforming by dimension. 
Sec. 205. - Applicability. 
    A building, structure or parcel of land nonconforming by more than one factor, such as by use, dimension, area or parking, shall comply with all regulations of this section. Where the regulations conflict, the most restrictive regulations shall apply. 
Sec. 206. - Building or structure nonconforming by use. 
    Nonconforming uses are incompatible with and detrimental to permitted uses in the zoning districts in which they are located. Nonconforming uses cause disruption of the comprehensive land use pattern of the city, inhibit present and future development of nearby properties, and confer upon their owners a position of unfair advantage. It is intended that existing nonconforming uses shall not justify further departures from this ordinance for themselves, or for any other properties. 
    206.1. Treatment in residential zones. Nonconforming uses in residential zones are to be treated in a stricter fashion than nonconforming uses located in nonresidential zones. Due to the disruption which nonconforming uses cause to the peace and tranquility of a residential zone, nonconforming uses therein should be eventually abolished or reduced to total conformity over time. 
    206.2. Continuance of use. Nothing in this ordinance shall prevent or be construed to prevent the continuance of a nonconforming use of any building or structure for any purpose to which such building or structure was lawfully established. 
    206.3. Maintenance and repair. A building or structure containing a nonconforming use may be maintained and repaired except as otherwise provided in this section. 
    206.4. Moving. A building or structure containing a nonconforming use shall not be moved in whole or in part either on or off the lot on which it is located unless the use contained within such building or structure is made to conform to the use regulations of the zone in which it is relocated. 
    206.5. Addition and enlargement. A building or structure containing a nonconforming use shall not be added to or enlarged in any manner, including any addition or enlargement of floor area or volume, unless the use contained within such building or structure, including such addition and enlargement, is made to conform to the use regulations of the zone in which it is located. 
    206.6. Expansion. A nonconforming use of a building or structure shall not be expanded into any other portion of the building or structure which contains a conforming use or which is unoccupied or unused. 
    206.7. Intensification. A nonconforming use of a building, structure or land shall not be intensified in any manner. Intensification shall include, but not be limited to, increasing hours of operation, increasing the number of dwelling units or increasing the seating capacity of a place of assembly. However, this section shall not prohibit the reconfiguration of existing dwelling units within a building or structure so long as such reconfiguration complies with the requirements of section 206.6. 
    206.8. Change of use. 
(A)  Residential zones. Within any residential zone, a nonconforming use shall only be changed to a permitted use or to the same use code listed under article III. A nonconforming use, if changed to a permitted use, may not be changed back to a nonconforming use. No mixed uses are allowed in an R zone. 
(B)  Nonresidential zones. Within any nonresidential zone, a nonconforming use may be changed to a permitted use, to the same use code listed under article III, or may be changed to a different nonconforming use by special use permit in accordance with section 908. A nonconforming use, if changed to a permitted use, may not be changed back to a nonconforming use. 
    206.9 - Abandonment. If a nonconforming use is abandoned, it may not be reestablished. Abandonment of a nonconforming use shall consist of intent to abandon and some overt act, or failure to act, which would lead one to believe that the owner neither claims nor retains any interest in continuing the nonconforming use unless said owner can demonstrate an intent not to abandon the use. An involuntary interruption of a nonconforming use, such as by fire or natural catastrophe, does not establish the intent to abandon the nonconforming use. However, if any nonconforming use is halted for a period of 12 months, the owner of such nonconforming use will be presumed to have abandoned such nonconforming use, unless such presumption is rebutted by presentation of sufficient evidence of intent not to abandon the use. 
State Law reference- Authority to so provide, G.L. 1956, § 45-24-39(c). 
Sec. 207. - Building or structure nonconforming by dimension. 
    Buildings or structures that are nonconforming by dimension are likely to cause overcrowding and congestion in the neighborhoods, contribute to unhealthy conditions and are contrary to the purposes of this ordinance. Buildings or structures that are nonconforming by dimension cause disruption of the comprehensive land use pattern of the city, inhibit present and future development of nearby properties, and confer upon their owners a position of unfair advantage. It is intended that existing buildings or structures that are nonconforming by dimension shall not justify further departures from this ordinance for themselves or for any other property. 
    207.1 - Continuance. Nothing in this ordinance shall prevent or be construed to prevent the continuance of the use of any building or structure nonconforming by dimension for any purpose to which such building or structure was lawfully established. 
    207.2 - Maintenance and repair. A building or structure nonconforming by dimension may be maintained and repaired except as otherwise provided in this section. 
    207.3 - Moving. A building or structure which is nonconforming by dimension shall not be moved in whole or in part to any other location on the lot in which it is located unless every portion of such building or structure is made to conform to all of the dimensional requirements of the zone in which it is located. 
    207.4 - Addition and enlargement. A building or structure nonconforming by dimension shall not be added to or enlarged in any manner, unless such addition or enlargement conforms to all of the dimensional regulations of the zone in which the building or structure is located. 
    207.5 - Expansion. A conforming use within a building or structure which is nonconforming by dimension (other than by lot area per dwelling unit) may be expanded into any other portion of the building or structure which is unoccupied or unused. 
    207.6 - Intensification. A conforming use within a building or structure which is nonconforming by dimension may be intensified, provided that such intensification is in conformance with the use and lot area per dwelling unit regulations, if applicable, for the zone in which it is located. 
    207.7 - Change in use. A conforming use within a building or structure which is nonconforming by dimension may be changed to any other conforming use. 
    207.8 - Demolition. A building or structure nonconforming by dimension, if voluntarily demolished, shall not be reconstructed, unless it conforms with the dimensional regulations of the zone in which it is located. Such voluntary demolition shall be considered an abandonment of the use as set forth in section 206.9. If such building or structure is involuntarily demolished, destroyed, or damaged, it may be repaired or rebuilt to the same size and dimension as previously existed. 
Sec. 208. - Land nonconforming by use. 
    208.1 - Continuance. The lawfully established nonconforming use of land, where no building is involved, may be continued, provided that no such nonconforming use of land shall in any way be expanded or intensified either on the same or adjoining property. 
    208.2 - Change of use. The nonconforming use of land shall not be changed to a different use, unless such use conforms to the use regulations of the zone in which it is located. 
Sec. 209. - Land nonconforming by area. 
    209.1. Enlargement of undersized lots. Lawfully established lots which have less than the minimum area requirements may be maintained and may be changed by adding additional land to such lots without prejudice to the rights of the owner of such lots pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
    209.2 - Merger of undersized lots. Lawfully established contiguous unimproved, or improved and unimproved, substandard lots of record in the same ownership shall be merged together to create dimensionally conforming lots or to reduce the extent of dimensional nonconformance. Said lots shall be so merged, as of September 12, 2005 the effective date of the amendment to this Zoning Ordinance. 
    209.3 - Lawfully established merged lots. Any lawfully established lots which have been merged and shown on the assessor's plats as one lot shall not be divided unless in conformance with the dimensional regulations of this ordinance. 
    209.4 - Development of residential substandard lots of record. If a residentially zoned lot of record at the time of passage of this ordinance does not contain sufficient lot area to meet all dimensional requirements of the district in which it is located, but does contain sufficient area to meet all setback and parking requirements of such district, the building inspector may issue a building permit for the construction of one single-family dwelling only. Said permit shall be issued only upon the determination by the zoning officer that the substandard lot is not a candidate for merger under subsection 209.2. 
State Law reference- Substandard lots of record, G.L. 1956, § 45-24-38. 
Sec. 210. - Buildings and structures nonconforming by parking. 
    A building or structure is considered nonconforming by parking if the lawfully established use of the building or structure does not meet the parking requirements of article VIII. 
    210.1 - Addition, enlargement, expansion and intensification-Nonresidential uses. A nonresidential building or structure nonconforming by parking may be added to, enlarged, expanded or intensified provided additional parking space is supplied to meet the requirements of article VIII for such addition, enlargement, expansion or intensification. 
    210.2 - Addition, enlargement, expansion and intensification-Residential uses. Any residential building or structure nonconforming by parking may not be added to, enlarged, expanded or intensified unless brought into full compliance with the parking requirements of article VIII, such that sufficient parking is provided for the entire structure, including the original portion and the addition, enlargement, expansion or intensification. 
    210.3 - Change of use. A building or structure nonconforming by parking may be changed to a different use, pursuant to all other provisions of this ordinance, provided that such use meets the parking requirements [of article VIII]. The number of additional parking spaces supplied shall be the difference between the number of spaces required for the proposed use and the number of spaces required for the previous use. In the event that the new use requires less parking spaces than the previous use, no additional parking spaces need be supplied. However, none of the existing parking spaces shall be eliminated unless the total number of spaces required by this ordinance for the new use are provided. 
Sec. 211. - Existence by variance or special use permit. 
    A nonconforming building, structure, sign or parcel of land or the use thereof, which exists by virtue of a variance or a special use permit (or a special exception) granted by the board, shall not be considered a nonconformance for the purpose of this section, and shall not acquire the rights of this section. Rather, such building, structure, sign, parcel of land, or use thereof, shall be considered a use by variance or a use by special use permit and any moving, addition, enlargement, expansion, intensification or change of such building, structure, sign, parcel of land or use thereof, to any use other than a permitted use or other than in complete conformance with this ordinance, shall require a further variance or special use permit from the board. 
ARTICLE III. - USE AND DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 300. - Compliance with regulations. 
    The regulations set by this ordinance within each district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land. In addition, article IV contains dimensional regulations and article V contains supplementary regulations which apply to specific conditions, areas or uses. 
Sec. 301. - Use code. 
    The following use regulations in table 1 are designed to regulate land uses in the various zoning districts in the city. Each use group is identified by a use code number and is a separate use. The use code is a classification system designed to limit and aid in the interpretation of the use regulations. The code number in the use regulations corresponds to a more detailed listing of uses in appendix A [of this ordinance which is on file in the city clerk's office]. Where a use is not specifically listed, such use is not permitted unless the building official shall (pursuant to G.L. 1956, § 45-24-54) upon written request, provide written information to the requesting party as to the determination that the use is included within the appropriate use code number in appendix A [of this ordinance which is on file in the city clerk's office] within 15 days of the written request. In the event that no response is provided within such time, the requesting party shall have the right to appeal to the zoning board of review for such determination. 
Sec. 302. - Public utilities and public services. 
    The provisions of this ordinance shall not be construed so as to limit or interfere with the construction, installation, operation and maintenance for public utility purposes of water and gas pipes, mains and conduits, electric light and electric power transmission and distribution lines, telephone lines, cable television lines, oil pipelines, sewer mains, and incidental appurtenances and installations. 
Sec. 303. - Home occupations. 
    Home occupations are permitted, provided that: 
A)  It is conducted entirely within a dwelling; 
B)  Such use is situated in the same dwelling as the primary residence of the occupant; 
C)  The residential character of such dwelling is not changed; 
D)  There shall be not more than one worker in addition to the dwelling unit occupant; 
E)  No more than 50 percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling unit or 800 square feet, whichever is less, shall be used for the home occupation; 
F)  There shall be no storage or sale of goods or merchandise on the premises; 
G)  The use is in conformance with the use table (section 303); and 
H)  The use is in conformance with parking requirements (article VIII). 
Sec. 304. - Use regulations. 
    Permitted uses are denoted with a "Y" for yes. Uses which are not permitted are denoted with an "N" for no. Uses permitted only upon approval of the board are denoted with an "S" for special use permit. A special use permit shall only be approved in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. Where a use is located in an overlay zone, additional uses are permitted and other restrictions shall apply in addition to the underlying uses listed in this table. Any number of uses may be located on a lot provided each use is permitted and all other requirements of this ordinance are met. 
TABLE 1 - USE REGULATIONS 
Zoning Districts R-1 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-D M-1 M-2 P CM 1.0 RESIDENTIAL 11 One Household Detached Dwelling Y Y Y Y N N N N N N 12 Two Household Dwelling Y Y Y Y S S 1 N N N N 14 Multi-Household Dwelling, Three or more units N N Y Y S S 1 N N N N 14.1 Artist Loft N N N Y 1 Y 1 Y 1 S S N N 15 Group Quarters and Lodging N N N N N N N N N N 15.1 Nursing Home and Congregate Care Facility N S Y Y Y N N N N N 15.2 Community Residence Y Y Y Y Y Y N N N N 16 Temporary Lodging, 10 Rooms or Less N N S S S S N N N N 16.1 Temporary Lodging, 11 to 29 Rooms N N N S S S N N N N 16.2 Temporary Lodging, 30 Rooms or more N N N N S S N N N N 16.3 Temporary Lodging, with Supervision, 15 Residents or less N N S S S S N N N N 16.4 Temporary Lodging, with Supervision, more than 16 Residents N N N S Y Y N N N N 17 Mobile Home Park N N N N N N N N N N 1 Residential use to be restricted to upper stories only. Zoning Districts R-1 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-D M-1 M-2 P CM 2.0 INSTITUTIONAL AND GOVERNMENTAL SERVICES 21 Educational Institutions (Post Secondary) N S S S S S 1 N N N N 21.1 Educational Institutions N S S S S S 1 N N N N 22 Special Schools N S S S S S 1 N N N N 23 Religious Services N S S S S S S S N N 24 Medical and Health Services N N N S Y Y N N N N 25 Local & State Government S S S Y Y Y Y Y N N 25.1 Prison or Correctional Institution N N N N N N S S N N 26 Family Day Care Home with 5 or less persons Y Y Y Y Y Y N N N N 26.1 Day Care Facility with more than 5 persons N N N Y Y Y S 2 S 2 N N 26.2 Pre-School N N N S 2 Y 2 Y 1 S 2 S 2 N N 27 Service Organization N S S S S S S S N N 28 Cemetery S 3 S 3 S 3 S 3 S 3 N N N N Y 1 No residential uses permitted on first floor. 2 Special use permit may be granted only if the use is in conjunction with a permitted use. 3 Any cemetery shall also comply with RI General laws Chapter 23-18 entitled "Cemeteries" as amended [G.L. 1956, § 23-18-1 et seq.]. Any cemetery shall have a minimum lot size of 250,000 square feet. Zoning Districts R-1 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-D M-1 M-2 P CM 3.0 CULTURAL ENTERTAINMENT RECREATION SERVICES 31 Non-Profit Library, Museum, or Art Gallery S S Y Y Y Y S S N N 32 Spectator Assembly N S S S S S S S N N 33 Outdoor Recreation Facility S S S S S N S S N N 34 Indoor Sports Facility N N N S S N Y S N N 35 Non-Profit Community Park, Playground and Community Center Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N 36 Open Space Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Zoning Districts R-1 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-D M-1 M-2 P CM 4.0 GENERAL SERVICES 41 Financial, Insurance & Real Estate N N N S Y Y Y N N N 42 Personal Service S S S S Y 1 Y 1 N N N N 43 Limited Business Service N N N Y Y Y Y N N N 44 General Business Service N N N N Y Y Y N N N 45 Repair Service N N N N S N S S N N 46 Professional Service N N N S Y Y Y N N N 46.1 Veterinarian & Animal Hospital N N N N Y Y Y Y N N 47 Contract Construction Service N N N N S N Y S N N 48 Warehousing & Storage not including Open Lot Storage N N N N S S Y S N N 49 Warehousing & Storage including Open Lot Storage N N N N S N S S N N 1 A special use permit (S) is required for a barber shop. 1 A special use permit (S) is required for a massage parlor. Zoning Districts R-1 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-D M-1 M-2 P CM 5.0 TRADE 51 Wholesale Trade within Enclosed Structure N N N N S S Y Y N N 52 Wholesale Trade & Outdoor Storage N N N N S S Y S N N 53 Bulk Storage, Petroleum/LNG Storage, Junkyard (not including landfill) Scrap & Waste Materials N N N N N N N N N N 54 Retail Trade Building & Related material N N N N Y Y Y Y N N 55 Retail Trade Neighborhood Establishments 2,500 GLA or less N N N Y Y Y Y N N N 55.1 Convenience Store N N N Y Y Y Y N N N 56 Retail Trade Community Wide Establishments more than 2,500 GFA N N N N Y Y Y N N N 57 Retail Trade Automotive, marine Craft, Aircraft & Accessories N N N N Y S Y Y N N 58 Fast Food Restaurant N N N Y Y Y Y Y N N Zoning Districts R-1 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-D M-1 M-2 P CM 6.0 TRANSPORTATION, COMMUNICATION & UTILITIES 61 Transportation Center N N N N N N Y Y N N 62 Freight Terminal N N N N N N Y Y N N 63 Aircraft Transportation including Maintenance N N N N N N N S N N 64 Parking principal use N N S S Y Y S S N N 65 Communications & Utilities S S S S S S Y Y N N 65.1 Wireless Transmitting & Receiving Antennae including Satellite Dish type Y 1 Y 1 Y 1 S S S Y Y N N 66 Power Plant N N N N N N S S N N 66.1 Incinerator & Waste Facility N 2 N 2 N 2 N 2 N 2 N 2 N 2 N 2 N 2 N 2 66.2 Cogeneration N N N N N N S S N N 67 Billboards free standing or on building N N N N N N N N N N 1 Subject to screening requirement for on ground antennae in Section 502.2 and height restrictions of roof mounted antenna in Section 506.1 (B) 2 Banned by State legislation. Zoning Districts R-1 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-D M-1 M-2 P CM 7.0-8.0 MANUFACTURING 70 Food & Kindred Products Mfg. including Canning & or Packing N N N N N N S Y N N 70.1 Processing of Bakery Products N N N S S S Y Y N N 70.2 Processing of Vinegar or Yeast N N N N N N N N N N 70.3 Rendering or Refining of Fats and Oils N N N N N N N N N N 70.4 Stock Yard or Feeding Pen N N N N N N N N N N 70.5 Slaughter of animals not including fowl N N N N N N N N N N 71 Textile Mill Products & Apparel Mfg. N N N N N N S Y N N 72 Lumber & Wood Products Mfg. N N N N N N S Y N N 73 Paper and Allied Products (printing publishing, refinishing etc.) N N N N N N S Y N N 73.1 Pulp Mills and Paper Mills N N N N N N N N N N 74 Chemicals & Allied Products Mfg. N N N N N N N S N N 74.1 Agricultural Chemicals including fertilizer N N N N N N N N N N 74.2 Leather & Fur (tanning, refinishing) N N N N N N N S N N 74.3 Acid Mfg. N N N N N N N N N N 74.4 Chlorine or Other Similar Noxious or Toxic Gases N N N N N N N N N N 74.5 Glue Mfg. N N N N N N N N N N 75 Petroleum Products & Related Industries N N N N N N S S N N 75.1 Petroleum Refining N N N N N N N N N N 76 Rubber & Plastic Products Mfg. N N N N N N S S N N 77 Stone, Clay & Glass Products Mfg. N N N N N N S S N N 77.1 Pottery Products Mfg. N N N N N 1 N 1 S 1 Y N N 77.2 Abrasive, Asbestos & Misc. Non-Metallic Mineral Products Mfg. N N N N N N N S N N 77.3 Cement, Lime, Gypsum of Plaster of Paris Mfg. N N N N N N N N N N 77.4 Asbestos Mfg. N N N N N N N N N N 77.5 Junk Yard N N N N N N N N N N 78 Primary Metal Industries N N N N N N N N N N 79 Fabricated Metal Products Mfg. N N N N N N N S N N 79.1 Drop Forge Industries N N N N N N N N N N 80 Machinery & Machine Parts Mfg. N N N N N N S S N N 81 Transportation Equipment Mfg. N N N N N N S S N N 82 Ship & Boat (building, repair) N N N N N N S S N N 83 Precision Instruments & Scientific Equipment Mfg. N N N N N N Y Y N N 84 Jewelry, Silverware, Plated Ware, Costume Jewelry & Notions Mfg. N N N N N N S Y N N 84.1 Job Shops (jewelry) N N N N S N Y Y N N 84.2 Plating of jewelry & Other Metal Parts N N N N N N N S N N 85 Arts & Crafts Mfg. N N N Y Y Y Y Y N N 86 Nuclear Industries and Explosives N N N N N N N N N N 87 Tobacco Processing N N N N N N N N N N 88 Biological Technologies N N N N N N S S N N 1 Pottery products manufacturing is allowed provided that such activity takes place within a totally enclosed structure and that no more than 2,500 GFA is devoted to that use.  
(Ord. of 4-11-2012 ; Ord. of 3-10-2014(1); Ord. of 3-10-2014(2)) 
ARTICLE IV. - DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 400. - General. 
    Dimensional regulations for each of the zones and overlay zones (if applicable) are provided in the following tables. 
Sec. 401. - Residential zones. 
D = Lot depth. 
W = Lot width. 
R-1 zone R-2 zone R-3 zone Maximum height 2 stories 20 feet 2 stories 20 feet 3 stories30 feet Minimum lot area 5,000 sq. ft. 5,000 sq. ft. 5,000 sq. ft. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit N/A 2,500 sq. ft. 2,000 sq. ft. Minimum lot width and frontage 40 ft. 40 ft. 40 ft. Minimum front yard 18 ft. D 18 ft. D 18 ft. D Minimum side yard 8 ft. W 8 ft. W 8 ft. W Minimum rear yard 20 ft. D 20 ft. D 20 ft. D Maximum lot coverage 35% 40% 40%  
    401.1 - Supplementary dimensional regulations-Residential zones. 
(A)  A rear yard may be reduced to not less than 20 percent times lot depth provided the front yard is extended so that the combined total of the front and rear yards is not less than 40 percent times lot depth. 
(B)  Building coverage and other paved areas shall not reduce a lot's open area to less than 800 square feet. 
(C)  Paving shall not reduce a front yard's open area by more than 24% for a single family home not more than 36% for a multi-family home. 
    401.2 - Minimum contiguous buildable areas. Lots in R and C zones to be buildable shall have a minimum contiguous buildable area (not buildable areas include wetlands, floodplains, easements, rock outcroppings and steep slopes) equal to the following: 
Zoning District Minimum Contiguous Buildable Area R-1 Minimum Lot Area 5,000 sq. ft. 2500 sq. ft. R-2 Minimum Lot Area 5,000 sq. ft. 2500 sq. ft. R-3 Minimum Lot Area 5,000 sq. ft. 2500 sq. ft. C-1 Minimum Lot Area 5,000 sq. ft. 5000 sq. ft. C-2 Minimum Lot Area 5,000 sq. ft. 5000 sq. ft. C-D Minimum Lot Area 5,000 sq. ft. 5000 sq. ft.  
Sec. 402. - Commercial and industrial zones. 
    C-1 and C-2 zones shall have a height restriction of 35 feet for all structures and a minimum lot size of 5,000 square feet. Residential uses in C-1, C-2 and C-D zones shall have no less than 2,000 square feet of lot area per dwelling unit. 
    402.1. Supplementary dimensional regulations-Commercial and industrial zones. 
(A)  Maximum height of any structure cannot exceed maximum height of 30 feet if structure is within 150 feet of any R zone. 
(B)  When a lot is used solely for residential purposes, the dimensional regulations of the R-3 zone shall apply. 
(C)  Where the block frontage is partly in an R zone, the front yard requirements of the R zone shall apply. 
(D)  Where the property on the opposite side of the street is in an R zone, the front yard requirements of the R zone shall apply. 
(E)  A minimum side yard set back and back yard set back of 8 feet is required in a C zone. 
(F)  Where the rear yard of a lot abuts upon a lot in an R zone, there shall be a rear yard of not less than 20 percent times lot depth; maximum required need not exceed 20 feet. 
(G)  Where an industrial or manufacturing building is proposed to be constructed in any M zone, there shall be a minimum unobstructed distance of 30 feet from any existing industrial or manufacturing building. Said minimum distance shall be measured from the outer edge of the building envelope of the proposed building to the outer edge of the building envelope of the existing building. Distances resulting from building setbacks from the lot line, the width of existing streets and parking aisles may be included within the 30-foot separation. Through the granting of a special use permit, the board may allow two abutting owners to combine yards to permit unobstructed access. 
ARTICLE V. - SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS 

Sec. 500. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of supplementary regulations is to set specific conditions and dimensional criteria for various uses or areas, where the general regulations are not applicable, and to set standards for the granting of special use permits. 
Sec. 501. - Accessory uses. 
    Accessory uses are uses which are clearly incidental to and customarily associated with the principal use and shall be operated and maintained under the same ownership and on the same lot as the principal use and shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, private garages, home occupations, swimming pools, and accessory parking. Accessory uses are subject to all the requirements of this ordinance, except as provided herein. 
    501.1 - Accessory uses in R zones. 
A)  No accessory use, other than required off-street parking and a private garage, shall be located on any lot having an area of less than 5,000 square feet. 
B)  Accessory uses or any combination of such uses may be included in an accessory building of one or two stories, and no more than 20 feet in height and may occupy no more than 50 percent of the area of a rear yard. 
C)  No accessory buildings or structures shall be permitted between the front of a main structure and the street. 
D)  Within any R zone, where an existing principal structure is less than 20 feet from the lot line, an accessory building shall not be located less than ten feet from any existing principal or accessory structure on an adjacent or contiguous lot if the proposed accessory structure is one story or shall not be located less than 20 feet from an existing principal or accessory structure on an adjacent or contiguous lot if the proposed accessory structure is two stories. 
E)  Where a yard abuts upon a public right-of-way no accessory building shall be erected within 18 feet of such public right-of-way if it contains a garage that is accessible from said street. 
F)  A detached garage or shed may be located in the required rear yard but not less than five feet from the rear lot line. A detached garage located within a rear yard may have its driveway within the required side yard. 
G)  A garage attached to the main building or structure shall maintain the side yard and rear yard setback requirements as specified in article IV for the zone in which it is located. Such garage shall be no more than one story or 14 feet in height and 24 feet in depth. 
H)  A private garage or shed may be used to store vehicles, boats, recreational vehicles or similar equipment owned by the occupant. Storage or parking of tractor-trailers is prohibited in R zones. No recreational vehicle shall be used for residential occupancy. No recreational vehicle shall be stored for a period in excess of one year unless it is in a condition for safe and effective performance of the function for which it is intended. 
    501.2 - Accessory buildings and uses in C and M zones. Accessory buildings which contain 2,500 square feet or less of gross floor area shall only include a garage for the exclusive use of the owner and customer(s) or the storage of commercial vehicles. Accessory buildings exceeding 2,500 square feet of gross floor area are permitted to contain any accessory use which is incidental and customary to the main use, including a garage or storage building. All such buildings shall be on the same lot as the main use. Any accessory building or structure in a C or M zone that abuts an R zone shall have a setback of 20 feet from the property line of the abutting R zone. 
    501.3 - Accessory manufacturing uses in C-1 and C-2 zones. Incidental manufacturing uses to any permitted use are allowed in C-1 and C-2 zones provided such manufacturing uses are performed on the same lot as the main use; are clearly incidental and customary to the main use being performed on the premises; and all such products produced on the lot are sold on the premises. A maximum of 25 percent of the gross floor area of the permitted use may be devoted to manufacturing, compounding, processing or treatment of products, or to catering, cleaning, laundering, plumbing, upholstering and the like. 
Sec. 502. - Screening of trash/garbage collection areas, dumpsters and utility structures. 
    502.1 - Screening of trash containers and dumpsters. All commercial and industrial uses, and residential uses of four families or more, shall provide trash and/or garbage collection areas or dumpsters enclosed on at least three sides by a solid wall, opaque fence or compact planting screen of at least five feet in height, if such area is not within an enclosed building or structure. In order to provide adequate vehicular access to and from dumpsters, there shall be a minimum clearance of nine feet between any such dumpster and any principal structure. 
    502.2 - Screening of on-ground utilities. Utility structures, substations, telephone exchange substations, dish antennas and similar uses shall be enclosed on at least three sides by a vegetative screen of hardy evergreens or shrubs at least three feet high at time of planting and which shall be sufficient to effectively provide a visual screen from adjacent R zones. 
    502.3 - Location of dumpsters in R zones. Dumpsters in R zones shall not be located in front yards except as permitted by the board as a special use permit as provided in section 514.14. 
Sec. 503. - Requirements for automobile service stations. 
    Automobile service stations shall be permitted only when the following requirements are met: 
    503.1 - Lot requirements: 
A)  Minimum lot size shall be 10,000 square feet. 
B)  Minimum lot depth shall be 100 feet. 
C)  Minimum lot width and frontage shall be 100 feet. 
    503.2 - Requirements for service station buildings: 
A)  Minimum setback from all street lines shall be 40 feet. 
B)  Minimum setback from all interior lot lines shall be 20 feet. 
    503.3 - Requirements for driveways: 
A)  Minimum distance between access driveways shall be 20 feet. 
B)  Maximum width for curb cuts shall be 25 feet. 
    503.4 - Requirements for other structures: 
A)  Minimum distance between pump islands, compressed air connections and similar equipment and any street or property lines shall be 20 feet. 
B)  Minimum distance between the canopy and the street line shall be 12 feet. 
C)  Minimum distance between any canopy and any interior lot line shall be 20 feet. 
    503.5 - Requirements for underground tanks: 
A)  Maximum storage capacity for petroleum products shall be 42,000 gallons. 
B)  Minimum separation distance required between underground tanks, adjoining buildings and property lines shall be ten feet. Service station buildings are exempt from the separation distance requirement if there are no basements or pits that extend below the top of any tank within the separation distance. 
    503.6 - Requirements for repairing and washing vehicles: Repairing shall be limited to minor repair work, such as tire or tube repairing, battery changing, lubrication, engine tune ups and similar type work, and must be conducted wholly within a building. Repair work shall not include replacement of engines, replacement of transmissions, or any body work. Storage of all merchandise, auto parts and supplies shall be conducted wholly within a building. If washing of vehicles occurs inside or outside a building, the entire washing area shall be paved and all the water used in such washing shall be properly drained on-site with no runoff onto the public right-of-way. All outdoor activities shall be screened from adjoining R zones by a four-foot-high compact evergreen screen or tight board fence. 
Sec. 504. - Outside storage of vehicles. 
    All auto service stations, new and used car dealerships, recreational vehicle dealerships, garage repair shops, auto body shops, car washes, storage of vehicles, and similar types of uses shall meet the following requirements: 
    504.1 - Overnight outside storage. Overnight outside storage of any vehicles intended to be repaired shall be limited to one vehicle for every 500 square feet of lot area. 
    504.2. Storage of junk vehicles. Storage of any junk vehicles shall not be permitted unless said vehicles are kept within an area that is completely enclosed on all sides by a six-foot-high tight board fence or a similar type of screening. Said vehicles shall be deemed as stored vehicles, limited under section 504.1. 
Sec. 505. - Outdoor display of merchandise (other than autos). 
    Except in an R zone, outdoor displays are permitted up to ten percent of the gross floor area of a commercial establishment. Such outdoor display shall be located on the same lot as the main use or may be located on the adjoining city sidewalk only with the appropriate city permits and/or licenses. No additional parking shall be required for such additional area, provided existing parking is not reduced. The goods displayed shall be removed at the end of each business day. 
Sec. 506. - Height modifications. 
    506.1 - Roof structures permitted above maximum height. 
A)  The following roof structures are permitted above the maximum height as specified in this ordinance, provided that the total area of all such appurtenances is not more than one-third of the total roof area of the building: 
1)  Structures for the housing of elevators and elevator shafts, 
2)  Stairways, 
3)  Fire or parapet walls, 
4)  Skylights, 
5)  Towers, and 
6)  Steeples. 
B)  The following roof structures are permitted above the maximum height as specified in this ordinance, provided that the total area of all such appurtenances is not more than one-third of the total roof area of the building, and provided that such features shall be set back from the edge of the roof a minimum distance of one foot for every two feet by which they extend above the roof: 
1)  Heating and air-conditioning equipment, 
2)  Ventilating fans, 
3)  Solar collectors, 
4)  Storage tanks for water, 
5)  Television, radio or satellite dish antennas or masts, 
6)  Chimneys or roof-mounted smokestacks, 
7)  Roof-mounted flagpoles, and 
8)  Similar equipment required to operate and maintain a building. 
No such roof structure as set forth in this subsection (B) shall exceed the maximum height for the zone in which it is located, except by the amounts allowed herein: 
1)  Buildings from one to six stories: Ten feet. 
2)  Buildings exceeding six stories: Ten feet plus one foot per story above the sixth story to a maximum total of 20 feet. 
    506.2 - Height restrictions for freestanding structures. Freestanding flagpoles shall not exceed the following: 
1)  R zones: The height of any existing permitted principal building on a lot. 
2)  C and M zones: A height of ten feet over any existing principal building on a lot. 
Freestanding smokestacks shall not exceed the following: 
1)  Vacant lots: Freestanding smokestacks shall not be permitted. 
2)  R zones: Freestanding smokestacks shall not be permitted. 
3)  C zones: Freestanding smokestacks shall not exceed a height of 40 feet over any existing permitted principal building on the lot. 
4)  M zones: Freestanding smokestacks shall not exceed a height of 100 feet over any existing permitted principal building on the lot. 
Sec. 507. - Yards apply to only one building. 
    No required yard or other open space around an existing building, or which is hereafter provided around any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this ordinance, shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building; nor shall any yard or other required open space on an adjoining lot be considered as providing yard or open space on a lot whereon a building is to be erected. 
Sec. 508. - Front yard modifications. 
    508.1 - Averaging setbacks. The minimum required front yard of any lot proposed to be built on may equal the average of the actual front yards, lawfully established on lots wholly or partially within 100 feet in both directions, on both sides of the same street. 
    508.2 - Through lots. At each end of a through lot there shall be a front yard of the depth required by this ordinance for the zone in which each street frontage is located. However, in all R zones, one of these front yards may serve as a required rear yard. 
    508.3 - Corner lots. On a corner lot in an R zone, all yards fronting on intersecting streets shall meet the required front yard setbacks. 
Sec. 509. - Side yards modifications. 
    For the purpose of side yard regulations, any dwellings which occupy a single lot but have a common party wall shall be considered as one building. (For example, two-family detached dwellings or row dwellings). 
Sec. 510. - Projections into yards. 
    510.1 - Cornice, sill or chimney. A cornice, eave, belt course, sill, canopy or other similar architectural feature (not including bay window or other vertical projection) may extend or project into a required side yard not more than four inches for each 16 inches of width of such side yard and may extend or project into a required front, side, or rear yard not more than 30 inches. Chimneys may project into a required front, side, or rear yard not more than 16 inches provided the width of such side yard is not reduced to less than four feet. 
    510.2 - Fire escape. A fire escape may extend or project into any required front, side or rear yard not more than four feet. 
    510.3 - Open stairway, balcony or porch. An open, unenclosed stairway, balcony, porch, deck, platform or landing place, which, except for the roof, does not extend above the level of the first floor of the building may extend or project into any required front yard not more than six feet, and into any required side yard six feet, but in no case closer than four feet to the side or rear lot line. This provision does not apply to handicapped access ramps. 
Sec. 511. - Only one main residential building on a lot. 
    Every building hereafter erected shall be located on a lot as herein defined. In no case shall there be more than one main residential building and up to two accessory buildings on one lot. The only exception to this is a condominium development with four or more living units which may be housed in multiple structures. 
Sec. 512. - Corner setback. 
    In any triangle formed by the street lines intersecting at an angle of 100 degrees or less, there shall be a corner setback of 15 feet from the point of intersection, wherein no building or structures may be erected, no parking areas or entrances may be created and no vegetation or fencing may be maintained above the height of 31/2 feet above the plane of the curb grades. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, poles not exceeding eight inches in outside diameter designed for the support of lights and signs may be erected in this triangle. 
Sec. 513. - Fencing. 
    All fences shall be constructed of manufactured metal, wood, masonry or other approved fencing material. A hedge composed of plant material adjacent to the fence may be used but shall be in conformity with the maximum height requirements of this section. 
    Sec. 513.1 - Repair and condition. All fences shall be maintained in good condition, be structurally sound, be wholly intact and be free from insect infestation. 
    Sec. 513.2 - Maximum height. The maximum height of fences by zoning district shall be as follows: 
Zoning District Front Yard 
(feet) Side Yard 
(feet) Rear Yard 
(feet) R Zones 4 6 6 C Zones 5 6 6 M Zones 8 8 8  
    Sec. 513.3 - Technical review requirement. Fencing in areas zoned R1, R2, R3 and CD are required to have a technical review by the zoning official for compatibility with the character of the commercial or residential area. 
    Sec. 513.4 - Fencing at driveway entrances and exits. At driveway entrances and exits, a reduction of all closed or open fences to a (4) foot height for a distance of (8) feet from the driveway entrance/exit property line is required for safety and visibility of persons backing out of the driveway. 
    Sec. 513.5 - Barbed wire and razor wire prohibited. The use of barbed wire and razor wire shall be prohibited in all zones except for a prison or correctional institution or except as permitted by the board as a special use permit as provided in section 514.12. 
Sec. 514. - Special use permits. 
    The following special uses are permitted upon approval by the board, in accordance with article IX. 
    514.1 - Boarding. The board may permit that up to two rooms may be rented with or without meals within any dwelling unit provided more than 50 percent of the habitable space is occupied by the family occupying the dwelling unit, and provided no more than one person may occupy any one of said rooms. 
    514.2 - Accessory manufacturing. Within C zones, manufacturing, compounding, processing, catering, cleaning, laundering, plumbing, or treatment of products and similar uses which are clearly incidental and essential to a retail use and which exceed the provisions of section 501.3 may be permitted by the board, provided such uses, operations or products shall not be objectionable due to odor, dust, smoke, noise, vibration or other similar causes. 
    514.3 - Alterations in an R-1 zone. A building, in existence prior to the enactment of this ordinance, in an R-1 zone may be permitted to be altered to accommodate two or more dwelling units provided that: the total number of dwelling units does not exceed one dwelling unit for every 5,000 square feet of lot area; the building is not increased in height or floor area; and all other provisions of this ordinance (including parking) relative to residential use are met. 
    514.4 - Change in nonconforming use. 
A)  Nonresidential zones. Within any nonresidential zone, a nonconforming use may be changed to a different nonconforming use by special permit. In considering an application for a special use permit to change to a different nonconforming use, the board shall find that the new use will be less nonconforming and less disruptive of the neighborhood land use pattern. A nonconforming use changed to a different nonconforming use by a special use permit may not be changed to another nonconforming use without the granting of another special use permit. 
B)  Residential zones. Within any residential zone, a nonconforming use may be changed to a different use which is allowed by special use permit in that zone. In considering the application, the board shall consider any conditions required for the granting of that special use permit. 
    514.5 - Parking R zones. Off-street automobile parking lots may be established by special use permit to support off-street parking requirements of residential uses in areas where the board finds that there is a need for such additional facilities or where required off-street parking cannot be satisfied on the lot in which such residential uses are located. Such lots shall be developed and maintained as required by article VIII of this ordinance, and subject to such further conditions as may be imposed by the board. 
    514.6 - Off-site parking. The board may permit off-street parking on other off-site lots in any district provided that such off-site parking is reasonably and safely accessible from the principal use, either by pedestrians or other means such as tram and/or shuttle service. 
    514.7 - Reduction in required lot area. The board may permit the lot area per dwelling unit to be reduced to 80 percent of the minimum area specified in this ordinance if, and only if, parking, the use of the building, and the building height are all in conformance with the requirements of this ordinance. 
    514.8 - Maximum lot coverage. The board may allow an additional ten percent lot coverage above the maximum lot coverage specified in this ordinance if, and only if, parking is provided in accordance with (section on parking) [article VIII] and the use of the building is in conformance with article III. 
    514.9 - Maximum height in R zones. The board may, by special use permit, allow an increase in the maximum height to three stories, not to exceed 40 feet, provided that the use of [the] building is in conformance with article III and provided that each side yard must be increased by one foot for every three feet in height over two stories or 30 feet. 
    514.10 - Shared parking. The board may allow shared parking, provided that (1) the type of structures or uses indicate that the period of usage of such structures or use will not be simultaneous (e.g., a church with Sunday services together with a business that is closed on Sundays), and (2) neither use may be a residential use except in a mixed use development with 20 or more residential units. 
    To be considered for zoning relief shared parking must be according to a parking plan that is legally incorporated into ownership and tenant agreements of principal users. 
    The following table defines the percent of the minimum parking required by use group during each time period for the purposes of defining a shared parking plan. 
Uses M-F M-F M-F Sat. & Sun. Sat. & Sun. Sat. & Sun. 8am-5pm 6pm-12am 12am-6am 8am-5pm 6pm-12am 12am-6am Residential 60% 100% 100% 80% 100% 100% Office/Warehouse/Industrial 100% 20% 5% 5% 5% 5% Commercial 90% 80% 5% 100% 70% 5% Hotel 70% 100% 100% 70% 100% 100% Restaurant 70% 100% 10% 70% 100% 20% Movie Theater 40% 80% 10% 80% 100% 10% Entertainment 40% 100% 10% 80% 100% 50% Conference/Convention 100% 100% 5% 100% 100% 5% Institutional (non-church) 100% 20% 5% 10% 10% 5% Institutional (church) 10% 5% 5% 100% 50% 5%  
    514.11 - Shared driveway. The board may allow a shared driveway between two lots provided that each lot contains not more than four pre-existing dwelling units. Shared driveways are not allowed for new construction in R zones. 
    514.12 - Barbed wire fences. The board may permit barbed wire fences only where the applicant has demonstrated that it is required for public safety purposes. 
    514.13 - Shared access. The board may allow two abutting owners to combine yards to permit unobstructed access as described in section 402.1(G). 
    514.14 - Dumpster in front yard. The board may allow a dumpster in a screened area in a front yard when pre-existing conditions prevent the dumpster from being otherwise located. The dumpster must be located such it does not obstruct the sidewalk or otherwise create a safety hazard and or create a nuisance. 
State Law reference- Special use permits, G.L. 1956, § 45-24-42. 
ARTICLE VI. - SPECIAL ZONES 

Sec. 600. - Overlay zoning districts. 
    Overlay zoning districts are hereby established to regulate areas and structures of historical significance, educational and health care institutions, and mixed uses. These regulations are necessary to meet the purposes set forth in section 100 of this ordinance. The boundaries of the overlay zoning districts are as defined in section 102 of this ordinance. These boundaries may be amended in accordance with article XI [sic] of this ordinance. Overlay zoning districts are designed to impose supplementary requirements and do not in any manner reduce any requirements of the underlying zone, except where specifically provided for by this ordinance. 
Sec. 601. - Historic district-Purpose. 
    Historic districts are overlay zoning districts which cover designated districts or structures, which are listed in the National Register of Historic Places, within the City of Central Falls. The purpose of historic districts is to safeguard the heritage of the city by preserving designated districts and structures of historic or architectural value which reflect elements of Central Falls' cultural, social, economic, political, and architectural history; to stabilize and improve property values in such districts or designated structures; to maintain and foster civic beauty; to strengthen the economy; and to promote the use of designated districts and structures for the education, pleasure and welfare of the citizens. An historic district may include properties which are associated with broad patterns, events, and/or people significant in local, state or national history; which embody the distinctive characteristics of a broad range of building types and architectural styles; which possess high artistic value and/or represent the work of a master builder, architect, landscape architect or other designer; or which lack individual distinction but which add to the historic district zone's status as a significant and distinguishable socio-cultural entity. 
Sec. 602. - Mill building reuse development (MBRD). 
    A mill building reuse development (MBRD) creates a zoning overlay district within an M zone containing obsolete or under utilized manufacturing and or industrial building. The (MBRD) designation allows the development of such sites according to a plan for mixed use. All such re-use developments shall be done in accordance with this section. 
    602.1 - Mill building reuse development. In accordance with section 101.4 of this ordinance, a MBRD district may contain one or more manufacturing and/or commercial structures with appurtenant accessory buildings, common areas, open space and roadways. The purpose of a MBRD is to allow for the redevelopment of the site for mixed use development through careful site planning. MBRD zoning overlays may be applied in any M zone. 
    602.2 - Re-use development establishment and regulations. 
A)  Establishment: A reuse development may be established upon approval by the planning commission pursuant to G.L. 1956, § 45-24-47 in any M zone in which the proposed principal use of each building is permitted in accordance with Article III and 602.2 
B)  Permitted uses: Uses as permitted in article III and the following uses listed by use category are permitted in a mill building reuse development: 
1.0  Residential, 11,14 and 14.1 
2.0  Institutional and Governmental Services, 21, 22, 24, 24.1 and 24.2 
3.0  Cultural, Entertainment And Recreation Services, 31, 32 (limited to auditorium, exhibition hall and theater) and 34 
4.0  General Services, 41, 42, 43, 44, 46 and 47 
5.0  Trade, 55, 56 
D)  Additional criteria for approval: To approve a re-use development, the zoning board shall find that: 
1.  That the re-use development is not displacing an active manufacturing and or industrial use. Further that there is no reasonable expectation that manufacturing will continue at the site. 
2.  The re-use development will not create a serious conflict with adjacent manufacturing and or industrial businesses in the M zone. 
3.  The developer has a plan to notify all tenants and owners of the buildings and units in the re-use development that they are in a M zone and that allowed M zone uses that may be perceived as a nuisance or otherwise obnoxious shall give them no cause for action against such industrial and or manufacturing activity. 
4.  The plans for the re-use development are consistent with the comprehensive plan. 
Sec. 603. - Reserved (Municipal Economic Development Zone.). 
ARTICLE VII. - SIGNS 

Sec. 700. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to recognize the function of signs in the city, to provide for their inclusion under the zoning ordinance, and to regulate and control all matters relating to such signs, including location, size and purpose. Signs are accessory uses and are permitted only in conjunction with permitted uses. Such signs are intended to advertise goods, services, facilities, events or attractions available on the premises where located, to identify the owner or occupant or to direct traffic on the premises. It is the further purpose of this article to preserve locally recognize values of community appearance; to safeguard and enhance property values in residential, commercial and industrial areas; to protect public investment in and the character of public thoroughfares; to reduce hazards to motorists and pedestrians traveling on the public way, and thereby to promote the public health, safety and welfare. 
    These purposes will be accomplished by regulation of the display, erection, use, and maintenance of signs. The use of signs is regulated according to zone. The placement and physical dimensions of signs are regulated primarily by type and length of street frontage. 
Sec. 701. - Conformance. 
    No sign will be permitted as a main or accessory use except in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 702. - Signs permitted in all zones. 
    The following signs are permitted in all zones: 
    702.1. Governmental. Signs of every kind and nature erected by or on behalf of any federal, state or local government agency, including official traffic control or informational signs, hazard warning signs, legal notices, railroad crossing signs or other similar signs required by law. 
    702.2. Nameplates. One nameplate for each dwelling unit, not internally illuminated, and not exceeding 11/2 square feet in area, indicating the name of the occupant or any permitted occupation. 
    702.3. Identification. Wall signs, which may be externally illuminated, and which are permanently affixed to buildings for the purpose of identifying the name of building, date of erection or other historical information, provided that such signs are composed of similar materials as the building, or bronze or brass, and are affixed flat against the building. 
    702.4. Credit card signs. Credit card signs, non-illuminated, limited to a total area of one square foot per structure. 
    702.5. Bulletin boards. Signs used as a bulletin or notice board to announce activities and events for institutional and governmental services. Such signs shall be located upon the premises of said institutions and shall not exceed ten square feet in area. In all R zones, such signs shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from any property line abutting a residential use. Such signs may be externally illuminated. 
    702.6. Temporary signs. The following temporary signs are permitted in all zones: 
A)  Signs, which may be externally illuminated, for nonprofit or charitable organizations, including exterior messages for national and state holidays; provided, however, that no such temporary sign may be erected for a period of more than 30 consecutive days in any year nor more than seven days four times per year with a total of 30 cumulative days throughout the year. In all R and C zones, such signs shall be limited to 32 square feet in area and set back a minimum of ten feet from any property line. 
B)  Rental or sale signs, freestanding or attached to the premises, pertaining to the prospective rental or sale of the property on which they are located; provided that such signs shall not be illuminated, nor extend over the sidewalk, and further provided that: 
1.  Within all R zones, such signs shall not exceed a total area of six square feet and shall be removed within 14 days of the real estate closing or lease transaction. 
2.  Within all C zones, such signs shall not exceed a total area of 12 square feet, and shall be removed within 30 days of the real estate closing or lease transaction. 
3.  Within all M zones, such signs shall not exceed a total area of 32 square feet, and shall be removed within 30 days of the real estate closing or lease transaction. 
C)  Construction signs and "grand opening" signs, non-illuminated, customary and necessary in connection with the erection of buildings or other construction work, limited to one sign per street frontage for each construction project. Such sign may be freestanding or attached to the premises, but shall not exceed 32 square feet in area, and shall be removed within 60 days of the completion of construction. In all R zones, such signs shall not exceed 12 square feet in area, and shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from any property line. 
D)  Political signs, non-illuminated, incidental to a city, state, or federal election or referendum, or signs which are political in nature. Such signs shall be constructed of durable material, and shall be prohibited from public trees, traffic signs or utility poles. Such signs shall be erected not more than 60 days prior to such election or referendum, and in any event, no premises shall have a sign erected for more than 120 days in any calendar year. Political signs relating to any election or referendum shall be removed within 14 days after said election or referendum. 
Sec. 703. - Signs prohibited in all zones. 
    The following signs shall be prohibited in all zones in the city: 
    703.1 - Traffic or safety hazards. Signs determined by the chief of police to constitute a traffic or other safety hazard by reason of size, location, or type of illumination. 
    703.2 - Flashing signs. A sign which contains an intermittent or sequential flashing light source used primarily to attract attention. Does not include changeable copy signs, animated signs, or signs which, through reflection or other means, create an illusion of flashing or intermittent light. 
    703.3 - Billboards. Freestanding and roof-mounted billboards (see sections 707 and 710.4). 
    703.4 - Signs on utility poles. Utility poles owned by any governmental agency or utility company shall not be used for any type of sign or message other than those specifically erected by such governmental agency or utility company. 
    703.5 - Freestanding sign. A freestanding sign, as defined in sections 704.3 and 1102 shall not be placed on any public sidewalk in the city. 
(Ord. of 8-12-1997) 
Sec. 704. - Sign types. 
    The following sign types are permitted in the city in accordance with the requirements of this article: 
    704.1 - Canopy sign. A sign painted on or attached to a hood, awning or roof like canopy. Individual letters, words or symbols may be affixed or applied to any surface, provided that area of the sign does not exceed the maximum area allowed in section 707. A canopy sign is not considered a projecting sign. In no event shall such sign or part thereof be erected closer than two feet to the curb line. 
    704.2 - Directional sign. A sign identifying on-premises traffic, parking or other functional activity bearing no commercial advertising. Such signs are permitted in all zones except in R zones, and shall be limited to four square feet in area per sign. 
    704.3 - Freestanding sign. A sign that is attached to, erected on, or supported by some structure (such as a pole, mast, frame, or other structure, but not any kind of antenna) that is not itself an integral part of or attached to a building. All permanently installed freestanding signs shall be protected from vehicular circulation and parking areas. In accordance with section 703.5 above, freestanding signs shall not be placed on any public sidewalk in the city. 
    704.4 - Projecting sign. A sign that is perpendicular to the plane of the building to which it is affixed, or which projects more than 15 inches beyond said exterior wall. In no event shall such sign or part thereof be erected closer than two feet to the curb line. 
    704.5 - Roof sign. A sign that projects more than two feet above the roof, parapet or ridge line of the building; or mounted upon any roof, parapet or ridge line of a building. 
    704.6 - Wall sign. A sign that is affixed to or painted on the face of any exterior wall or door of a building or fence; is parallel or approximately parallel to the plane of the building to which it is affixed; and does not project more than 15 inches beyond said exterior wall, nor project more than two feet above the roof, parapet or ridge line of the building, whichever is higher. 
    704.7 - Window sign. A sign that is attached to the inside of any window or situated within a building, so that the sign is visible from the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 8-12-1997) 
Sec. 705. - Sign measurements. 
    All permitted signs shall be measured as follows: 
    705.1 - Area. Measured in square feet, the entire area within a square, rectangle, circle, triangle or any other polygon enclosing the extreme limits of graphic, writing or similar representation, emblem or any fixture of similar character, together with any frame or other material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the background against which it is placed; excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which such sign is placed. Where a sign has two or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in determining the area of the sign, except that where two such faces are placed back to back and are at no point more than two feet from one another, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area of the one face if the two faces are of equal area, or as the area of the larger face if the two faces are of unequal area. 
    705.2 - Height. Measured in feet, the overall height of a sign is measured from the grade directly below the sign to the highest point of the sign or any of its supports. The height of any free standing sign in all zones may not exceed 20 feet. 
    705.3 - Setback. Measured in feet from the outermost edge of the sign to the public right-of-way. 
    705.4 - Projection over public right-of-way. Measurement in feet, perpendicular to the property line, from the property line to the outermost edge of the sign, over any public right-of-way. 
    705.5 - Maximum permitted sign area. In all zones but the R zone, the maximum permitted area for signs on a building shall be based on the building frontage. Where a building fronts on two or more streets, the total area for signs for each street frontage shall be based on the building frontage for that street. For gas stations, street frontage shall be used to calculate the permitted total area of signs as permitted in the tables. For any drive-in business that has a booth for employees only with no public access, including a gas station, the maximum area of signs shall be based on the street frontage, and on a corner lot, only one street frontage shall be used to calculate maximum sign area. 
Sec. 706. - Illumination. 
    706.1 - Externally illuminated sign. Any sign which is illuminated by a light that reflects off the surface of the sign from an external source shall be considered an externally illuminated sign. 
    706.2 - Internally illuminated sign. Any sign shall be considered an internally illuminated sign where the source of the illumination is inside the sign and light emanates through the message of the sign. Digital, LED, and neon signs shall be considered internally illuminated signs. 
Sec. 707. - Permitted signs by zone. 
    707.1 - R zones. Signs to identify each permitted home occupation and one sign to display the name of a permitted nonresidential use. Such signs may be externally illuminated. The total area of all such signs shall not exceed six square feet on any lot. All types of billboards are prohibited in R zones. Window signs shall not exceed 25% of the total display area per window. 
    707.2 - C zones. The maximum total area of all signs on any structure shall not exceed 11/2 square feet per one foot of building frontage. Window signs shall not be included in this calculation. All signs may be illuminated externally. The maximum area of any individual sign shall be limited to 30 square feet. Window signs shall not exceed 25% of the total display area per window. 
    707.3 - M zones. The maximum total area of all signs on any structure shall not exceed four square feet per one foot of building frontage. Window signs shall not be included in the above calculation. Such signs may be externally or internally illuminated. The maximum area of any individual sign shall be limited to 45 square feet. 
Sec. 708. - Nonconforming signs. 
    Any sign which lawfully existed and was maintained at the time this ordinance became effective may be continued. Maintenance, repairs and changing of sign faces are permitted provided that there is no change in area, height, setback, projection or lighting of the existing sign. 
Sec. 709. - Supplemental sign regulations. 
    709.1 - Signs in historic districts. All signs, including window signs, but except political signs, in an historic district shall be subject to approval by the historic district commission. 
    709.2 - Signs in overlay zones. Signs in overlay zones shall conform to the corresponding requirements of the underlying zone. 
Sec. 710. - Special use permits for signs. 
    The board, as provided in section 907, may grant the following special use permits provided that all other requirements of this ordinance are met: 
    710.1. Any particular sign may be increased in area by 25 percent over the requirements in this article, provided that the total area of all permitted signs on the building does not exceed the maximum permitted sign area by 15 percent. 
    710.2. The maximum permitted sign area for an allowed use or structure may be increased by 15 percent. 
    710.3. The maximum permitted sign height may be increased by 25 percent. 
    710.4. Billboards may be permitted in C and M zones only. 
    710.5. Digital and LED signs may be permitted in C and M zones only. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 

Sec. 801. - Parking requirements. 
    No land shall be used or occupied and no structure shall be erected or used unless the off-street parking spaces required herein are provided. Such parking spaces are not required for any structure or use existing prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any amendment thereto, provided however, that parking spaces as specified in this ordinance shall be provided subject to the requirements of this section for any enlargement, alteration or change to any such existing structure or use and also provided that no existing parking shall be decreased below the minimum requirements herein. While it is the intent of this section to require minimum off-street parking and loading facilities, excessive paving of land that supplies significantly more than the minimum numbers of spaces is discouraged. 
    801.1 - Location of required parking spaces. The off-street parking spaces required by this ordinance shall be on the same lot as the structure or use they are intended to serve or on an abutting lot provided that such off-street parking spaces for commercial or industrial uses shall not be located in any residence district where such commercial or industrial use is prohibited. 
a.)  Within any R zone, there shall be no parking space within the front yard. 
b.)  Parking within a residential structure shall be side by side not front to back. 
    801.2 - Minimum size of parking spaces. Each parking space shall be marked by painted lines and contain the following minimum dimensions affecting the width and length of individual parking stalls and the width of aisles in all districts, exclusive of necessary drives and other access ways. A driveway beside a dwelling may be considered a required parking space only for a detached single- or two-family dwelling and need not contain painted lines. 
Parking Space Minimum Width 9 feet Minimum Length 18 feet Minimum Aisle Width 90 degree angle 24 feet 60 degree angle 18 feet 45 degree angle 13 feet 30 degree angle 11 feet 0 degree (Parallel Parking) 12 feet  
    801.3 - Setbacks of parking spaces. No parking space or aisle (back-up space) shall be less than ten feet from any front or corner side yard property. No parking space or aisle shall be less than five feet from any building, except where greater setbacks are required. Parking spaces less than ten feet from any building shall be separated from such building by raised curb, bumper or wheel guards. The requirements of this subsection shall not apply to detached single- or two-family dwellings. 
    801.4 - Entrance and exit. Each parking space shall be designed with [an] adequate off-street area for approach, turning, and exit without the need or ability to use any part of a street. All driveways shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width for each lane of traffic using such driveway. The width of any driveway shall not exceed 30 feet. The requirements of this subsection shall not apply to detached single- or two-family dwellings. 
    801.5 - Driveways. 
a)  Non residential driveways shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width. The width shall not exceed 30 feet. 
b)  Residential driveways shall be a minimum of eight feet in width. The width shall not exceed 16 feet. 
    801.6 - Shared parking. No part of an off-street parking area required for any building or use for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this section shall be included as a part of an off-street parking area similarly required for another building or use. 
    801.7 - Construction requirements. Every parcel of land which, after the effective date of this ordinance or any amendment thereto, is changed to a parking area for more than ten vehicles, or to a drive-in business or motor vehicle sales or service establishment, shall be developed as follows, subject to the approval of plans thereof by the building official. 
A)  Such parking area shall be treated with bituminous or other surfacing and shall have appropriate bumper or wheel guards where needed. However, use of pervious materials, such as gravel, is encouraged within 200 feet of the Blackstone River or other water bodies and wetlands. 
B)  The perimeter of parking areas facing streets or R zones shall be suitably landscaped with trees, shrubs, vegetation and groundcover. Landscaped areas shall be separated and protected from parking areas by curbing or other means. 
C)  Any light used to illuminate said parking area shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining premises and streets. 
D)  Border screening using dense shrubbery or solid fence of at least four feet in height shall be required wherever parking areas abut residential uses or R zones. 
    801.8 Off-street parking space requirements. The number of off-street parking spaces required for each use shall be as follows: 
801.8. Parking Requirements Parking space per; dwelling unit (D.U.) or gross floor area (GFA) Residential Single dwelling unit 2/D.U. Two or more dwelling units 2/D.U. Elderly housing 1/D.U. Rooming house 1/2 rooms Office Banks and other financial institutions 1/300 sq. ft. GFA Office, professional service, laboratory 1/300 sq. ft. GFA Medical office and clinic 1/300 sq. ft. GFA Service Business and commercial service 1/300 sq. ft. GFA Hotel/motel 1/bedroom Funeral home Greater of 8/parlor or 2.5/300 sq. ft. of assembly area Theater and auditorium 1/4 seats Indoor commercial recreation and coin-operated amusement establishment 1/200 sq. ft. GFA Outdoor recreation 1/1,000 sq. ft. of lot area Gas and service station 1/employee plus 4/bay 1 Retail Restaurant 1/4 seats or 1/300 sq. ft. GFA, whichever is greater Fast food restaurant 1/2 seats or 1/150 sq. ft. GFA, whichever is greater New and used vehicle sales 1/300 sq. ft. GFA Furniture, appliance or carpet sales 1/300 sq. ft. GFA Other retail uses 1/300 sq. ft. GFA Transportation & UTILITY Public and private utilities 1/300 sq. ft. GFA Commercial vehicle terminal 1/400 sq. ft. GFA Institutional Place of worship 1/4 seats Preschool 1/500 sq. ft. GFA Primary or junior high school 3/classroom High school 1/5 students Post-secondary school or college 1/3 students Hospital 1/bed Nursing, convalescent home 1/2 beds Library, museum 1/500 sq. ft. GFA Correctional or detention facility 1/employee 1 Industrial Wholesale business and storage space and warehouses 1/500 sq. ft. GFA Manufacturing, processing, assembly or packaging 1/500 sq. ft. GFA 1 Based on maximum number of employees on any one shift, provided there is time between shifts.  
Sec. 802. - Loading requirements. 
    No land shall be used or occupied and no structures shall be erected or used for commercial or industrial purposes unless the off-street loading spaces required herein are provided. Such loading spaces are not required for any commercial or industrial structure or use existing prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any amendment thereto, provided, however, that off-street loading spaces as specified in this ordinance shall be provided subject to the requirements of this section for any enlargement or alteration to any such existing structure or use. 
    802.1 - Location of required loading spaces. The off-street loading spaces required by this ordinance shall be in all cases on the same lot or parcel of land as the use or structure they are intended to serve. In no case shall any required off-street loading space be part of an area used to satisfy the off-street parking requirements of this ordinance. Each loading area shall be designed with adequate off-street area as required for parking spaces by subsection 801.4. To the extent possible, loading areas shall be to the rear of any building. 
    802.2. Number of required loading spaces. For each commercial and industrial enterprise of over 1,000 square feet of gross floor or ground area in which commodities are sold, displayed, serviced, repaired, altered, or fabricated as the principal use of the enterprise, the first off-street loading space shall be required for the first 10,000 square feet of gross floor area. Thereafter, one off-street loading space shall be required for every additional 20,000 square feet of gross floor area. Each off-street loading space shall consist of the following dimensions: 
60 feet Width: 14 feet Clearance: 15 feet  
    Additional off-street loading spaces shall be required by the building inspector when necessary to provide adequate area for off-street loading. Detailed plans for off-street loading space provision and use may be required before the issuance of any building permit. 
Sec. 803. - Drive-up windows. 
A.)  A drive-up window requires a special use permit, regardless of the zone it is located in or the type of business conducted. 
B.)  In addition to the requirements in section 908, the following requirements must be met in the application for a drive-up window special use permit: 
1.  Pedestrians must be able to enter the establishment from the parking lot or sidewalk without crossing the waiting or exit lines. 
2.  Waiting lanes should be designed for the maximum length possible. At a minimum, waiting lanes should accommodate average peak monthly traffic flow, allowing 23 feet per vehicle. Waiting lane length will be measured from the point where orders or business is first conducted. 
3.  Waiting lanes must be designed so that waiting cars do not block sidewalks or public streets. 
4.  Landscaping, waiting lane devices, and overall design should not prevent vehicles from safely and efficiently leaving waiting lanes. 
5.  All lights and illuminated materials must be screened from the view of adjoining residentially zoned properties. 
6.  The volume of menu boards and or drive-up window speakers must not exceed 55 decibels at any adjoining property line or across an alley/street from the site. 
ARTICLE IX. - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND RELIEF[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Provisions for administration and enforcement required, G.L. 1956, § 45-24-32(6). 

Sec. 901. - Enforcement duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the director of minimum housing (building official) to interpret and enforce the provisions of this ordinance in the manner and form and with the powers provided in the laws of the state and in the charter and ordinances of the city. The building official shall refer all applications for variances, special use permits and other applications to the zoning board of review to the director of the division of planning ("director") for review and an advisory opinion. The building official shall make a determination in writing, within 15 days, to any written complaint received, regarding a violation of this ordinance. In order to provide guidance or clarification, the building official shall, upon written request, issue a zoning certificate or provide information to the requesting party within 15 days of the written request. Any determination of the building official may be appealed to the board in accordance with section 907 of this ordinance. 
Sec. 902. - Building permit/certificate of occupancy. 
    Before a building permit or certificate of occupancy is issued for the construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, demolition, removal, enlargement or occupancy of any building or structure or use of premises, a site plan shall be submitted to the building official indicating the intended use and its conformity in all respects to the provisions of this ordinance. 
    902.1. Site plan. An application (three copies) for a building permit for an addition, erection or enlargement, under the provisions of the Rhode Island Building Code shall be accompanied by a site plan, drawn to scale, showing the accurate dimensions of the lot; the building site; the location and size of existing buildings on the lot; all proposed construction; all front, side and rear yard dimensions; proposed parking areas; and such other information as may be necessary to enforce the provisions of this ordinance. A site plan shall not be required with an application for a permit involving the alteration of an existing building(s), where the use and exterior dimensions of the buildings are not changed or enlarged in any manner. 
Sec. 903. - Certificate of occupancy. 
    A certificate of occupancy shall be required for any of the following: 
A)  Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected or enlarged; 
B)  Change in use of an existing building to a different use; 
C)  Occupancy and use of vacant land except for the raising of crops; 
D)  Change in the use of land to different use except for the raising of crops; or 
E)  Any change in use of a nonconforming use. 
    The occupancy, use or change of use shall not take place until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the building official in accordance with the requirements for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy as stated in the Rhode Island Building Code. 
Sec. 904. - Minimum requirements. 
    In interpreting and applying the provisions of this ordinance, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of health, safety, morals, convenience or the general welfare. 
Sec. 905. - Conflicts of law. 
    All departments, officials and public employees of the city which are vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall conform to the provisions of this ordinance and shall issue no permit or license for any use, building or purpose if the same would be in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance. Any permit or license issued in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance shall be null and void. 
Sec. 906. - Penalties and enforcement. 
    Any person or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, who violates or is the owner of property in violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be fined up to $500.00 for each offense, such fine to inure to the city. Each day of the existence of any violation shall be deemed a separate offense. The erection, construction, enlargement, intensification, conversion, moving or maintenance of any building or structure and the use of any land or building which is continued, operated or maintained contrary to any of the provisions of this ordinance is hereby declared to be a violation of this ordinance and unlawful. The building official shall be empowered to levy such fines, with appeal thereupon to the district court. The city solicitor shall be empowered to institute injunction, abatement or any other appropriate action in any appropriate court to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove such violation. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
Sec. 907. - Zoning board of review. 
    907.1 - Establishment and procedures. A zoning board of review, herein called the "board," is hereby created. Board members may be remunerated in the performance of official duties, at an amount to be established by the city council. The board may engage legal, technical or clerical assistance to aid in the discharge of its duties. The division of planning shall serve as planning staff to the board. The board shall establish written rules of procedure within six months of the adoption of this ordinance. Appeals and correspondence to the board shall be sent to the board in care of the division of planning. The division of planning shall file all records and decisions of the board. 
    907.2 - Membership. The zoning board of review shall consist of five members who are residents of Central Falls, appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council, each to hold office for the term of five years; provided, however, that the original appointments shall be made for terms of one, two, three, four, and five years, respectively. The board shall also include two alternates to be designated as the first and second alternate members, for terms of five years. These alternate members shall sit and may actively participate in hearings. The first alternate shall vote if a member of the board is unable to serve at a hearing and the second shall vote if two members of the board are unable to serve at a hearing. In the absence of the first alternate member, the second alternate member shall serve in the position of the first alternate. No member or alternate may vote on any matter before the board unless they have attended all hearings concerning such matter. Vacancies in unexpired terms of board members shall be filled by the mayor no more than 90 days following the vacancy. Members may be removed by the city council, upon the recommendation of the mayor, for due cause and for not attending three consecutive meetings. 
    907.3. Prior members. Members of zoning boards of review serving on the effective date of adoption of this ordinance shall be exempt from provisions of this chapter [this ordinance] respecting terms of originally appointed members until the expiration of their current terms. 
    907.4 Chair. The board shall, at its first meeting following the adoption of this ordinance, and in January of each year thereafter, elect a chairperson, vice-chairperson and secretary from its membership. The chairperson, or in his/her absence, the vice-chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by the issuance of subpoenas. 
    907.5. Powers and duties. The board shall have the following powers and duties: 
(A)  To hear and decide appeals in a timely fashion where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative officer or agency in the enforcement or interpretation of this ordinance. 
(B)  To hear and decide appeals from a party aggrieved by a decision of the HDC, pursuant to article VI. 
(C)  To authorize, upon application, in specific cases of hardship, variances in the application of the terms of this ordinance. 
(D)  To authorize, upon application, in specific cases, special use permits. 
(E)  To refer matters to the planning commission, planning division, or to other boards or agencies of the city as the board may deem appropriate, for findings and recommendations. 
(F)  To provide for issuance of conditional zoning approvals where a proposed application would otherwise be approved except that one or more state or federal agency approvals which are necessary are pending. A conditional zoning approval shall be revoked in the instance where any necessary state or federal agency approvals are not received within a specified time period. 
(G)  To hear and decide such other matters, according to the terms of this ordinance or other statutes, and upon which [the] board may be authorized to pass under this ordinance or other statutes. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 45-24-57(1). 
    907.6 - Voting. The board shall be required to vote as follows: 
(1)  Five active members shall be necessary to conduct a hearing. As soon as a conflict occurs for a member, that member shall excuse himself/herself, and shall not sit as an active member and shall take no part in the conduct of the hearing. Only five active members shall be entitled to vote on any issue. 
(2)  The concurring vote of three of the five members of the board sitting at a hearing shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the HDC or any zoning administrative officer from whom an appeal was taken. 
(3)  The concurring vote of four of the five members of the board sitting at a hearing shall be required to decide in favor of an applicant on any matter within the discretion of the board upon which it is required to pass under this ordinance, including variances and special use permits. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 45-24-57(2). 
    907.7 - Application procedure. Application procedures may be required for the filing of appeals, request for variances, special use permits, development plan review, site plan review and such other applications as may be specified in this ordinance, and shall be prepared by the director and published. 
    907.8 - Fees. Reasonable fees are required, in an amount to be established by the city council, to be paid by the appellant or applicant for the adequate review and hearing of applications, issuance of zoning certificates and the recording of the decisions thereon. 
    907.9 - Decisions and records of the zoning board of review. Following a public hearing, the board shall render a decision within 20 days. The board shall include in its decision all findings of fact and conditions, showing the vote of each member participating thereon, and the absence of a member or his or her failure to vote. Decisions shall be recorded and filed in the office of the division of planning within ten working days from the date when the decision was rendered, and shall be a public record. The board shall keep written minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations, findings of fact, and other official actions, all of which shall be recorded and filed in the office of the planning division in an expeditious manner upon completion of the proceeding. For any proceeding in which the right of appeal lies to the superior or supreme court, the board shall have the minutes taken either by a competent stenographer or recorded by a sound-recording device. 
    Any decision by the board, including any special conditions attached thereto, shall be mailed to the applicant, to the planning division, and to the associate director of the division of planning of the Rhode Island department of administration. Any decision evidencing the granting of a variance, modification or special use shall also be recorded in the land evidence records of the city. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 45-24-61. 
    907.10. Expiration of variances and special use permits - Any variance or special use permit shall expire one year after the date of filing of the decision with the City Clerk unless the applicant shall, within one year, obtain a legal building permit and proceed with the construction; or obtain a certificate of occupancy when no building permit is required. The Board may, upon written request and for cause shown prior to the expiration of the one year period, renew the variance or special use permit for a second period of up to one year. Said request for an extension need not be advertised. 
    Should an applicant fail to begin construction with a legal building permit, or obtain a certificate of occupancy within the extension period, the board may, upon written request prior to the expiration period, renew the variance or special use permit for a third period of up to one year, provided that the applicant can show due diligence in proceeding and substantial financial commitment in promoting the subject variance or special use permit since the date of the original filing of the decision, notice shall be given in accordance with section 908.2 and a hearing shall be held on the request. 
    None of the periods shall run during the pendency of any of any superior court actions seeking to over turn the grant. 
Sec. 908. - Variances and special use permits. 
    908.1. Application. An application for relief from the literal requirements of a zoning ordinance because of hardship or an application for a special use permit may be made by any person, group, agency or corporation by filing with the division of minimum housing and zoning an application describing the request and supported by such data and evidence as may be required by the board. The division of minimum housing and zoning shall immediately transmit such application received to the board and shall transmit a copy of each application to the planning commission. 
    908.2. Hearing and notice. The zoning board shall immediately upon receipt of an application request that the planning division and/or planning commission shall report its findings and recommendations, including a statement on the general consistency of the application with the goals and purposes of the comprehensive plan of the city, in writing to the board within 30 days. The board shall hold a public hearing on any application for variance or special use permit in an expeditious manner, after receipt, in proper form, of an application, and shall give public notice thereof at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. Notice of this hearing shall be sent by first class mail to the applicant, and to at least all those who would require notice under G.L. 1956, § 45-24-53. Said notice shall also include the street address of the subject property. 
    908.3. Standards for relief. 
(A)  Variance. In granting a variance, the board shall require that evidence to the satisfaction of the following standards be entered into the record of the proceedings: 
(1)  That the hardship from which the applicant seeks relief is due to the unique characteristics of the subject land or structure and not to the general characteristics of the surrounding area; and not due to a physical or economic disability of the applicant; 
(2)  That said hardship is not the result of any prior action of the applicant and does not result primarily from the desire of the applicant to realize greater financial gain; 
(3)  That the granting of the requested variance will not alter the general characteristic of the surrounding area or impair the intent or purpose of this zoning ordinance or the comprehensive plan of the city; 
(4)  That the relief to be granted is the least relief necessary. 
    The board shall, in addition to the above standards, require that evidence [be] entered into the record of the proceedings showing that: 
(1)  In granting a use variance the subject land or structure cannot yield any beneficial use if it is required to conform to the provisions of the zoning ordinance. Nonconforming use of neighboring land or structures in the same district and permitted use of land or structures in an adjacent district shall not be considered in granting a use variance; and 
(2)  In granting a dimensional variance, that the hardship that will be suffered by the owner of the subject property if the dimensional variance is not granted shall amount to more than a mere inconvenience, which shall mean that there is no other reasonable alternative to enjoy a legally permitted beneficial use of one's property. The fact that a use may be more profitable or that a structure may be more valuable after the relief is granted shall not be grounds for relief. 
(B)  Special use permit. In granting a special use permit, the board shall require that evidence to the satisfaction of the following standards be entered into the record of the proceedings: 
(1)  That the special use is specifically authorized by sections 303 and 514 of this ordinance, and setting forth the exact subsection of this ordinance containing the jurisdictional authorization; 
(2)  That the special use meets all of the criteria set forth in the subsection of this ordinance authorizing such special use; and 
(3)  That the granting of the special use permit will not alter the general character of the surrounding area or impair the intent or purpose of this ordinance or the comprehensive plan of the city. 
    908.4 - Special conditions. In granting a variance or special use permit, or in making any determination upon which it is required to pass after public hearing under this ordinance, the board may apply such special conditions that may, in the opinion of the board, be required to promote the intent and purposes of the comprehensive plan of the city and this ordinance. Failure to abide by any special conditions attached to a grant shall constitute a zoning violation. Such special conditions shall be based on competent credible evidence on the record, be incorporated into the decision, and may include, but are not limited to, provisions for: 
(1)  Minimizing adverse impact of the development upon other land, including the type, intensity, design, and performance of activities; 
(2)  Controlling the sequence of development, including when it must be commenced and completed; 
(3)  Controlling the duration of use or development and the time within [which] any temporary structure must be removed; 
(4)  Assuring satisfactory installation and maintenance of required public improvements; 
(5)  Designating the exact location and nature of development; and 
(6)  Establishing detailed records by submission of drawings, maps, plats, or specifications. 
State Law reference- Variances, G.L. 1956, § 45-24-41 et seq. 
Sec. 909. - Appeals to the zoning board. 
    909.1 - Procedure. An appeal to the board from a decision of any other zoning enforcement agency or officer or the HDC pursuant to section 601.10 may be taken by an aggrieved party. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days of the date of the recording of the decision or within 30 days of the time when the aggrieved party knew or should have known of the decision, by such officer or HDC by filing an application with the officer or HDC from whom the appeal is taken and with the board specifying the ground thereof. The officer or HDC from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. Notice of the appeal shall also be transmitted to the planning commission. 
    909.2 - Stay of proceedings. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board, after the appeal shall have been duly filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would in the officer's opinion cause imminent period to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be granted by a court of competent jurisdiction on application thereof and upon notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken on due cause shown. 
    909.3 - Public hearing. The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof in the same manner as set forth in subsection 908.2 of this ordinance, as well as due notice to the parties of interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. The cost of any notice required for the hearing shall be borne by the appellant. 
    909.4 - Decisions and records of the board. In exercising its powers in ruling, the board may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter [this ordinance], reverse or affirm wholly or partly and may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have the powers of the officer or HDC from whom the appeal was taken. All decisions and records of the board respecting appeals shall conform to the provisions of section 907.6 of this ordinance. 
    909.5 - Appeals to superior court. An aggrieved party may appeal a decision of the board to the superior court for providence county by filing a complaint setting forth the reasons of appeal within 20 days after such decision has been recorded and posted in the office of the city clerk. The decision shall be posted in a location visible to the public in the city hall for a period of 20 days following the recording of the decision. The board shall file the original documents acted upon by it and constituting the record of the case appealed from, or certified copies thereof, together with such other facts as may be pertinent, with the clerk of the court within 30 days after being served with a copy of the complaint. When the complaint is filed by someone other than the original applicant or appellant, such original applicant or appellant and the members of the board shall be made parties to such proceedings. The appeal shall not stay proceedings upon the decision appealed from, but the court may, in its discretion, grant a stay on appropriate terms and make such other orders as it deems necessary for an equitable disposition of the appeal. 
State Law reference- Appeals, G.L. 1956, § 45-24-63 et seq. 
Sec. 910. - Adoption, amendment and administration of zoning ordinance. 
    910.1 - Procedure. The director of the planning division shall be the officer to receive a proposal for adoption, amendment, or repeal of a zoning ordinance or zoning map(s). Immediately upon receipt of such proposal, the director shall refer such proposal to the city council and the planning commission for study and recommendation. The planning commission shall report to the city council within 45 days after receipt of the proposal, giving its findings and recommendations. The city council shall hold a public hearing within 65 days of receipt of [the] proposal, giving proper notice as prescribed in section 910.3 of this ordinance. The city council shall render a decision on any such proposal within 45 days after the date of completion of the public hearing. The provisions of this subsection pertaining to deadlines shall not be construed to apply to any extension consented to by the applicant. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 45-24-51. 
    910.2 - Review by planning commission. Among its findings and recommendations to the amendment or repeal of this ordinance or zoning map, the planning commission shall: 
(1)  Include a statement on the general consistency of the proposal with the comprehensive plan of the city, including the goals and policies statement, the implementation program, and all other applicable elements of the comprehensive plan; and 
(2)  Include a demonstration of recognition and consideration of each of the applicable purposes of zoning as presented in section 100 of this ordinance. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 45-24-52. 
    910.3. Notice and hearing requirements. 
(1)  No zoning ordinance shall be adopted, repealed, or amended until after a public hearing has been held upon the question before the city council. The city council shall first give notice of such public hearing by publication of notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the city at least once each week for three consecutive weeks prior to the date of such hearing, which may include the week in which the hearing is to be held, at which hearing opportunity shall be given to all persons interested to be heard upon the matter to the proposed ordinance. Written notice, which may be a copy of said newspaper notice, shall be mailed to the associate director of the division of planning of the Rhode Island department of administration, and, where applicable, to the parties specified in subsections (2), (3), (4) and (5) of this section, at least two weeks prior to the hearing. Such newspaper notice shall be published as a display advertisement, using a type size at least as large as the normal type size used by the newspaper in its news articles, and shall: 
(a)  Specify the place of said hearing and the date and time of its commencement; 
(b)  Indicate that adoption, amendment or repeal of a zoning ordinance is under consideration; 
(c)  Contain a statement of the proposed amendments to the ordinance that may be printed once in its entirety, or summarize or describe the matter under consideration; 
(d)  Advise those interested where and when a copy of the matter under consideration may be obtained or examined and copies; and 
(e)  State that the proposal shown thereon may be altered or amended prior to the close of the public hearing without further advertising, as a result of further study or because of the views expressed at the public hearing. Any such alteration or amendment must be presented for comment in the course of said hearing. 
(2)  Where a proposed general amendment to an existing zoning ordinance includes changes in an existing zoning map, public notice shall be given as required by subsection (1) of this section. 
(3)  Where a proposed amendment to an existing ordinance includes a specific change in a zoning district map but does not affect districts generally, public notice shall be given as required in subsection (1) of this section, with the additional requirements that: 
(a)  Notice shall include a map showing the existing and proposed boundaries, zoning district boundaries, and existing streets and roads and their names, and city boundaries where appropriate; and 
(b)  Written notice of the date, time and place of the public hearing and the nature and purpose thereof shall be sent to all owners of real property whose property is located within 200 feet of the perimeter of the area proposed for change, whether within the City of Central Falls or within an adjacent city or town in which the property is located. 
(4)  Notice of a public hearing shall be sent by first class mail to the city or town council of any city or town to which one or more of the following pertain: 
(a)  Which is located within 200 feet of the boundary of the area proposed for change; or 
(b)  Where there is a public or quasi-public water source, or private water source that is used or is suitable for use as a public water source, within 2,000 feet of any real property that is the subject of a proposed zoning change, regardless of municipal boundaries. 
(5)  Notice of a public hearing shall be sent to the governing body of any state or municipal water department or agency, special water district, or private water company that has riparian rights to a surface water resource and/or surface watershed that is used, or is suitable for use, as a public water source and that is within 2,000 feet of any real property which is the subject of a proposed zoning change, provided, however, that the governing body of any state or municipal water company has filed with the building inspector in the city a map survey, which shall be kept as a public record, showing areas of surface water resources and/or watersheds and parcels of land within 2,000 feet thereof. 
(6)  No defect in the form of any notice under this section shall render any ordinance or amendment invalid, unless such defect is found to be intentional or misleading. 
(7)  Costs of any notice required under this section shall be borne by the applicant. 
(8)  In granting a zoning ordinance amendment, the city council may limit the change to one of the permitted uses in the zone to which the subject land is rezoned, and impose such limitations, conditions and restrictions, including without limitation: 
(a)  Requiring the petitioner to obtain a permit or approval from any and all state or local governmental agencies or instrumentalities having jurisdiction over the land and use which are subject to the zoning change; 
(b)  Relating to the effectiveness or continued effectiveness of the zoning change; and/or 
(c)  Relating to the use of the land, as it deems necessary. 
    The director and the city clerk shall cause the limitations and conditions so imposed to be clearly noted on the zoning map and recorded in the land evidence records, provided, however, in the case of a conditional zone change, the limitations, restrictions, and conditions shall not be noted on the zoning map until the zone change has become effective. 
    If the permitted use for which the land has been rezoned is abandoned or if the land is not used for the requested purpose for a period of two years or more after the zone change becomes effective, the city council may, after a public hearing as hereinbefore set forth, change the land to its original zoning use before such petition was filed. 
    If any limitation, condition, or restriction in an ordinance amendment is held to be invalid by a court in any action, that holding shall not cause the remainder of the ordinance to be invalid. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 45-24-53. 
    910.4 - Maintenance of zoning ordinance. The city clerk shall be the custodian of this zoning ordinance and zoning map or maps created hereunder. The director shall be responsible for maintenance and update of the text and zoning map comprising this ordinance. Changes which impact the zoning map shall be depicted on the map within 90 days of such authorized change(s). The director shall be responsible for review of this ordinance annually, and whenever changes are made to the comprehensive plan of the city, to identify any changes necessary and forward these changes to the city council. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 45-24-55. 
    910.5 - Publication and availability of zoning ordinance. Printed copies of this ordinance and map(s) shall be available to the general public through the city clerk and shall be revised to include all amendments. A reasonable charge may be made for copies to reflect printing and distribution costs. 
    Upon publication of this ordinance and map(s), and any amendments thereto, the city clerk shall send a copy, without charge, to the associate director of the division of planning of the department of administration of the State of Rhode Island, and the state law library. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 45-24-45. 
    910.6 - Appeal of enactment of or amendment to zoning ordinance. An appeal of the enactment of or an amendment to this ordinance may be taken to the superior court for Providence County by filing a complaint within 30 days after such enactment or amendment has become effective. The complaint shall set forth with specificity the area or areas in which the enactment or amendment does not conform with the comprehensive plan and/or the manner in which it constitutes a taking of private property without just compensation. Such appeal may be taken by an aggrieved party or by any legal resident or landowner of the city, or by any association of residents or landowners of the city. This appeal shall not stay the enforcement of the zoning ordinance, as enacted or amended, but the court may, in its discretion, grant a stay on appropriate terms, which may include the filing of a bond, and make such other orders as it deems necessary for an equitable disposition of the appeal. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 45-24-71. 
Sec. 911. - Vested rights. 
(1)  Any application for development under this ordinance, including an application for a building permit, special use permit, variance, planned development, or residential cluster development, shall be deemed substantially complete when all required documents, including plans, together with required fees, are received by the official designated herein to receive such applications. Required documents shall include only those documents specified either by this ordinance or by rules adopted and published by the permitting authority, prior to the time the application is filed. 
(2)  Any application for development under this ordinance that is substantially complete prior to the enactment or amendment of this ordinance shall be reviewed according to the regulations applicable in the zoning ordinance in force at the time the application was submitted. If such application is approved, the applicant must begin construction, or exercise the right granted in the application if no construction is involved, not more than one year after the date of such approval. All construction must be completed not more than two years after the date of such approval, unless specifically set forth to the contrary in the original approval. 
State Law reference- Provisions for vested rights required, G.L. 1956, § 45-24-44. 
Sec. 912. - Effective date. 
    This ordinance shall take effect upon passage by the city council. 
Sec. 913. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this ordinance or of any rule, regulation or determination made hereunder, or the application thereof to any person, agency or circumstances, is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this ordinance or the rule, regulation, or determination and the application of such provisions to other persons, agencies, or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. The invalidity of any section or sections of this ordinance shall not affect the validity of the remainder of the ordinance. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 45-24-72. 
ARTICLE X. - DEFINITIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Definitions required, G.L. 1956, § 45-24-32(2). 

Sec. 1000. - Terms defined. 
    Words used in the present tense include the future, the singular includes the plural and the plural the singular. The word "lot" includes the word "plot." The word "used" includes "designed" and "intended to be used." The word "building" includes "structure," the word "dwelling" includes "residence," the word "person" includes "corporation," "partnership," "association" and "individual." The word "shall" is mandatory. The words "zone" and "district," when referring to a zoning district, shall be interchangeable. Unless otherwise specified, all distances shall be measured parallel to the ground, in any direction. Terms not defined in this ordinance shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them. The following terms, unless a contrary meaning is specifically prescribed, shall have the following meanings: 
    1001. Abutter. One whose property abuts, that is, adjoins, at a border, boundary, or point with no intervening land. 
    1002. Accessory family dwelling unit. An accessory dwelling unit for the sole use of one or more members of the family of the occupant or occupants of the principal residence, but need not have a separate means of ingress and egress. 
    1003. Accessory use. A use of land or of a building, or portion thereof, customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of land or building. Such accessory use shall be restricted to the same lot as the principal use. Such accessory use shall not be permitted without the principal use to which it is related. 
    1004. Aggrieved party. An aggrieved party, for purposes of this act [this ordinance], shall be (a) any person or entity or entities who can demonstrate that their property will be injured by a decision of any officer or agency responsible for administering this ordinance; or (b) anyone requiring notice pursuant to this ordinance. 
    1005. Alteration, exterior. An action that changes one or more of the exterior architectural features of a structure or its appurtenances, including, but not limited to, the erection, construction, reconstruction, or removal of any structure or appurtenance. 
    1006. Antenna. Equipment designed to transmit or receive electronic signals. 
    1007. Apartment hotel. A building or portion thereof used for or containing both rooming units and dwelling units and where additional services such as restaurants, meeting rooms and recreational facilities may be provided. 
    1008. Applicant. An owner or authorized agent of the owner submitting an application or appealing an action of any official, board or agency. 
    1009. Application. The completed form or forms and all accompanying documents, exhibits and fees required of an applicant by an approving authority for development review, approval, or permitting purpose. 
    1010. Appurtenances. Features other than primary or secondary structures which contribute to the exterior appearance of a property including, but not limited to, paving, doors, windows, signs, materials, decorative accessories, fences, and landscape features. 
    1011. Auto body shop. A building or portion of a building in which major repairs are performed on automobile, truck or motorcycle bodies or chassis, including body repair, painting or priming. 
    1012. Basement. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of its floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, having more than one-half of its height above the average elevation of the finished lot grade adjoining the building. 
    1013. Billboard. A sign advertising products, services, facilities, events or attractions not made, sold, used, served or available on the premises displaying such sign. 
    1014. Block frontage. All the property fronting on one side of a street between intersecting or intercepting streets or between a street and right-of-way, waterway, end of dead-end street or city boundary measured along the street line. 
    1015. Boarding house. A building where lodging is supplied with or without meals and the operator resides on the premises. An apartment for the operator of such a facility shall be permitted and not included in the total calculation of rooms permitted. 
    1016. Buffer. Land which is maintained in either a natural or landscaped state, and is used to screen and/or mitigate the impacts of development on surrounding areas, properties or rights-of-way. 
    1017. Building. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. 
    1018. Building, accessory. A subordinate building that is located on the same lot as a principal building and that is used incidentally to a principal building or that houses an accessory use. Where a substantial part of the wall of an accessory building is part of the wall of the principal building or where an accessory building is attached to the principal building in a substantial manner as by a roof, such accessory building shall be counted as part of the principal building. 
    1019. Building, detached. A building having no party wall in common with another building. 
    1020. Building, principal. The primary building on a lot or a building that houses a principal use. 
    1021. Building, semi-detached. A building having one party wall common with an adjoining building. 
    1022. Building envelope. The three-dimensional space within which a structure is permitted to be built on a lot and which is defined by regulations governing: building setbacks, maximum height, bulk or other regulations, and/or any combination thereof. 
    1023. Building frontage. The width of a building abutting or parallel to the street line. 
    1024. Building height. The vertical distance measured from the grade, as defined herein, on the street frontage of the building, to the highest point of the roof structure. The distance may exclude spirals, chimneys, flagpoles and the like as per section 509 of this ordinance. 
    1025. Building official. The director of minimum housing of the City of Central Falls and the zoning enforcement officer. 
    1026. Cellar. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of its floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, having less than one-half its height above the average elevation of the finished lot grade adjoining the building. 
    1027. Cemetery. Land used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including crematories, mausoleums and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of such cemetery. 
    1028. City. The City of Central Falls. 
    1029. Cluster. A site planning technique that concentrates building in specific areas on the site to allow the remaining land to be used for recreation, common open space and/or preservation of environmentally, historically, culturally, or other sensitive features and/or structures. 
    1030. Common ownership. Either (a) ownership by one or more individuals or entities in any form of ownership of two or more contiguous lots; or (b) ownership by an association (such ownership may also include a municipality) of one or more lots under specific development techniques. 
    1031. Community center. A building or group of buildings whose sole purpose is to house a nonprofit service, fraternal, or sectarian organization, including administrative offices, child and elderly programs, recreation and assembly. 
    1032. Community residence. A home or residential facility where children and/or adults reside in a family setting and may or may not receive supervised care. This shall not include halfway houses or substance abuse treatment facilities. This shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(a)  Whenever six or fewer retarded children or adults reside in any type of residence in the community, as licensed by the state pursuant to G.L. 1956, § 40.1-24-1. 
(b)  A group home providing care or supervision, or both, to not more than eight mentally disabled or mentally handicapped or physically handicapped persons, and licensed by the state pursuant to G.L. 1956, § 40.1-24-1. 
(c)  A residence for children providing care or supervision, or both, to not more than eight children, including those of the caregiver, and licensed by the state pursuant to G.L. 1956, § 42-72.1. 
(d)  A community transitional residence providing care or assistance, or both, to no more than six unrelated persons or no more than three families, not to exceed a total of eight persons requiring temporary financial assistance and/or to persons who are victims of crimes, abuse or neglect, and who are expected to reside in such residence not less than 60 days nor more than two years. 
    Residents will have access to and use of all common areas, including eating areas and living rooms, and will receive appropriate social services for the purpose of fostering independence, self-sufficiency, and eventual transition to a permanent living situation. 
    1033. Comprehensive plan. The comprehensive plan adopted by the city and approved pursuant to G.L. 1956, § 45-22.2. 
    1034. Condominium. A structure containing two or more units, the interior space of which units are individually owned; the balance of the property (common area) is owned in common by the owners of the individual units. 
    1035. Construction. The act of adding to an existing structure or erecting a new principal or accessory structure or appurtenances to a structure, including, but not limited to, buildings, extensions, outbuildings, fire escapes, and retaining walls. 
    1036. Council. The city council of the City of Central Falls. 
    1037. Day care-Day care center. Any other day care center which is not a family day care home. 
    1038. Day care-Family day care home. Any home other than the individual's home in which day care in lieu of parental care or supervision is offered at the same time to six or less individuals who are not relatives of the care giver, but may not contain more than a total of eight individuals receiving such care. 
    1039. Demolition. An act or process that destroys a structure or its appurtenances in part or in whole. 
    1040. Density, residential. The number of dwelling units per unit of land. 
    1041. Development. The construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any structure, any mining, excavation, landfill or land disturbance, any change in use, or alteration or extension of the use of land. 
    1042. Development plan review. The process whereby the planning division is authorized to review the site plans, maps and other documentation of a development to determine the compliance with the stated purposes and standards of this ordinance. 
    1043. Director. Director of the division of planning of the City of Central Falls. 
    1044. District. See zoning use district. 
    1045. Dormitory. A building used as rooming units for a student body or religious order as an accessory use for a college, university, boarding school, orphanage, convent, monastery, or other similar institution. 
    1046. Drainage system. A system of the removal of water from land by drains, grading or other appropriate means. Such techniques may include runoff controls to minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or development, the means for preserving surface and ground waters and the prevention and/or alleviation of flooding. 
    1047. Driveway. That portion of a lot that consists of a travel lane used to access a parking area or garage and which is bounded on either side by an area that is not part of the parking area. 
    1048. Dwelling unit. A structure or portion thereof providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation and containing a separate means of ingress and egress. 
    1049. Dwelling, multi-household. A building or portion thereof used for occupancy by three or more households living independently of each other. 
    1050. Dwelling, one-household. A building used exclusively for one household and containing only one dwelling unit. 
    1051. Dwelling, two-household. A building used exclusively for occupancy by two households living independently of each other. 
    1052. Extractive industry. The extraction of minerals, including: solids, such as coal and ores; liquids, such as crude petroleum, and gases, such as natural gases. The term also includes quarrying; well operation; milling, such as crushing, screening, washing and flotation; and other preparation customarily done at the extraction site or as a part of the extractive activity. 
    1053. Family. A person related by blood, marriage or other legal means. See also Household. 
    1054. Garage, parking. Any building, except those herein defined as a private garage, used for parking of vehicles, and with not more than two pumps for the incidental sale of gasoline. Such buildings may include stores and other commercial establishments, providing they conform to all regulations of the zone in which they are located. 
    1055. Garage, private. A detached accessory building or portion of a principal building, used for storage of vehicles where the capacity does not exceed one vehicle for each 2,500 square feet of lot area, but need not be for less than two vehicles. 
    1056. Garage repair shop. A building or portion of a building in which repairs, other than major structural repairs, are made to vehicles. 
    1057. Gasoline service station. A building or portion of a building in which automotive repairs or services are performed; fuel, oil, batteries and accessories are sold; grease racks, elevators and tire-mounting devices are employed; but excluding automobile body repairing and painting and sale of automotive body parts. 
    1058. GFA (gross floor area). The sum of the gross horizontal area of the several floors of a building measured from the exterior face of exterior walls, but not including interior parking spaces, loading spaces for motor vehicles, or any space where the floor to ceiling height is less than six feet. 
    1059. Grade. A reference plane representing the average of finished ground level adjoining the building at all exterior walls. When the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference plane shall be established by the lowest points within the area between the building and the lot line, or when the lot line is more than six feet from the building, between the building and a point six feet from the building. 
    1060. Group quarters. A dwelling unit in which individuals requiring supervision are provided living, sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation facilities. 
    1061. Halfway house. A residential facility for adults or children who have been institutionalized for criminal conduct and who require a group setting to facilitate the transition to [becoming] a functional member of society. 
    1062. HDC. The historic district commission of the City of Central Falls. 
    1063. Home occupation. Any activity customarily carried out for gain by a resident which is conducted as an accessory use in the resident's dwelling unit. 
    1064. Hospital. An institution licensed by the State of Rhode Island to provide primary health services and medical or surgical care to persons, primarily inpatients, suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity and other abnormal physical or mental conditions, and including, as an integral part of the institution, related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient facilities or training facilities. 
    1065. Hotel/motel. A building or portion thereof where temporary lodging is supplied and where additional services such as restaurants, meeting rooms and recreational facilities may be provided. 
    1066. Household. One or more persons living together in a single dwelling unit, with common access to and common use of all living and eating areas and all areas and facilities for the preparation and storage of food within the dwelling unit. The term "household unit" shall be synonymous with the term "dwelling unit" for determining the number of such units allowed within any structure on any lot in a zoning district. Any individual household shall consist of any one of the following: (a) a family, which may also include servants and employees living with the family, and (b) a person or group of not more than three unrelated persons living together. 
    1067. Infrastructure. Facilities and services needed to sustain residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, and other activities. 
    1068. Junkyard, including auto wrecking. A lot or part thereof used for the storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, including scrap metal or other scrap material, or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof. 
    1069. Kennel. A commercial operation that (i) provides food and shelter and care of animals for purposes not primarily related to medical care (a kennel may or may not be run by or associated with a veterinarian), or (ii) engages in the breeding of animals for sale. 
    1070. Land development project. A project in which one or more lots, tracts, or parcels of land are to be developed or redeveloped as a coordinated site for a complex of uses, units, or structures, including but not limited to residential, commercial, institutional, recreational, open space, and/or mixed use as provided for [in] this ordinance. 
    1071. Less restrictive zone. The order of zones from less restrictive to more restrictive is: M-2, M-1, C-D, C-2, C-1, CM, P, R-3, R-2, and R-1. 
    1072. Lodging. The provision of a rooming unit or units for compensation. 
    1073. Lot. Either (a) the basic development unit for determination of lot area, depth, and other dimensional regulations, or (b) a parcel of land whose boundaries have been established by some legal instrument such as a recorded deed or recorded map and which is recognized as a separate legal entity for purposes of transfer of title. 
    1074. Lot area. The total area circumscribed by the boundaries of a lot, except that: (i) when the legal instrument creating a lot shows the boundary of the lot extending into a public street right-of-way, then the lot boundary for purposes of computing the lot area shall be the street right-of-way line, or if the right-of-way line cannot be determined, a line running parallel to and 30 feet from the center of the traveled portion of the street; and (ii) in a residential district, when a private road that serves more than three dwelling units is located along any lot boundary, then the lot boundary for purposes of computing the lot area shall be the inside boundary of the traveled portion of that road. 
    1075. Lot building coverage. That portion of the lot that is or may be covered by buildings and accessory buildings. 
    1076. Lot depth. The distance measured from the front lot line to the rear lot line. For lots where the front and rear lot lines are not parallel, the lot depth is an average of the depth. 
    1077. Lot frontage. That portion of a lot abutting a street. Where all lot frontage is not contiguous, then only the largest single portion of such lot frontage will be considered with regard to minimum frontage requirements. 
    1078. Lot line. A line of record, bounding a lot, which divides one lot from another lot or from a public or private street or any other public or private space, and shall include: 
(a)  Front: Any lot line separating a lot from a street right-of-way; 
(b)  Rear: The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line, or in the case of triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped lots, an assumed line at least ten feet in length entirely within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line; and 
(c)  Side: Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. 
    On a corner lot, or irregularly shaped lot, there may be more than one front lot line. 
    1079. Lot width. The horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot measured at right angles to its depth along a straight line parallel to the front line at the minimum front setback line. 
    1080. Lot, corner. A lot at the junction of and fronting on two or more intersecting streets, both of which are 20 feet or more in width. 
    1081. Lot, through. A lot which fronts upon two parallel or approximately parallel streets, or which fronts upon two streets which do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot. 
    1082. Mixed use. A mixture of land uses within a single development, building or lot. Under some circumstances, a second principal use may be regarded as accessory to the first, and thus a combination use is not established. In addition, when two or more separately owned or separately operated enterprises occupy the same lot, and all such enterprises fall within the same principal use classification, this shall not constitute a mixed use. 
    1083. Mobile home. A structure designed or used for residential occupancy built upon or having a frame or chassis to which wheels may be attached by which it may be moved upon a highway, whether or not such structure actually has, at any given time, such wheels attached, or is jacked up or skirted, or attached to a permanent slab foundation. 
    1084. More restrictive zone. The order of zones from more restrictive to less restrictive is: R-1, R-2, R-3, P, CM, C-1, C-2, C-D, M-1 and M-2. 
    1085. Nonconformance. A building, structure, or parcel of land, or use thereof, lawfully existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of this ordinance and not in conformity with the provisions of such ordinance or amendment. Nonconformance shall be of only two types: 
(a)  Nonconforming by use: A lawfully established use of land, building or structure which is not a permitted use in that zoning district. A building or structure containing more dwelling units than are permitted by the use regulations of this ordinance shall be nonconforming by use; and 
(b)  Nonconforming by dimension: A building, structure, or parcel of land not in compliance with the dimensional regulations of this ordinance. Dimensional regulations include all regulations of this ordinance other than those pertaining to the permitted uses. 
    A building or structure containing more dwelling units than are permitted by the use regulations of this ordinance shall be nonconforming by use, while a building or structure containing a permitted number of dwelling units by the use regulations of the zoning ordinance, but not meeting the lot area per dwelling unit regulations, shall be nonconforming by dimension. 
    1086. Nursing home. A facility licensed by the State of Rhode Island, and maintained for the purpose of providing skilled nursing care and medical supervision at a lower level than that available in a hospital. 
    1087. Overlay district. A district that is superimposed on one or more district or parts of districts and that imposes specified requirements in addition to those otherwise applicable for the underlying zone and or which allow alternate uses (see section 101.4 of this ordinance). 
    1088. Owner. Any person, agent, firm or corporation who, alone, jointly, or severally with others: (a) shall have legal or record title to any property; or (b) shall have charge, care or control of any property as agent, executor, administrator, trustee or guardian. 
    1089. Parking area aisles. A portion of paved area consisting of lanes providing access to parking spaces. 
    1090. Parking space. A portion of paved area set aside for the parking of one vehicle. 
    1091. Parking, accessory use. Off-street parking of automobiles on the same or contiguous lot as a principal use where said parking is established or required in conjunction with the principal use. 
    1092. Parking, principal use. Off-street parking of automobiles on one or more lots where parking spaces for more than four automobiles are available for public use whether free, for compensation, or to satisfy parking requirements of a principal use on separate and noncontiguous lots. 
    1093. Permitted use. A use by right which is specifically authorized in a particular zoning district. 
    1094. Pre-application conference. A review meeting of a proposed development held between applicants and the planning division, before formal submission of an application for a permit or for development approval. 
    1095. Removal. A relocation of a structure on its site or to another site. 
    1096. Repair. A change meant only to remedy damage or deterioration of a structure or its appurtenances. 
    1097. Rest home. Group lodging for convalescing people, including [the] elderly, where basic services are provided. 
    1098. Rooming House. A building where lodging is supplied in rooming units. 
    1099. Rooming unit. A room or suite of rooms having an independent means of access within a building, with facilities intended for sleeping and living. 
    1100. Setback line or lines. A line or lines parallel to a lot line at the minimum distance of the required setback for the zoning district in which the lot is located that establishes the area within which the principal structure must be erected or placed. 
    1101. Shared parking. Shared parking is a parking land use technique that may be utilized when land uses have different predictable parking demand patterns such that different groups of parkers are able to use the same parking spaces/areas at different time periods throughout the day. Shared parking is most effective when these land uses have significantly different peak parking characteristics that vary by time of day, day of week, and/or season of the year. In these situations, shared parking strategies will result in fewer total parking spaces needed when compared to the total number of spaces needed for each land use or business separately. Land uses often used in specific shared parking arrangements include office, restaurants, residential developments, retail, schools, churches and cinemas. Shared parking is often effectively utilized in mixed-use developments. 
    1102. Sign. Any device that is sufficiently visible to persons not located on the lot where such device is located to attract the attention of such persons or to communicate information to them. 
    1103. Sign, freestanding. A sign that is attached to, erected on, or supported by some structure (such as a pole, mast, frame, or other structure) that is not itself an integral part of or attached to a building or other structure having a principal function other than the support of a sign. 
    1104. Sign, off-premises. A sign that draws attention to or communicates information about a business, service, commodity, accommodation, attraction, or other activity that is conducted, sold, or offered at a location other than the premises on which the sign is located. 
    1105. Sign, temporary. A sign that (i) is used in connection with a circumstance, situation, or event that is designed, intended or expected to take place or to be completed within a reasonably short or definite period after the erection of such sign, or (ii) is intended to remain on the location where it is erected or placed for a period of not more than 15 days. If a sign display area is permanent but the message displayed is subject to periodic changes, that sign shall not be regarded as temporary. 
    1106. Site plan. The development plan for one or more lots on which is shown the existing and/or the proposed conditions of the lot. 
    1107. Special use. A regulated use which is permitted pursuant to a special use permit issued by the board. Formerly referred to as a special exception. 
    1107. Story. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above; also, any portion of a building used for human occupancy between the topmost floor and the roof. A basement may be counted as a story but a cellar shall not be so counted. 
    1108. Street. A public right-of-way established by or maintained under public authority, a private way open for public uses, and a private way plotted or laid out for ultimate public use, whether or not constructed. 
    1109. Street line. The line dividing a lot from any street, except a limited or controlled access highway to which the lot has no access. 
    1110. Structure. A combination of materials to form a construction for use, occupancy, or ornamentation, whether installed on, above, or below the surface of land or water, including, but not limited to, buildings, gazebos, billboards, outbuildings, and swimming pools. 
    1111. Substandard lot of record. Any lot lawfully existing at the time of adoption or amendment of this ordinance and not in conformance with the dimensional and/or area provisions of such ordinance or amendment. 
    1112. Temporary lodging. Lodging typically leased for less than one month increments, as in hotel and motel. 
    1113. Tower. Any structure whose principal function is to support transmitting or receiving antenna and related electronic devices. 
    1114. Transitional housing. See Community residence. 
    1115. Use. The purpose or activity for which land or buildings are designed, arranged, or intended, or for which land or buildings are occupied or maintained. 
    1116. Use, accessory. A subordinate use located on the same lot with the principal building, or subordinate use of land, either of which is customarily incident to and serves the principal building or the principal use of the land. 
    1117. Use, principal. The primary or predominant use of any lot. 
    1118. Utility facilities. Any aboveground structures or facilities (other than buildings, unless such buildings are used as storage incidental to the operation of such structures or facilities) owned by a governmental entity, a nonprofit organization, a corporation, or any entity defined as a public utility for any purpose by the State of Rhode Island and used in connection with the production, generation, transmission, delivery, collection, or storage of water, sewage, electricity, gas, oil, or electronic signals. 
    1119. Variance. Permission to depart from the literal requirements of this ordinance. An authorization for the construction or maintenance of a building or structure, or for the establishment or maintenance of a building or structure, or for the establishment or maintenance of a use of land, which is prohibited by this ordinance. There shall be only two categories of variance, a use variance or a dimensional variance: 
(a)  Use variance. Permission to depart from the use requirements of this ordinance where the applicant for the requested variance has shown by evidence upon the record that the subject land or structure cannot yield any beneficial use if it is to conform to the provisions of this ordinance; 
(b)  Dimensional variance. Permission to depart from the dimensional requirements of this ordinance, where the applicant for the requested relief has shown, by evidence upon the record, that there is no other reasonable alternative way to enjoy a legally permitted beneficial use of the subject property unless granted the requested relief from the dimensional regulations. However, the fact that a use may be more profitable or that a structure may be more valuable after the relief is granted shall not be grounds for relief, although it may be an incidental result of the relief. 
    1120. Vehicle, commercial. Automobile vehicle used for commercial transportation purposes, including but not limited to trucks (all types and weights), van used for delivery and service, tractor-trailer, garbage pickup or dump truck, dumpster truck, or similar type vehicle. 
    1121. Wholesale sales. On-premises sales of goods primarily to customers engaged in the business of reselling the goods. 
    1122. Yard, front. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which shall be the least distance between the building and the street, and which is open, unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings or structures from the ground to the sky, except as otherwise provided in this ordinance. 
    1123. Yard, side. A yard extending from the side of the building to the side lot line, the length of which is measured from the front lot line to the rear lot line. 
    1124. Yard, rear. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, measured from the rear of the building to the rear lot line. 
    1125. Zoning certificate. A document signed by the zoning enforcement officer, which acknowledges that a use, structure, building or lot either complies with or is legally nonconforming to the provisions of the municipal zoning ordinance or is an authorized variance therefrom. 
    1126. Zoning map. The map or maps which are a part of this ordinance and which delineate the boundaries of all mapped zoning districts within the physical boundary of the city. 
    1127. Zoning use districts. The basic unit in zoning to which a uniform set of regulations applies, or a uniform set of regulations for a specified use. 
Appendix A 
    This list of use code numbers; is to be used in conjunction with Section 304, Table 1-Use Regulations. Each use code number corresponds with a specific line in Section 304 and illustrates the range of specific uses. Accessory uses, where appropriate, are also listed. 

Sec. 1.0. - Residential. 
    11 One Household Detached Dwelling - one household unit with accessory use and home occupation. 
    12 Two Household Detached Dwelling - two household units with accessory use and home occupation. 
    14 Multi-Household Dwelling - three or more household units with accessory use and home occupation. 
    15 Group Quarters and Lodging - Ten (10) rooming units or less with incidental lodging. 
    15.1 Nursing Home. Licensed extended care facility. 
    15.1.1 Congregate Care Facility - Includes retirement homes and convalescent housing with no more than one bed per each 2,000 square feet of gross acreage. 
    15.2 Community Residence - Home or residential facility where children and/or adults reside in a family setting and may or may not receive supervised care. This shall not include halfway houses or substance abuse treatment facilities. This shall include the following: (a) Whenever six or fewer mentally handicapped children or adults reside in any type of residence in the community, as licensed by the state pursuant to Rhode Island General Law Section 40.1-24-1 et seq. 
1.  (b)  A group home providing care or supervision, or both, to not more than eight mentally disabled or mentally handicapped or physically handicapped persons, and licensed by the state pursuant to Rhode Island General Law Section 40.1 24-1 [G.L. 1956, § 40.1-24-1 et seq.], (c) A residence for children providing car or supervision, or both, to not more than eight children including those of the care giver and licensed by the state pursuant to Rhode Island General Laws Section 42-72.1 [G.L. 1956, § 42-72.1-1 et seq.](d) A community transitional residence providing care or assistance or both, to no more than six unrelated persons or no more than three families not to exceed a total of eight persons requiring temporary financial assistance and/or to persons who are victims of crimes, abuse or neglect, and who are expected to reside in such residence not less than sixty days nor more than two years. Residents will have access to and use of all common areas, including eating areas and living rooms and will receive appropriate social services for the purpose of fostering independence, self-sufficiency, and eventual transition to a permanent living situation. (See Article 10. Definitions for Community Residence). 
    16 Temporary Lodging, ten (10) rooms or less tourist home, bed and breakfast, hotel, and motel. 
    16.1 Temporary Lodging, 11 to 29 rooms - hotel and motel. 
    16.2 Temporary lodging, more than 30 rooms hotel and motel. 
    16.3 Temporary Lodging, with supervision, 15 residents or less - rescue mission, homeless shelter, drop in center. 
    16.4 Temporary Lodging, with supervision, more than 16 residents - rescue mission, homeless shelter, drop in center. 
    17 Mobile Home Park - Residential mobile home, Mobile Home Park, trailer park. 
Sec. 2.0. - Institutional and governmental services. 
    21 Educational Institution - Post Secondary Includes the following: Classrooms, office and assembly use, lecture hall, library, museum and other facilities for instructional purposes; laboratory facility for teaching and research, radio station; administrative office, including academic and business offices, security office, health care facility, day care facility, bookstore; theater with no public assembly, dance studio, exhibition facility, theater, stadium, indoor and outdoor sports facility, including gymnasium for athletic events such as swimming, skating, tennis, football, baseball and other sports; residence hall, dormitory, sorority, fraternity, dining hall, and cafeteria; maintenance facility, workshop, garage, repair facility, and power plant; parking garage and parking lot; not including trade or business school: vocational and trade skills in automotive, construction, metallurgical, chemical and similar industrial operations. 
    21.1 Educational Institution - Elementary through high school - Public and private schools includes the following: classrooms, office and assembly use, lecture hall, library, and other facilities for instructional purposes; laboratory facility for teaching, administrative office, health care facility, day care facility; theater with no public assembly, dance studio, exhibition facility, stadium, indoor and outdoor sports facility, including gymnasium for athletic events such as swimming, skating, tennis football, baseball and other sports; not including trade or business schools; vocational and trade schools in automotive, construction, metallurgical, chemical and similar industrial operations. 
    22 Trade Schools - Public and private institution providing training and/or instruction in: art, business, bookkeeping, accounting, secretarial and the like, cosmetology, dancing, driving hair styling, music conservatory; not including vocational and trade skills in automotive, construction, metallurgical, chemical and similar industrial operations. 
    23 Religious Services - Church synagogue, other places of worship including accessory halls retreat centers and similar activities. 
    24 Medical and Health Services - Hospital (not animal hospital), medical diagnostic or treatment facility, medical or dental office, research laboratory or educational facility, sanitarium, and any use accessory thereto, center for occupational and physical therapy, physical fitness, and drug and alcohol rehabilitation (provided such drug or alcohol rehabilitation facility is owned by or operated in conjunction with a hospital); clinic for medical, dental surgical or psychiatric treatment of disease and disability, whether on an inpatient or outpatient basis; health maintenance organization (HMO). 
    24.1 Drug or Alcohol Rehabilitation facility not owned by or operated in conjunction with a hospital. 
    24.2 Medical or Dental Office - Building occupied by physicians, surgeons, dentist, nurses or other medical, paramedical and para-dental personnel, not owned by or operated in conjunction with a hospital. 
    25 Local and State Government - Local and State administrative or legislative office and chamber, armory, judicial office or court, state police station, municipal fire and police station, with accessory use. 
    25.1 Prison or Correctional Institution. 
    26 Family Day Care Home, as defined in Article 10 - may be children or adults receiving care. 
    26.1 Day Care Facility with more than six (6) persons - may be children or adults receiving care. 
    26.2 Preschools, as defined by the Rhode Island Department of Elementary and Secondary Education. 
    27 Service Organization business, professional and labor organization; civic, social, fraternal and service association; welfare, philanthropic and charitable institution; and other miscellaneous services. 
    28 Cemetery - cemetery, historic cemetery, memorial park but not including funeral homes. 
Sec. 3.0. - Cultural, entertainment and recreation services. 
    31 Non-Profit Library, Museum and Art Gallery. 
    32 Spectator Assembly - auditorium, exhibition hall, sports arena, stadium, theater, outdoor recreation facility, amusement park, drive-in movie, driving range, fair ground, and miniature golf. 
    33 Outdoor Recreation Facility - golf course, tennis court, swimming pool, camp ground, riding academy and country club. 
    34 Indoor Sports Facility - bath house, public bathing, bowling, billiards and like sports; boxing arena; dance hall; gymnasium and indoor swimming pool; ice and roller skating rink; indoor tennis squash and racquetball court; video arcade, games of skill, shooting gallery. 
    35 Non-Profit Community Park and Playground - Neighborhood, city wide and regional park (multipurpose, leisure and ornamental garden); and playground or play field. 
    36 Open Space - community garden, forest reserve, wildlife refuge and other open space; crop or tree farming, truck, gardening; provided that no permanent retail stand or other commercial structure shall be located thereon except for the sale of products raised on the premises. 
Sec. 4.0. - General services. 
    41 Finance, Insurance and Real Estate Service - banking and bank-related functions, credit services, savings and loan association and credit union; insurance carrier, personal credit agency; real estate agent, real estate developer, security and commodity trading service. 
    42 Personal Service - (other than as accessory to residential as per Section 5-1 (a) apparel repair, alteration and cleaning pickup service; barber and beauty service; massage parlor (special use permit required), tanning salon; photographic service; self service laundry and drop-off cleaning service (no dry cleaning on premises); shoe repair service. 
    42.1 Funeral Home - Facility and establishment that arranges for and prepares funerals, including preparation of corpses for burial, related ceremonial function rooms and the like. 
    43 Limited Business Service - advertising agency; business office; credit reporting and collection service; interior designer; photocopy; duplication, mailing and stenographic service; private employment service; research and development of related activities; watch, clock and jewelry repair service. 
    44 General Business Service - printing and copying service; building maintenance service; car washing; catering service; cleaning establishment, including on premises dry cleaning; news syndicate service; pawn shop; radio, TV, electrical electronic and appliance repair service; re-upholstery and furniture repair service; trade school for the instruction of general business service; and wholesale merchandise broker, excluding wholesale storage. 
    45 Repair Service, Automotive - automobile service station, including sale of gasoline; garage repair shop, lubrication shop, transmission shop, muffler and brake service; automobile re-upholstery and interior repair; trade school for the instruction of above repair services. 
    45.1 Gasoline sales, Automotive - Gasoline sales, with no service of automobiles, but including accessory sales of related products. 
    46 Professional Service - accounting; architectural and engineering: legal; medical and related services; trade or professional school for the instruction of professional service listed herein. 
    46.1 Veterinarian and Animal Hospital - veterinarian service and animal hospital. 
    47 Contract Construction Service - cabinet making shop, carpentry service; concrete, masonry or plastering service; electrical contractor; general contract construction service; job shop; painting paper hanging and decorating service; plumbing, heating and air conditioning service; roofing and sheet metal service; taxidermy establishment; well drilling service. 
    48 Warehousing and Storage not including open lot storage. 
    49 Warehousing and Storage including open lot storage. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2014(2)) 
Sec. 5.0. - Trade. 
    51 Wholesale Trade, within enclosed structure - including accessory storage, building materials or lumber yard (retail also permitted), contractor's equipment rental, storage and maintenance; drugs, chemicals and allied products; durable goods and apparel; electrical and electronic goods and hardware, plumbing, heating equipment, and supplies (retail also permitted): farm products; groceries and related products; household goods; machinery equipment and supplies; motor vehicles and automotive equipment and general warehouse. 
    52 Wholesale Trade and Outdoor Storage - building materials or lumber yard (retail also permitted); contractor's equipment rental, storage and maintenance; drugs, chemicals and allied products; electrical electronic goods and hardware, plumbing, heating equipment, and supplies (retail also permitted); farm products; groceries and related items; machinery equipment and supplies; motor vehicles and automotive equipment; nonflammable medical or industrial gases. 
    53 Bulk Storage, Petroleum/LNG Storage, (not Including Landfill), Scrap and Waste Materials - Heating oil, diesel oil, storage of petroleum products, propane and kerosene storage for retail sale. Bulk storage of petroleum products, propane storage. Bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas, liquefied nitrogen gas (other gases stored under pressure or temperature are not permitted). 
    54 Retail Trade-Building and Related Material - hardware-retail; nursery and garden supplies retail only, greenhouse not permitted; paint, glass, and wallpaper-retail; yard equipment and supplies. 
    55 Retail Trade, Neighborhood Establishments, 2,500 sq. GFA or Less - apparel and accessories; household appliances; art supply; bakeries; books newspapers and periodicals; cameras and photographic supplies; confectionery; custom tailoring; dairy products; drug store; eating and/or drinking establishments excluding entertainment; fabric store; floor covering-retail; florist; fruits and vegetables-retail; gift shop; groceries and delicatessens-retail; hobby shops; home furnishings and equipment; jewelry-retail; liquor store; meat and fish- retail; musical instruments and supplies-retail; office supplies or equipment, stationery or art supplies; pet store; radio, television, audio/video and computer equipment, sales and/or rental; shoe store; sporting goods and bicycles; variety store; hardware-retail; nursery and garden supplies-retail including greenhouses; paint, glass, and wallpaper-retail; yard equipment and supplies. 
    55.1 Convenience Store - newspapers and periodicals; dairy products; fruits and vegetables-retail; groceries and delicatessens-retail; and related convenience items. 
    56 Retail Trade - Community-wide Establishment More Than 2,500 sq. GFA - apparel and accessories; household appliances; art supply; bakeries; books newspapers and periodicals; cameras and photographic supplies; confectionery; custom tailoring; dairy products; department store, no automotive repairs or installation; drinking establishments serving alcoholic beverages; drive-in eating establishments; drug store; eating and/or drinking places excluding entertainment; fabric store; floor covering-retail; florist; fruits and vegetables-retail; gift shop; groceries and delicatessens-retail; hobby shops; home furnishings and equipment; jewelry-retail; liquor store; marine accessories; meat and fish retail; musical instruments and supplies-retail; office supplies or equipment, stationery or art supplies; pet store; radio, television, audio/video and computer equipment, sales and/or rental; second hand merchandise and antiques; shoe store; sporting goods and bicycles; supermarkets; variety stores. 
    57 Retail Trade - Automotive, Marine Craft, Aircraft and Accessories - marine craft sales and storage; mobile home sales; retail sales: motor vehicles (new and used); recreational vehicle sales; tires, batteries and accessory sales. 
    58 Fast Food Restaurant - A commercial establishment where food or beverages are cooked, prepared or packaged and offered for sale inside or outside the structure by means of stand-up counter and/or drive-in service (including self service) and primarily serves or dispenses such food or beverages in or with disposable containers and/or utensils and take away food is more than incidental. 
Sec. 6.0. - Transportation, communication and utilities. 
    61 Transportation Center - Motor vehicle rental office, including outdoor storage of vehicles; taxicab terminal; truck and trailer rental office; including the storage of moving vans, truck trailers, storage trailers, boat trailers; bus passenger terminal; railroad passenger terminal; rapid rail transit; accessory indoor maintenance and storage. 
    62 Freight Terminal - Public utility service yard, railroad yard or freight yard, accessory outdoor maintenance and storage. 
    63 Aircraft Transportation including maintenance - Heliport, accessory outdoor maintenance and storage. 
    64 Parking, Principal Use Parking - Garage or open lot for passenger and commercial vehicles. No gasoline sales and no automotive repairs. 
    65 Communication and Utilities - Electrical sub station, telephone switching device (non-office or store), gas telephone and telegraph and cable television utilities or junction box (no office or store), water utilities, well, pumping station or storage facility, water supply reservations or reservoirs. 
    65.1 Wireless transmitting and receiving antennae, including satellite dish type. 
    66 Power Plant, - steam and/or electricity generating facility powered by solar, natural gas or low sulfur oil only. 
    66.1 Incinerator and Waste Facility Incinerator - power plant powered by solid wastes; incinerator, sewage disposal facilities or solid waste transfer station, operated by or for a state or municipal agency. 
    67 Outdoor Advertising - billboards (freestanding or on building) 
Secs. 7.0-8.0. - Manufacturing. 
    70 Food and Kindred Products Manufacturing Including Canning and/or Packaging- beverage manufacturing and/or bottling; brewery or distillery; canning and preserving fruits and vegetables; confectionery and related products; dairy products; grain mill products; ice cream manufacturing; ice manufacturing; meat products (not including slaughter); poultry products (including slaughter); sugar manufacturing; canning and preserving of fish and seafood. 
    70.1 Processing of baker products. 
    70.2 Processing of sauerkraut, vinegar or yeast. 
    70.3 Rendering or refining of fats or oils. 
    70.4 Stock yard or feeding pen. 
    70.5 Slaughter of animals , not including fowl; and distillation of bones. 
    71 Textile Mill Product and Apparel Manufacturing - carpet and rug weaving; fur goods; hats, caps and millinery; knit goods, woven fabrics, felt and other small wares; lace and lace goods; yarns and threads; laundry and/or dry cleaning plant; dyeing plant and finishing of textiles; leather and leather apparel suits, coats and overcoats including furnishings, work clothing and allied garments, outerwear and undergarments. 
    72 Lumber and Wood Products - furniture and fixtures manufacturing; household and office furniture; millwork veneer, plywood and pre-fabricated structural wood products; partitions, shelving, lockers and office and store fixtures; sawmills and planing mills; signs and advertising displays; toys, amusement, sporting and athletic goods; wooden containers; and other articles and merchandise made from wood or wood products. 
    73 Paper and Allied products, Printing, Publishing - books, newspaper, and periodicals; printing, binding, and publishing; building paper and building paper board; converted paper, paperboard and paperboard products; industrial printing, including manifold business forms, greeting cards. Paperboard containers and boxes. 
    73.1 Pulp mills and paper mills. 
    74 Chemicals and Allied Products Manufacturing - alcohol manufacturing; battery manufacturing; bleaching and dyeing; manufacture in processing of fuel and ice, gum and wood chemicals, industrial inorganic and organic chemicals, paints, varnishes, lacquers, enamels and allied products, non-explosive processes; plastic materials and synthetic rubber, synthetic and other man-made fibers; soap, detergents and cleaning preparations, perfumes, cosmetics and other toilet preparations; creosote manufacture or treatment. 
    74.1 Agricultural chemicals including fertilizer. 
    74.2 Leather and fur tanning and finishing. 
    74.3 Acid manufacturing hydrochloric acid; nitric acid; picric acid; sulfuric acid. 
    74.4 Chlorine or other similar noxious or toxic gases and chemicals. 
    74.5 Glue manufacture. 
    75 Petroleum Products and Related Industries manufacturing household products derived from petroleum including flooring material; paving and roofing materials. 
    75.1 Petroleum Refining - coal distillation including manufacture or derivation of the by- products; manufactured gases from petroleum and petroleum by-products; tar distillation or tar products manufacture. 
    76 Rubber and Miscellaneous Plastic Products - manufacturing advertising display signs, floor covering, miscellaneous plastic products, reclaiming rubber, rubber footwear, sporting goods and stamps, toys and novelties, rubber manufacture or treatment; tire manufacturing tire re-treading, tire recapping. 
    77 Stone, Clay and Glass Products - manufacturing, compounding, assembling or treating articles or merchandise from the following prepared materials: brick and tile, cement and cement products, concrete, gypsum and plaster products, cut stone and stone products manufacturing, flat glass, glass and glass ware, glass tubing, neon signs, pottery and related products, and structural clay products. Above products may be fired only in kilns powered and/or heated by electricity or gas. 
    77.1 Pottery Products Manufacturing. 
    77.2 Abrasive and Miscellaneous Nonmetallic Mineral Products Manufacturing. 
    77.3 Cement, Lime, Gypsum or Plaster of Paris Manufacture - potash works; materials processing, distribution and storage of cement, salt, rock, sand and gravel; rock quarries; stone mill. 
    77.4 Asbestos and related asbestos products manufacturing and assembly. 
    77.5 Junk Yard - including storage, sorting, collecting or baling of rags, paper, metal or junk, truck or automobile wrecking. 
    78 Primary Metal Industries - blast furnaces; steel works; and rolling and finishing of ferrous metals; iron and steel foundries; primary and secondary smelting and refining of nonferrous metals; rolling, drawing and extruding nonferrous metals; smelting of tin, copper, zinc or iron ore including blast furnace or blooming mill. 
    79 Fabricated Metal Products - manufacturing cutlery, hand tools, machine tools, general hardware, metal cans and other metal products; fabricating structural metal products; fabricating wire products (miscellaneous products); manufacturing heating apparatus and plumbing fixtures; manufacturing light sheet-metal products; metal shop; metal stamping; manufacturing screw machine products and bolts, nuts, screws, rivets and washers; coating, engraving and allied services; and blacksmith and silversmith shop. 
    79.1 Drop Forge Industries, Manufacturing Forgings with Power Hammers. 
    80 Machinery and machine parts manufacturing - manufacturing agricultural machinery, communication equipment, computer hardware and related business machines, construction, mining and materials handling machinery and equipment, electric lighting and wiring equipment, electrical apparatus, motors, generator, coils, condensers, transformers and welding equipment, electrical transmission and distribution equipment, electronic components, accessories, instruments and devices, engines and turbines, general office or industrial machinery and equipment, household appliances, audio and video parts and equipment, metal working machinery and equipment and metal tools. 
    81 Transportation Equipment Manufacturing auto body shops, aircraft and parts, motor vehicles and equipment manufacturing, including body repair, painting services, rebuilding, assembling, reconditioning, overhauling, motorcycles, bicycles and parts, rail equipment. 
    82 Ship and Boat Building and Repairing. 
    83 Precision Instruments and Scientific Equipment Manufacturing - engineering, laboratory and scientific and research instruments and associated equipment, instruments for measuring, controlling and indicating physical characteristics, musical instruments and parts, ophthalmic goods optical instruments and lenses, pens, pencils and other office and artists' equipment, photographic equipment and supplies, surgical, medical and dental instruments and supplies, watches, clocks, clockwork devices and parts. 
    84 Jewelry, Silverware, Plated Ware, Costume Jewelry and Notions Manufacturing - costume jewelry, costume novelties, buttons and miscellaneous notions, jewelers' findings and materials, jewelry, silverware and plated ware. 
    84.1 Manual Assembly of Jewelry Parts - job shops. 
    84.2 Plating of jewelry and related precious and semi-precious metal parts and products, including electroplating and plating of electronic parts and products using acids and electrical mechanisms. 
    85 Arts and Crafts Manufacturing - manufacture of articles from metal. Wood, stone, clay, glass, ceramic, paper, leather or similar material for display, wholesale or retail sale, provided that no more than 2,500 sq. ft. GFA be used and that there be no more than 5 employees. 
    86 Nuclear Industries Manufacturing and Explosives Manufacture or Storage in Bulk Quantities - nuclear process related machinery; nuclear reactor (not for generating power); processing and storage of nuclear fuels and other materials; storage, reclaiming and disposal of nuclear waste and manufacture and storage in bulk quantities of explosives, munitions and ordinance. 
    87 Tobacco Processing 
    88 Biological Technologies - Industries that use RDNA (recombinant deoxyribonucleic acid), cell fusion and novel bioprocessing techniques; including related research into processes that promote human health diagnostics and therapeutics, agricultural biology including plant genetics for food purposes, veterinary products, environmental remediation techniques, and manufacture of instruments that assist in biological research. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1973 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1973 Code, as updated through December 31, 1981, which are included herein. Sections of the 1973 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1973 Code 
Section Section   
this Code 1-1-1-3 1-1-1-3 1-4 1-12 1-6 1-5 1-8 1-4 2-1 2-4 2-2 2-49 2-8 2-50 2-9 2-52 2-10 2-314 2-12 2-232 2-14 24-1 2-16 24-2 2-20, 2-21 2-142, 2-143 2-21.1 2-144 2-26 2-174 3-4-3-7 4-40-4-43 3-8 4-43 4-1-4-4 8-6-8-9 4-5, 4-6 8-11, 8-12 4-7 8-5 4-8 8-1 4-9 8-45 8-50 4-11 8-134 4-11(f) 8-10 4-12 8-74 4-12.5 8-76 4-13 8-2 4-14-4-16 8-223-8-225 6-1 10-1 8-3, 8-4 2-315, 2-316 8-6-8-10 2-317-2-321 8-11 2-313 8-17 2-322 8-32-8-34 2-323-2-325 9-3, 9-4 20-9, 20-10 9-5 20-39 9-8 20-1 9-9 20-69 9-10-9-12 20-70 9-13, 9-14 20-71, 20-72 9-15-9-26 20-92-20-103 10-1 20-4 10-17-10-20 20-5-20-8 11-1-11-4 30-1-30-4 11-18-11-21 30-75-30-78 11-22 30-78 13-1-13-5 28-50-28-54 13-7 28-55 14-1 2-331 14-27-14-30 12-242-12-245 14-31-14-34 12-245-12-248 14-35-14-39 12-224 14-41, 14-42 12-220, 12-221 14-43 12-223 14-44 12-222 14-45 12-218 14-47 12-219 14-48 12-217 14-51-14-53 12-82-12-84 14-54 12-167 14-55, 14-56 12-188, 12-189 14-57-14-59 12-412-12-414 14-60 12-416 14-61 12-415 14-62 12-384 14-63-14-67 12-297-12-301 14-69 12-303 14-70 12-302 14-71, 14-72 12-352, 12-353 14-73 12-355 14-74 12-354 14-77 6-43 14-78 6-42 14-79-14-82 6-223-6-226 16-1-1-16-1-25 36-1 16-2-1 36-37 16-2-2 36-39 16-2-4 36-134 36-218 16-2-5 36-538 16-2-6 36-3 16-2-7, 16-2-8 36-2, 36-3 16-2-9 36-2 16-3-1 36-4 16-3-2, 16-3-3 36-7, 36-8 16-3-8 36-106 16-3-9 36-535 16-3-10 36-166 16-3-11 36-168 16-3-12 36-167 16-3-13 36-539 16-3-14 36-170 16-3-15 36-141 16-3-17 36-110 16-3-18 36-345 16-3-19 36-108 16-3-20 36-338 16-3-21 36-511-36-513 16-3-22 36-169 16-3-24 36-140 16-3-25 36-344 16-3-26 36-341 16-4-1, 16-4-2 36-74, 36-75 16-4-2.1 36-76 16-4-3, 16-4-4 36-77, 36-78 16-4-4-16-4-6 36-79-36-81 16-4-7 36-137 16-4-10 36-135 16-4-11 36-41 16-5-1-16-5-4 36-194-36-197 16-6-1, 16-6-2 36-242, 36-243 16-6-4-16-6-7 36-244-36-247 16-6-7 36-248-36-251 16-7-2 36-140 16-8-1 36-223 16-8-3-16-8-5 36-220-36-222 16-8-6-16-8-8 36-281-36-283 16-8-9 36-219 16-8-10 36-224 16-9-1, 16-9-2 36-339, 36-340 16-9-3-16-9-5 36-315-36-317 16-9-6, 16-9-7 36-342, 36-343 16-9-8 36-6 16-9-9 36-510 16-9-10 36-136 16-9-11 36-138 16-9-13 36-372 16-9-14 36-9 16-9-15 36-386 16-9-16 36-571 16-9-17 30-2 16-9-18- 
16-9-21 36-572- 
36-575 16-9-22 36-5 16-9-23 36-603 16-9-24 36-599 16-9-26, 16-9-27 36-601, 36-602 16-9-28 36-107 16-9-29 36-109 16-9-30 36-82 16-10-1, 16-10-2 36-536, 36-537 16-10-2 36-539 16-10-3, 16-10-4 36-542, 36-543 16-10-5, 16-10-6 36-540, 36-541 16-10-7-16-10-9 36-544-36-546 16-11-1-16-11-4 36-464-36-467 16-11-5 36-469 16-11-6-16-11-8 36-473-36-475 16-11-9 36-477 16-11-10 36-470, 36-471 16-11-11 36-472 16-11-12 36-476 16-11-13 36-478 16-12-1 36-369 16-12-2 36-40 16-12-3 36-370 16-13-1 36-373 16-13-2 36-371 16-13-3 36-374 16-13-4 36-1 16-13-4-16-13-9 36-375-36-380 16-14-2, 16-14-3 36-416, 36-417 16-14-4, 16-14-5 36-42, 36-43 16-14-6, 16-14-7 36-418, 36-419 16-15-1, 16-15-2 36-364, 36-365 16-15-3- 
16-15-7 36-381- 
36-385 16-15-8 36-366 16-15-10 36-367 16-17-1 36-627 16-17-2, 16-17-3 36-625, 36-626 16-17-4 36-139 16-18-1 32-62 16-18-2(a)- 
16-18-2(e) 32-85-32-89 16-18-3- 
16-18-6 32-90-32-93 16-18-7- 
16-18-11 32-115-32-119 16-18-12 32-63 16-18-13 32-61 16-19-1- 
16-19-3 36-437-36-439 16-19-5 36-440 18-1 26-2 18-8 12-2 18-10 26-84 18-11 26-1 18-12 26-152 18-16 26-30 18-18 26-85 18-21 26-31 18-21.5 26-29 18-22, 18-23 26-150, 26-151 19-35 20-40 21-1 22-19 21-2-21-6 22-23-22-27 21-7-21-18 22-60-22-71 23-1, 23-2 32-1 23-3 32-2 23-5-23-9 32-164-32-168 23-10-23-14 32-3 23-15 32-216 32-241-32-250 23-17, 23-18 32-4, 32-5 23-19-23-22 32-32-32-35 23-24, 23-25 32-6, 32-7 23-26-23-30 32-7-32-11 23-30.5 32-12 23-30.7 32-13 24-1-24-7 32-190-32-196  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1994 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1994 Code, as supplemented through September 12, 2005, that are included herein. 
1994 Code 
Section Section   
this Code 1-1-1-7 1-1-1-7 1-8-1-10 1-10-1-12 1-11-1-13 2-1-2-3 2-1 2-4 2-2, 2-3 2-49, 2-50 2-3.1 2-51 2-4 2-52 2-5 2-314 2-7 2-5 2-32 2-29 2-51, 2-52 2-47, 2-48 2-67-2-70 2-142-2-145 2-83, 2-84 2-174, 2-175 2-106-2-110 2-278-2-282 2-128, 2-129 2-315, 2-316 2-131-2-135 2-317-2-321 2-136 2-313 2-139-2-143 2-322-2-326 2-145-2-147 2-327-2-329 2-157 2-349 4-4-4-6 4-40-4-42 4-8, 4-9 4-43, 4-44 6-36 6-76 6-37 6-75 6-38 6-98 6-39 6-100 6-40 6-99 6-41-6-44 6-101-6-104 6-45 6-77 6-46 6-105 6-64, 6-65 6-42, 6-43 6-86 6-124 6-88-6-90 6-125-6-127 6-101 6-155 6-102 6-157 6-103 6-156 6-104, 6-105 6-158, 6-159 6-106 6-128 6-107-6-109 6-160-6-162 6-176-6-179 6-223-6-226 6-185 4-63 6-187 4-62 8-1 8-45 8-1.1-8-1.4 8-46-8-49 8-2 8-50 8-3-8-9 8-6-8-12 8-10 8-5 8-10.1 8-4 8-11 8-13 8-31 8-1 8-32.1 8-131 8-33 8-134 8-34 8-74 8-35 8-76 8-36 8-2 8-36.1 8-75 8-37 8-132 8-37.1 8-133 8-38-8-40 8-96-8-98 8-41 8-3 8-42, 8-43 8-99, 8-100 8-43.1 8-101 8-44, 8-45 8-135, 8-136 8-46 8-157 8-47 8-156 8-48-8-50 8-159-8-161 8-51 8-158 8-81-8-83 8-223-8-225 10-1-10-3 10-1-10-3 10-26 2-230 10-29, 10-30 2-231, 2-232 12-3 12-2 12-7 12-1 12-8 2-331 12-10-12-15 12-28-12-33 12-43-12-45 12-82-12-84 12-56 12-112 12-57, 12-58 12-114, 12-115 12-67-12-70 12-146-12-149 12-71 12-116 12-72 12-113 12-81 12-167 12-91, 12-92 12-188, 12-189 12-106, 12-107 12-217, 12-218 12-110-12-114 12-219-12-223 12-126-12-132 12-242-12-248 12-133 12-224 12-156 12-297 12-158-12-163 12-298-12-303 12-186, 12-187 12-352, 12-353 12-188 12-355 12-189 12-354 12-211 12-384 12-221-12-223 12-412-12-414 12-224 12-416 12-225 12-415 14-1 14-19 14-2, 14-3 14-47, 14-48 14-5 14-22 14-6 14-21 14-7-14-9 14-23-14-25 14-10 14-20 14-11-14-14 14-26-14-29 14-15 14-49 16-1 2-330 16-26-16-30 16-19-16-23 16-41-16-44 16-50-16-53 18-26-18-27 12-4 18-36-18-40 18-48-18-52 18-42, 18-43 18-53, 18-54 18-51 18-19 18-52 18-21 18-53 18-20 18-54 18-19 18-55 18-22 18-67 26-115 18-68, 18-69 26-117, 26-118 18-70 26-116 18-71 26-114 20-1-20-7 20-4-20-10 20-8, 20-9 20-2, 20-3 20-31 20-1 20-35 20-39 20-37 20-40 20-46-20-50 20-69-20-73 20-61-20-72 20-92-20-103 20-101, 20-102 20-135, 20-136 22-26-22-28 22-19-22-21 22-29-22-35 22-23-22-29 22-56-22-67 22-60-22-71 22-76-22-80 22-101-22-105 24-1, 24-2 24-1, 24-2 24-4 24-3 26-2 26-84 26-3 26-29 26-4 26-1 26-5 26-85 26-6, 26-7 26-150, 26-151 26-9 26-152 26-10, 26-11 26-30, 26-31 26-12 26-2 26-36-26-40 26-51-26-55 28-1, 28-2 28-19, 28-20 28-3, 28-4 28-22, 28-23 28-26-28-30 28-50-28-54 28-32 28-55 30-31-30-42 2-78-2-89 30-61-30-67 2-108-2-114 30-68 2-107 31-317(b) 36-545 32-1-32-4 30-1-30-4 32-26 30-27 32-27-32-36 30-30-30-39 32-37 30-29 32-38 30-28 32-39-32-42 30-40-30-43 32-61-32-67 30-75-30-81 32-91 30-107 32-92 30-106 32-93-32-96 30-108-30-111 34-1, 34-2 32-1, 32-2 34-4 32-3 34-5 32-216 32-241-32-250 34-6-34-13 32-4-32-11 34-15-34-17 32-12-32-14 34-36-34-40 32-32-32-36 34-61, 34-62 32-62, 32-63 34-63 32-61 34-76-34-84 32-85-32-93 34-96-34-100 32-115-32-119 34-121, 34-122 32-139, 32-140 34-123, 34-124 32-137, 32-138 34-146-34-150 32-164-32-168 34-171-34-177 32-190-32-196 36-26 34-19 36-51-36-53 34-42-34-44 36-55-36-57 34-45-34-47 36-71-36-77 34-68-34-74 38-1 36-1 38-2 36-37 38-3 36-39 38-5 36-134 36-218 38-6 36-538 38-7-38-9 36-2-36-4 38-10, 38-11 36-7, 36-8 38-11 36-167 38-12 36-1 38-16 36-106 38-17 36-535 38-18 36-110 38-19 36-108 38-20 36-511-36-513 38-41-38-45 36-74-36-78 38-45(3) 36-79 38-46, 38-47 36-80, 36-81 38-48 36-137 38-51(b) 36-135 38-52 36-41 38-81, 38-82 36-339, 36-340 38-83-38-85 36-315-36-317 38-86, 38-87 36-342, 36-343 38-88 36-6 38-89 36-510 38-90 36-136 38-91 36-138 38-93 36-372 38-94 36-9 38-95 36-386 38-96-38-100 36-571-36-575 38-101 36-5 38-102 36-603 38-103 36-599 38-105, 38-106 36-601, 36-602 38-107 36-107 38-108 36-109 38-109 36-82 38-110 36-627 38-111, 38-112 36-625, 36-626 38-113 36-139 38-114 36-166 38-115 36-168 38-117 36-539 38-118 36-170 38-119 36-141 38-120 36-345 38-121 36-338 38-122 36-169 38-123 36-140 38-124 36-344 38-125 36-341 38-141-38-144 36-194-36-197 38-161, 38-162 36-242, 36-243 38-164-38-167 36-244-36-247 38-167 36-248-36-251 38-182 36-140 38-201 36-223 38-203-38-205 36-220-36-222 38-206-38-208 36-281-36-283 38-209 36-219 38-210 36-224 38-231 36-369 38-232 36-40 38-233 36-370 38-234 36-373 38-235 36-371 38-236-38-239 36-374-36-377 38-240(b) 36-378 38-241, 38-242 36-379, 36-380 38-244, 38-245 36-416, 36-417 38-246, 38-247 36-42, 36-43 38-248, 38-249 36-418, 36-419 38-250, 38-251 36-364, 36-365 38-252-38-256 36-381-36-385 38-257 36-366 38-260 36-367 38-291-38-293 36-437-36-439 38-295 36-440 38-311 36-536 38-312(a)-(c) 36-537 38-312(d) 36-539 38-313, 38-314 36-542, 36-543 38-315, 38-316 36-540, 36-541 38-317(a) 36-544 38-318, 38-319 36-545, 36-546 38-321 36-38 38-341-38-344 36-464-36-467 38-345 36-469 38-346-38-348 36-473-36-475 38-349 36-477 38-350(a), (b) 36-470 38-350(c) 36-471 38-351 36-472 38-352 36-478 38-353 36-476 38-354 36-468  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances included in the new Code. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section Section 
this Code  6-14-1982(Ord.) art. I 38-32 art. II 38-31 art. III, § 1 38-61 art. III, §§ 2-4 38-62 art. III, §§ 5, 6 38-63 art. III, § 7- 38-64-38-66 art. III, § 9 art. III, §§ 10-12 38-67 art. III, §§ 13-16 38-68 art. III, §§ 17-18 38-69 art. III, § 19 38-70 art. III, §§ 20-21 38-71 art. IV, §§ 1, 2 38-111 art. IV, §§ 3-5 38-112 art. IV, §§ 6-8 38-113 art. V, § 1, 38-113 art. V, § 2 art. V, §§ 3-5 38-113 art. V, § 6 38-113 art. V, §§ 7-9 38-113 art. V, §§ 10, 11 38-113 art. V, §§ 12, 13 38-113 art. V, § 14, 38-113 art. V, § 15 art. V, §§ 16-18 38-113 art. V, § 19- 38-113 art. V, § 21 art. VI, §§ 1-3 38-181 art. VII, § 1 38-34 art. VIII, §§ 1-4 38-35 art. IX, § 1 38-181 art. IX, §§ 2, 3 38-181 art. IX, §§ 4-6 38-181 art. IX, § 7, 38-181 art. IX, § 8 art. X, §§ 1-4 38-36 art. XII, § 1 38-33 art. XIV, §§ 1-5 38-37 art. XV, §§ 1-3 38-231 art. XV, § 4- 38-232-38-235 art. XV, § 7 art. XVII, §§ 1-14 38-38  9-13-1982(Ord.) 2 6-124 3 6-155 4 6-158 5(i) 6-127 5(a), 5(b) 6-156 5(c) 6-157 5(d) 6-159 5(e) 6-128 5(f)-5(h) 6-125-6-127 5(j) 6-162 6 6-161 8 6-160  5-30-1984(2)(Ord.) 1 34-43  5-30-1984(3)(Ord.) 1-6 34-42 10- 1-1984(Ord.) I 2-78-2-89  6-18-1985(Ord.) 1 2-47 10-15-1985(Ord.) 11-24-11-26 30-79-30-81 11-27 30-81 12- 9-1985(Ord.) 2-5  6-11-1987(2)(Ord.) 1 34-44 12-14-1987(1)(Ord.) 18-48 A 18-49 F, G 18-53, 18-54 12-14-1987(3)(Ord.) 1 36-438-36-440  8- 3-1988(Ord.) art. I, § 1 14-19 art. I, § 2 14-47 art. II, § 1 14-23 art. II, § 2 14-48 art. II, § 4, 14-24, 14-25 art. II, § 5 art. II, § 6 14-20 art. II, § 7, 14-26, 14-27 art. II, § 8 art. III, § 1 14-29 art. III, § 2 14-21  9-12-1988(Ord.) art. II, § 2 14-48 art. II, § 3, 14-24, 14-25 art. II, § 4 art. II, § 5 14-20 art. II, § 6, 14-26, 14-27 art. II, § 7 art. III, § 4 14-22  1- 9-1989(Ord.) art. II, § 9 14-28  6-14-1989(Ord.) 8-37 2-349  9-11-1989(Ord.) II 30-110 IA 30-107 IB 30-106 IC 30-109 ID 30-108 30-111  2-12-1990(2)(Ord.) I 2-48  3-12-1990(3)(Ord.) 12-82  4- 9-1990(1)(Ord.) 2-331  4- 9-1990(2)(Ord.) 12-1  6- 6-1990(1)(Ord.) 11-2, 11-3 30-2, 30-3 12-10-1990(Ord.) 1 36-546  2-19-1991(Ord.) I 34-19  5-13-1991(1)(Ord.) 20-8  5-13-1991(2)(Ord.) 20-7  5-13-1991(3)(Ord.) 14-19  5-13-1991(4)(Ord.) 9-9, 9-10 20-135, 20-136  5-13-1991(5)(Ord.) 20-5  5-13-1991(6)(Ord.) 1 20-6  9- 9-1991(1)(Ord.) A 12-112 B 12-146, 12-147 C, D 12-148, 12-149 E 12-116 11-12-1991(1)(Ord.) 2-331 12- 9-1991(Ord.) 10-2  5-11-1992(Ord.) 4-40  8-24-1992(Ord.) 1, 2 32-139, 32-140 3 32-138 4 32-137 10- 5-1992(Ord.) 24-3  1- 6-1993(1)(Ord.) A, B 8-45 C 8-50  1- 6-1993(2)(Ord.) art. I, § 2 14-47  1- 6-1993(3)(Ord.) 1 16-19 2-5 16-50-16-53 6-9 16-20-16-23  4-14-1993(Ord.) 19-37 22-20 19-37.1 22-21  5-12-1993(1)(Ord.) 19-38 22-21  8-10-1993(Ord.) 12.1 2-230 12.4 2-231  8-16-1993(3)(Ord.) 1 4-40  8-30-1993(Ord.) 1 26-115 2 26-117 4 26-118 5 26-116 6 26-114  9-13-1993(Ord.) 1 8-157 2A 8-156 2B 8-159 3(a) 8-160 3(b) 8-159 3(c) 8-161 4 8-158  3- 7-1994(Ord.) 22-28  3-15-1994(Ord.) 10-21-1-10-21-4 2-326  6- 1-1994(Ord.) 34-42, 34-43  6-14-1994(Ord.) 1-5 28-20  6-30-1994(Ord.) 1-4 34-45  9-12-1994(2)(Ord.) 18-100, 18-101 26-51, 26-52 18-102, 18-103 26-54, 26-55 11-14-1994(Ord.) 32-32 32-34 32-36  1- 9-1995(Ord.) I-IV 2-278-2-281  5- 8-1995(1)(Ord.) 2-1, 2-2  5- 8-1995(2)(Ord.) 2-3  5-31-1995(1)(Ord.) 12-113  5-31-1995(2)(Ord.) 1-4 2-330  6- 5-1995(2)(Ord.) 34-46  8- 7-1995(Ord.) 1, 2 34-47  8-28-1995(Ord.) 1-3 34-45 12-11-1995(Ord.) 4-40 96-006-O  3-13-1996 8-1 96-003-O  5-13-1996 8-96 96-004-O  5-13-1996 8-97 96-005-O  5-13-1996 2-51 8-46 96-007-O  5-13-1996 8-132 96-008-O  5-13-1996 8-98  6-27-1997(Ord.) 8-13  8-12-1997(Ord.) App. A, § 703, 
A, § 704  3-18-1998(1)(Ord.) 4-40  3-18-1998(2)(Ord.) 30-106  6- 8-1998(Ord.) 4-40  8- 3-1998(Ord.) 12-114  8- 4-1998(Ord.) 22-21 12-14-1998(Ord.) 8-1 8-3, 8-4 8-47-8-50 8-74, 8-75 8-96 8-98-8-101 8-131-8-133 8-135, 8-136 12-28-12-33 28-19  1-11-1999(Ord.) 12-82 26-114  2- 8-1999(Ord.) 30-109 11- 8-1999(Ord.) 16-22 16-50  3-15-2000(Ord.) 16-22  3-27-2000(Ord.) 8-157  4-17-2000(Ord.) 2-175  6-23-2000(Ord.) 2-144 10-23-2000(Ord.) 2-327 11- 6-2000(Ord.) 20-73  4-27-2001(Ord.) 14-49  5-30-2001(Ord.) 6-75-6-77 6-98-6-105  6- 4-2001(Ord.) 2-145 6-43 6-124-6-128 6-155, 6-156 6-158-6-162  6- 8-2001(Ord.) 2-328  6-13-2001(Ord.) 2-328  6-28-2001(Ord.) 34-45  8-20-2001(Ord.) 2-329 12-10-2001(Ord.) 28-22  5-13-2002(Ord.) 34-68-34-74  8-26-2002(Ord.) 2-331  9-16-2002(Ord.) 10-3  9-30-2002(1)(Ord.) 18-48 18-50-18-52  9-30-2002(2)(Ord.) 30-3 12-16-2002(Ord.) 12-4  1-13-2003(Ord.) 28-23  2-10-2003(Ord.) 26-51-26-55  4-14-2003(Ord.) 4-40  8-25-2003(Ord.) 28-19 2708 12-11-2003 8-52 8-162 12-14-2003(Ord.) 4-44  2- 9-2004(Ord.) 20-2  4-12-2004(Ord.) 26-115 26-117  6- 1-2004(Ord.) I-5 22-101-22-105  8-31-2004(1)(Ord.) 36-468  8-31-2004(2)(Ord.) 12-115  8-31-2004(3)(Ord.) 2-107-2-114  8-31-2004(4)(Ord.) 22-28  9-13-2004(Ord.) 30-109 10-18-2004(Ord.) 30-27-30-43 11- 8-2004(1)(Ord.) 14-26 11- 8-2004(2)(Ord.) 22-29 11-29-2004(Ord.) 20-3 12-13-2004(Ord.) 8-132  1-10-2005(1)(Ord.) 26-114  1-10-2005(2)(Ord.) 36-3  2-28-2005(1)(Ord.) 30-34  2-28-2005(2(Ord.) 36-2  3-14-2005(1)(Ord.) 34-46  3-14-2005(2)(Ord.) 36-386  4-11-2005(1)(Ord.) 28-50  4-11-2005(2)(Ord.) 8-1  4-11-2005(3)(Ord.) 30-4  4-11-2005(4)(Ord.) 30-36  4-11-2005(5)(Ord.) 36-78, 36-79  4-11-2005(6)(Ord.) 32-14  6- 1-2005(1)(Ord.) 26-151  6- 1-2005(2)(Ord.) 4-40  6- 1-2005(3)(Ord.) 18-19-18-22  6- 1-2005(4)(Ord.) 36-38  6- 1-2005(5)(Ord.) 2-29 12-12-2005(Ord.) 1 10-25 2.2 10-27 2.4 10-28 2.12-2.14 10-61-10-63 3.1, 3.2 10-65, 10-66 3.4-3.14 10-101-10-111 4.1-4.17 10-135-10-151 5.1, 5.2 10-171, 10-172 5.5-5.14 10-173-10-182 6-10 10-203-10-207 11 10-72 12 10-208 13.1 10-26 13.2 10-64 13.3-13.7 10-67-10-71 13.10 10-209  4-10-2006(Ord.) 30-28, 30-29 30-31-30-43  6-26-2006(Ord.) 4-44 12-11-2006(Ord.) 36-627  5-14-2007(Ord.) 20-137  6-11-2007(1)(Ord.) 34-45  6-11-2007(2)(Ord.) 34-42  6-11-2007(3)(Ord.) 34-43  6-25-2007(1)(Ord.) 22-124, 22-125  6-25-2007(2)(Ord.) 22-19-22-21 22-23-22-29  4-14-2008(1)(Ord.) 20-51 20-74  4-14-2008(2)(Ord.) 26-5  5-12-2008(1)(Ord.) 14-3 14-48  5-12-2008(2)(Ord.) 22-20  5-12-2008(3)(Ord.) 8-52 8-162  6- 9-2008(1)(Ord.) 42-101-42-111 26-4 42-113(b) 26-4  6- 9-2008(2)(Ord.) 1-5 26-3  6-30-2008(Ord.) 34-45  7-28-2008(Ord.) 28-21  9-15-2008(Ord.) 8-162 10-20-2008(Ord.) 8-7 12- 8-2008(Ord.) 22-22  1-12-2009(Ord.) 32-33  2-27-2009(Ord.) 17.01, 17.02 10-242, 10-243 17.03 10-241 17.04-17.06 10-272 17.07, 17.08 10-301, 10-302 17.09 10-273 17.10 10-271  6-25-2009(Ord.) 42-1-42-6 18-101-18-106 44-1-44-8 18-141-18-148  8-24-2009(Ord.) 2-331  4-12-2010(1)(Ord.) 32-31 30-34(1), (4)  4-12-2010(2)(Ord.) 32-32 30-35(a)  4-12-2010(3)(Ord.) 34-181-       Added 32-301-32-303 34-183  5-10-2010(Ord.)       Added Adopting ord., p. xi  3-21-2011(Ord.) 32-32  4-18-2011(1)(Ord.) 32-36(c) 30-39(c)  4-18-2011(2)(Ord.) 32-8  4-18-2011(3)(Ord.) 34-43(a)  4-18-2011(4)(Ord.) 34-45(a), (b)  4-18-2011(5)(Ord.)       Added 36-628  5-16-2011(2)(Ord.) 34-42(a) 12-19-2011(1) (Ord.) 36-2 12-19-2011(2) (Ord.) 36-366 12-19-2011(3) (Ord.)       Added 36-387 12-19-2011(4) (Ord.) 20-136 12-19-2011(6) (Ord.) 30-2, 30-3, 30-33, 30-35, 30-37, 30-39, 30-40, 30-42, 30-79, 30-81   4-11-2012 (Ord.) App. A, 304, Table 1 10-10-2012 (Ord.) 1-5       Added Art. II, Div. 3, 26-66-26-70   2-13-2013 (Ord.) 1-4       Added Art. III, Div. 6, 2-191-2-194   3-20-2013(1) (Ord.)       Added 22-30   4-12-2013 (Ord.) 2-144   4-20-2013 (Ord.) 2-145  3-10-2014(1)(Ord.) App. A, § 304  3-10-2014(2)(Ord.) App. A, § 304 App. A, App. A, § 4.0  4-14-2014(Ord.) 1       Added 12-5  4-23-2014(1)(Ord.) 1 20-40  4-23-2014(2)(Ord.) 1 12-29  6- 9-2014(Ord.) 12-1  8-13-2014(Ord.) 4-40-4-44       Added 4-45 4-62, 6-63  8-25-2014(Ord.) 1 30-27-30-43  9- 8-2014(1)(Ord.) 1 10-25-10-28       Added 10-29-10-37       Rpld 10-61-10-72, 10-101-10-111, 10-135-10-151, 10-171-10-182, 10-203-10-209 2 12-4       Added 12-6  9-29-2014(1)(Ord.) 1 8-1-8-13,       Added 8-14 8-45-8-50, 8-74-8-76, 8-96-8-101, 8-131-8-136,       Added 8-137-8-140 8-223-8-225  3-23-2015(1)(Ord.) 1 14-20-14-29       Added 14-30  3-23-2015(2)(Ord.) 1 32-12  4-13-2015(Ord.) 1       Added 2-30   5-11-2015 (Ord.) 1 30-106-30-109   9-14-2015(1) (Ord.) 1 36-437-36-440       Added 36-441   9-14-2015(2) (Ord.) 10-241-10-243, 10-271-10-273, 10-301, 10-302   9-14-2015(3) (Ord.) 1 26-1-26-5, 26-29-29-31, 26-51-26-53, 26-84, 26-85, 26-150-26-152 2 1-12 3 28-50 4 14-26   9-28-2015 (Ord.) 1 22-20, 22-21 2 20-40 10-14-2015 (Ord.) 1 12-1-12-3       Added 12-7, 12-8 2 12-28-12-33 3 12-82-12-84, 12-112-12-115, 12-146-12-149       Added 12-150 12-167, 12-188, 12-189, 12-217-12-219, 12-223, 12-224, 12-242-12-248, 12-352-12-355, 12-384, 12-412-12-416       Added 12-417-12-425 4 6-75-6-77, 6-98-6-105, 6-124-6-128, 6-155-6-162, 6-223-6-226 12-14-2015 (Ord.) 1 4-40(a) 2 4-40(e)   2-10-2016 (Ord.)       Added 1-13 11- 9-2015(1) (Ord.) 1 26-114-26-118       Added 26-119   3-14-2016(1) (Ord.) 1 14-20   8-10-2016(1) (Ord.) 1 20-93, 20-94 2 22-61, 22-62 11-28-2016(1) (Ord.) 1       Added 2-332   2-13-2017(2) (Ord.) 1 12-417-12-425   2-27-2017(1) (Ord.) 1       Added 40-1-40-3, 40-34-40-36, 40-67   3-13-2017(1) (Ord.) 1 2-47   5- 8-2017(1) (Ord.) I       Added 2-293-2-300   6-12-2017(1) (Ord.) 1 2-332   6-12-2017(2) (Ord.) 2 34-68-34-74       Added 34-75   6-19-2017(1) (Ord.) 1 2-328, 2-330  7-10-2017(1) (Ord.) 1 12-4, 12-6 2 18-20-18-22 3 10-25-10-37       Added 10-38  9-18-2017(1) (Ord.) 1 36-1-36-9       Added 36-10, 36-11  9-18-2017(2) (Ord.) 1       Rnbd 32-32       as 32-34       Rnbd 32-33       as 32-36       Rnbd 32-34-32-36       as 32-37-32-39       Added 32-32, 32-33, 32-35, 32-40 12-11-2017(1) (Ord.) 1 22-20 2 20-40  1- 8-2018(1) (Ord.) 1       Added 32-310-32-316  1- 8-2018(2)(Ord.)       Added 12-9  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the General Laws of Rhode Island. 
G.L. 1956 
Section Section   
this Code 2-12-6-2-12-10 20-4 3-1-1 et seq. Ch. 4 3-5-15, 3-5-16 4-40 3-5-19 4-42 3-7-1 et seq. Ch. 4, Art. II, 
Div. 2 4-40 4-1-1 et seq. Ch. 8 4-13-1 Ch. 8 Ch. 8, Art. V 8-2 4-13-1.1 12-4 4-13-15 8-74 4-13-19 8-134 4-13.1-1 et seq. 8-74 8-162 4-13.1-9 8-132 4-15-1 et seq. 8-6 4-16-1 et seq. 8-6 5-1-1 et seq. Ch. 12 5-2-1 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. IV 5-5-1 12-32 5-11-1.1 et seq. Ch. 12, Art. IV, 
Ch. 12, Art. V 5-11-18 12-113 5-15-1 et seq., 5-21-1 et seq. Ch. 12, Art. V, 
Ch. 12, Art. VI 5-22-1 Ch. 6 5-22-1 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. III 5-22-5 Ch. 6 5-24-1 et seq. Ch. 12, Art. V 5-24-4 12-84 12-188 5-38.3-1 et seq. 12-3 12-31 5-53.1-1 et seq. Ch. 12, Art. IX 5-57-1 et seq. Ch. 16, Art. II 5-57-38 Ch. 16, Art. II 5-65-1 et seq. 12-32 5-73-1 et seq. 12-32 8-8-3(a)(4) 14-20 8-8-3.2 14-20 9-26-5 20-102 22-70 11-9-19 26-53 11-9-19.1 26-53 11-19-18 6-128 11-19-30 6-19 11-19-30 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. II 11-23 12-4 ch. 11-34 12-4 11-34-1 et seq. 12-4 11-35-4 Ch. 32, Art. VI 11-37.1-2(e) 26-3 11-37.1-3- 
11-37.1-5 26-3 11-44-1 26-1 28-55 11-44-21.1 26-52 11-45-1 26-84 11-45-1(a)(8) 4-63 11-45.1-1 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. III, 
Div. 2 11-47 12-4 11-47-1 et seq. 26-150 11-47-11 22-30 11-51 12-4 12-10-12 2-194 12-14-12 Ch. 36, Art. VI 12-18-3 2-194 12-28-1.01 et seq. 18-19 16-19-8 Ch. 2, Art. V, 
Div. 2 2-278 tit. 21, ch. 28 18-19 12-4 21-28-1.02 12-4 23-18-1 et seq. App. A, § 304 ch. 23-18.8 30-107 23-18.8-1 et seq. Ch. 30, Art. IV 30-107 ch. 23-18.9 30-107 23-18.9-1 et seq. Ch. 30 30-107 23-19.1-1 et seq. 30-106 23-19.1-4 30-106 23-19.2-1 et seq. Ch. 18 23-19.2-4 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. II 23-19.2-7 12-3 12-28 23-20.10-2(15) 12-421 23-27.3-1 et seq. Ch. 10 23-27.3-100 et seq. 10-28 10-36 23-27.3-100.1.5.1 Ch. 10, Art. II 23-27.3-118.0, 23-27.3-119.0 10-1 23-28.1-1 et seq. Ch. 20 23-28.20-1 et seq. 20-5 23-28.28-1 et seq. 20-5 23-37-1 et seq. Ch. 20, Art. II 23-37-4 20-9 24-5-1 et seq. Ch. 32 24-5-13 32-14 24-7-3 32-1 28-5-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 2 28-9.1-1 et seq. Ch. 20, Art. II, 
Div. 2 20-69 28-9.1-5 20-69 28-9.1-7 et seq. 20-72 29-4-1 et seq. Ch. 24 29-4-5 24-2 30-15-1 et seq. Ch. 16 31-1-1 et seq. Ch. 36 31-1-2 36-1 31-1-2 et seq. 36-1 31-1-3 36-1 31-3-1 36-106 31-3-18 36-107 31-3-60 36-107 31-7-4(b), 
31-7-4(c) 36-221, 36-222 31-9-6, 31-9-7 36-467 31-10-27 36-108 31-10-32 36-109 31-10.1-1, 
31-10.1-4 36-511 31-10.1-5 36-512 31-10.1-6 36-513 31-12-6(a) 36-134 31-12-7, 31-12-8 36-134 31-12-9 36-4 36-134 31-12-11, 
31-12-12 Ch. 36 31-12-12(a)(1) Ch. 36, Art. VI 31-12-12(a)(2) Ch. 36, Art. III 36-4 31-12-12(a)(3) Ch. 36, Art. V, 
Div. 7 31-12-12(a)(4) 36-140 31-12-12(a)(6) 36-224 31-12-12(a)(8) Ch. 36, Art. VII 31-12-12(a)(9) 36-245 31-12-13 Ch. 36 31-13-1 36-75 31-13-3 Ch. 36, Art. III 31-13-4 36-74 36-244 31-13-6, 31-13-7 36-77 31-13-8 36-78 31-13-9- 
31-13-11 36-80-36-82 31-14-1 36-196 31-14-1 et seq. Ch. 36, Art. V, 
Div. 3 31-14-5 36-194 31-15-2 36-197 31-15-3-31-15-7 36-166-36-170 31-15-9 36-140 31-15-11 36-135 31-15-12 36-141 31-15-14 36-138 31-15-15 36-469 31-16-1 36-338 31-16-2, 31-16-3 36-242, 36-243 31-16-4 36-245 31-16-5, 31-16-6 36-247, 36-248 31-16-8, 31-16-9 36-249, 36-250 31-16-9 36-251 31-17-6 36-218 31-18-1 36-536 31-18-3 36-537 31-18-4, 31-18-5 36-539, 36-540 31-18-6 36-537 31-18-7 36-541 31-18-8 36-535 31-18-9 36-542 31-18-10 36-544, 36-545 31-18-12 36-546 31-18-18 36-342 31-19-1 36-464 31-19-1 et seq. Ch. 36, Art. VII 31-19-2, 31-19-3 36-464, 36-465 31-19-4 36-472 31-19-5 36-468 36-476 31-19-9 36-475 31-19-10 36-478 31-19-12 36-471 31-20-1, 31-20-2 36-283 31-20-9 36-220 31-20-10 36-281 36-342 31-21-1 et seq. Ch. 36, Art. VI 31-21-4- 
31-21-6 36-373 31-21-7, 31-21-8 36-369 31-21-14 36-6 31-22-2 36-343 31-22-5 36-136 31-22-6 36-345 31-22-7 36-339, 36-340 31-22-9 36-9 31-22-22 36-5 31-22-24 36-603 31-23-13 36-574 31-23-14 36-573 31-23-15 36-575 31-23-16 36-572 31-24-1 36-599, 36-600 31-24-4 36-600 31-24-7 36-601 31-24-9 36-602 31-25-9 30-1 31-27-7.1 36-368 31-27-16 36-315 31-28-7 36-368 31-29-5 36-368 31-42-1 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. III 31-42-2 18-52 31-42-4, 31-42-5 18-53 32-3-1 Ch. 28 34-10-1 et seq. 2-232 34-18-1 et seq. 12-4 36-1-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III 37-15-6 Ch. 30 30-2 32-5 40.1-24-1 App. A, § 1000 40.1-24-1 et seq. App. A, § 1 42-28.1-1 et seq. 22-22 ch. 42-46 2-282 42-46-1 et seq. 2-282 42-72.1 App. A, § 1000 42-72.1-1 et seq. App. A, § 1 42-128.1-8 10-38 43-3-3-43-3-6 1-2 43-3-10- 
43-3-13 1-2 43-3-16 1-2 43-3-22- 
43-3-24 1-4 44-1-1 et seq. Ch. 34 44-3-3 Ch. 34, Art. III 44-3-4(1) 34-43 44-3-4(e) 34-44 44-3-12 34-46 44-3-34 34-45 44-5-12(a)(4) 34-47 44-5-20.1 34-19 44-5.1-1 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. IV 44-5.1-2, 
44-5.1-3 34-68 44-5.1-3(i) 34-69 44-5.1-4(i) 34-74 44-55-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VI, 
Div. 2 45-2-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II 45-2-2 Ch. 34, Art. II 45-2-27 Ch. 14, Art. II 14-19 45-6-1 Ch. 32, Art. VI 45-6-2 1-12 45-6.1-1 et seq. 36-3 45-11-1 2-328 2-330 45-15-1- 
45-15-15 2-314 45-15-16 Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 3 45-19-1 et seq. Ch. 20, Art. II, 
Div. 3 Ch. 22 45-19-16 20-93 45-20-1 et seq. Ch. 22 45-21-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III Ch. 20, Art. II, 
Div. 3 45-22.1 2-293 45-22.2 2-297 App. A, § 106 App. A, § 1000 45-22.2-1 et seq. App. A, § 100 45-23 2-297 45-24-1 et seq. App. A 45-24-30 App. A, § 100 45-24-32(1) App. A, § 100 45-24-32(2) App. A, Art. X 45-24-32(6) App. A, Art. IX 45-24-32(8) App. A, § 102 45-24-36 App. A, § 101 45-24-38 App. A, § 209 45-24-39 App. A, Art. II 45-24-39(c) App. A, § 206 45-24-41 et seq. App. A, § 908 45-24-42 App. A, § 514 45-24-44 App. A, § 911 45-24-45 App. A, § 910 45-24-46.4 2-297 45-24-47 App. A, § 602 45-24-49 2-297 45-24-51, 
45-24-52 App. A, § 910 45-24-53 App. A, § 908 App. A, § 910 45-24-54 App. A, § 301 45-24-55 App. A, § 910 45-24-57(1), 
45-24-57(2) App. A, § 907 45-24-61 App. A, § 907 45-24-63 et seq. App. A, § 909 45-24-71 App. A, § 910 45-24-72 App. A, § 913 45-24.2-1 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. II ch. 45-24.3 14-20 45-24.3-1 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. II 14-20 ch. 45-31 40-35 40-36 40-67 45-31-8 40-67 ch. 45-32 40-35 40-36 40-67 45-32-4 40-34 ch. 45-33 40-35 40-36 40-67 45-55-9 Char. § 4-909 46-12-1 et seq. 18-103  
