The Charter
Chapter C
CHARTER
C:1

Part 1
The Town
ARTICLE I
Basic Provisions
§ C-1. Incorporation.
The inhabitants of the Town of East Greenwich, within the corporate limits
as now established or as hereafter established in the manner provided
by law, shall continue to be a municipal body politic and corporate in
perpetuity under the name of "Town of East Greenwich," and as such shall
continue to have, exercise and enjoy all the rights, immunities, powers,
privileges and franchises, and shall be subject to all the duties and
obligations, now incumbent upon or appertaining to said Town as a
municipal corporation or by virtue of the laws of this state so far as the same
shall not be altered by this Charter or amendments hereof.
§ C-2. Form of government. [Amended 11-4-2014]
The municipal government formed by this Charter shall be known as the
"Council-Town Manager form of government."
§ C-3. Powers of the Town.
The Town has all the powers granted to a town and all the powers possible
for a town to have under the Home Rule Charter Amendment and under the
Constitution and laws of this state together with all the implied or incidental
powers necessary to carry into execution the powers granted. The Town
may acquire property within or without its corporate limits for any Town
purpose, in fee simple or any lesser interest or estate, by purchase, gift,
devise, lease or condemnation, and may sell, lease, mortgage, hold, manage
and control such property as its interest may require. Except as prohibited
by the Constitution of this state or restricted by this Charter, the Town
shall and may exercise all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges
and immunities of every name and nature whatsoever. The enumeration of
particular powers by this Charter shall not be deemed to be exclusive, and
it is intended that the Town shall have and may exercise all powers which
could be enumerated in this Charter under this state's Constitution.
§ C-4. Intergovernmental agreements.
The Town may enter into contracts or cooperative agreements with the
federal government, the state, or with any political subdivision thereof, for
the performance of any service, the use of any facilities, the combination of
services and/or functions, and the financing thereof.
§ C-1 CHARTER § C-4
C:3

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ C-5. Amending the Charter.
§ C-6. Construction. [Amended 11-7-2000]
The provisions of this Charter shall be liberally construed in favor of the
Town. The powers of local self-government shall include not only those
granted in express terms but also those not inconsistent with or prohibited
by the Constitution of the state.
§ C-7. Separability.
If any section or part of a section of this Charter is found invalid by a court
of competent jurisdiction, that holding shall not affect the remainder of this
Charter nor the context in which the section or part of the section found
invalid appears, except to the extent that an entire section or part of a
section is inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the section or
part of a section found invalid. If any section or part of a section pertaining
to election procedures is held invalid by a court, the pertinent election
procedures set forth in the laws of the state shall apply.
§ C-8. Conflict of provisions.
To the extent that any specific provision contained in this Charter shall
conflict with any provision expressed in general terms, the specific
provision shall prevail.
A. This Charter may be amended at any time or a new Charter adopted at
any time in the manner provided by the Constitution of the state.
Should two or more amendments adopted at the same time have
conflicting provisions, the one receiving the largest affirmative vote
shall prevail.
B. The sections of any amendment added to this Charter shall be
appropriately numbered by the Town Clerk and inserted in their
appropriate places.
C. It shall not be necessary for the full text of the Charter or of
amendments to the Charter to be printed on the ballot. Any digest or
description of amendments or any question or statement which
substantially expresses the purpose or identifies the subject matter to
be voted upon shall be sufficient. When any question is to be submitted
to the electors, the Town Council shall approve the statement of the
question as it shall appear on the ballot. A copy of the full text of the
Charter or amendments shall be posted in each polling place and any
other places designated by the Board of Canvassers.
§ C-5 CHARTER § C-9
C:5
§ C-9. Printing of the Charter. [Amended 11-7-2000; 11-4-2014]
The Council may provide for the printing, publication and distribution of
the Charter and, at its discretion, may require that a reasonable charge be
made for copies. The Council shall provide a copy of the Charter to every
Town officer and department head without charge or provide electronic
access to it, and a printed copy or electronic access to the Charter will be
made available upon request to employees within a reasonable amount of
time.
§ C-10. Authority of officers.
Any powers, duties or functions which are required by law to be exercised,
performed or administered by a particular officer or officers of the Town
shall be carried out by the officer or officers who by this Charter or by
ordinance or by law are responsible for the same, regardless of the title or
designation of the office.
§ C-11. Oath of office.
Every officer of the Town shall, before entering upon the duties of his or her
office, take and subscribe to the following oath or affirmation, to be filed
and kept in the office of the Town Clerk: "I solemnly swear (or affirm) that
I will support the Constitution and obey the laws of the United States of
America and of the State of Rhode Island; that I will, in all respects, observe
the provisions of the Charter and ordinances of the Town of East Greenwich,
and will faithfully discharge the duties of the office of . . . ."
§ C-12. Official bonds. [Amended 11-7-2000]
The Town Council shall require a bond, in such amount and with such surety
as this Charter or the Town Council may specify, from all persons entrusted
with the collection, custody or disbursement of any of the Town money, and
may likewise require such a bond from other officials and employees as the
Council may deem advisable or as required by law. The premiums on such
bonds, except for auctioneers, shall be paid for by the Town unless provided
otherwise.
§ C-13. Terms of office. [Amended 11-7-2000]
The term of office of all officers, members of boards, commissions and
committees of the Town appointed with the approval of or appointed or
elected by the Council shall be concurrent with the term of the Council
and until their successor has been qualified unless otherwise stated in the
Charter or by ordinance.
§ C-14. Qualifications for elected office. [Amended 11-2-2004]
All elected officers of the Town shall be qualified electors of the Town and
shall be qualified as provided for by this Charter; and if any elected officer
of the Town ceases to be a resident of the Town, the office held by that
§ C-9 EAST GREENWICH CODE § C-14
C:6
person shall become vacant. An elected officer of the Town can only serve
12 consecutive years as an East Greenwich elected official, after which the
elected official cannot seek elected office for two years. This shall apply to
all elected officials in office as of January 1, 2005, and will take into account
their past service as an elected official, but will permit them to finish their
current term if they have as of that date served 12 or more consecutive
years.
§ C-15. Rules for boards, commissions and committees. [Amended
11-7-2000; 11-2-2004]
At least annually, every appointed board, commission and committee of
the Town shall adopt rules not in conflict with state law or this Charter
with regard to conduct of meetings, attendance and election of officers.
Every board or commission shall have rules providing for the election of
a chair, vice chair and a secretary, and each election will occur at the
commencement of the Town fiscal year.
§ C-16. Residence of members of boards, commissions and
committees.
No person shall be appointed to any board, commission or committee of
the Town unless he or she is a qualified elector of the Town and a resident
actually living in the Town, except as otherwise provided by the state law
and by this Charter, and if any appointed member of any board, commission
or committee ceases to meet such qualifications, the position held shall
become vacant.
§ C-17. Length of service for membership on boards, commissions
and committees. [Added 11-2-2004]
A person may serve on any board or commission for a total of three terms
or 10 years, whichever is less, even if the person serves on two or more
different boards or commissions. After three terms or 10 years, whichever
is less, the board or commission member cannot serve on any board or
commission for two years. However, effective January 1, 2005, every current
member of a board or commission may be reappointed to one term, at
the expiration of their current term, regardless of their years of service.
Upcoming openings, vacancies and/or reappointments shall be advertised.
If no one applies for the position, the term limit of the member whose
term is expiring does not apply for one additional term and that person
can be reappointed. Every board or commission shall have a defined term
of service that is not less than three years, unless otherwise stated in the
Charter, by ordinance, or by state law. These provisions do not apply to
alternates or to ad hoc boards or commissions.
§ C-18. Dual office holding. [Amended 11-3-1992; 11-7-2000]
A. No elected or appointed member of the Town government shall hold
more than one elective or appointive position in the Town government,
§ C-14 CHARTER § C-18
C:7
§ C-19. Conflict of interest.
with the exception of ad hoc or study commissions, at the same time.
No elected member of the Town government shall, at the same time,
hold any position by virtue of an appointment by the Town Council or
the Town Manager.
B. No employee of the Town shall hold an elective office in the Town
government while he or she is employed by the Town.
A. Contracts.
(1) No member of the Town Council, School Committee, nor the Town
Manager, nor any officer or employee of the Town shall (a) make a
contract with the Town (with the exception of his or her own
contract of employment), or (b) receive any commission, discount,
bonus, gift, contribution, or award from, or any share in, the profits
of any person making or performing such contract unless:
(a) The person concerned is a member of the Council or the Town
Manager, then he or she shall immediately, upon learning of
the existence of such contract or that such contract is
proposed, notify the Council in writing of the nature of his or
her interest in such contract;
(b) The person is a member of the School Committee or an officer
or employee of the School Department, then he or she shall
immediately, upon learning of the existence of such contract or
that such contract is proposed, notify the School Committee in
writing of the nature of his or her interest in such contract; and
(c) The person is some other officer or employee of the Town, then
he or she shall immediately, upon learning of the existence of
such contract or that such contract is proposed, notify the
Town Manager in writing of the nature of his or her interest in
such contract; and
(2) In each case listed above, he or she shall also abstain from doing
any official act on behalf of the Town or of the other contracting
party with reference thereto; provided, however, that when a
contractor with the Town is a corporation or a voluntary stock
association, the ownership of less than 5% of the stock or shares
actually issued shall not be considered as involving an interest in
the contract within the meaning of this section, and ownership of
under 5% shall not affect the validity of the contract unless the
owner of the stock or agent of the corporation or association
solicits or takes part in making the contract.
B. No Town officer or employee shall accept any gratuity or thing of value
from any person who has business with the Town or whose intent is to
influence that officer or employee in the performance of his or her
official duties. No Town officer or employee of the Town shall sell, give
§ C-18 EAST GREENWICH CODE § C-19
C:8
§ C-20. Conviction of a crime. [Amended 11-7-2000]
Any elected officer of the Town convicted of a crime which is a felony
or involving malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office shall be
required to vacate his/her office.
§ C-21. Performance of duties.
All paid personnel holding office or employment in Town government, other
than elected office, shall be required to engage in the actual work of their
employment during regular business hours to the extent that their services
may be necessary for the complete discharge of their duties. The Town
Council, upon recommendation of the Town Manager, shall determine which
employees of the Town shall not be required to devote their full time to their
duties, except as provided by the Charter.
§ C-22. Inventory of Town property and equipment. [Amended
11-7-2000]
At the end of every fiscal year, each department and agency head of the
Town shall prepare an inventory of all equipment and supplies under his
or her jurisdiction to be submitted to the Town Manager for transmission
to the Town Council. The inventories shall be public records with copies
available for public inspection at the Town Hall.
or loan equipment, property or supplies belonging to the Town, or allow
any such equipment, property or supplies to be sold, given or loaned,
to any person or organization without authorization in writing from the
Town Manager.
C. Every Town officer or employee who willfully violates the requirements
of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position, shall
forfeit his or her office or position, and he or she shall, in addition, be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, further, to the extent that the Town suffers
financial loss thereby, be required to make restitution to the Town to the
full extent of the financial loss. [Amended 11-4-2014]
D. Any resident of the Town or other interested citizen may instigate an
inquiry into a possible conflict of interest violation. An investigation
may be instigated by presenting a written statement of an alleged
violation to the Town Manager, Town Solicitor, or any member of the
Town Council.
E. The Town Council shall provide by ordinance appropriate procedures
for the implementation of the provisions of this section which shall
adequately protect the rights of the Town and the rights to a fair
hearing of any person accused hereunder. [Amended 11-4-2014]
§ C-19 CHARTER § C-23
C:9
§ C-23. Access to public records. [Amended 11-7-2000; 11-4-2014]
Unless and as otherwise provided by the Charter or by the laws of the
state, all records and accounts of every office, department or agency of the
Town, including the School Department, shall be open to any person at all
reasonable times and under reasonable regulations established by the Town
Council, except records and documents the disclosure of which would tend
to defeat the lawful purpose which they are intended to accomplish and
except as otherwise provided by this Charter. Any person inspecting public
records shall be permitted to make copies and abstracts thereof.
§ C-23 EAST GREENWICH CODE § C-23
C:10
ARTICLE III
Financial Provisions
§ C-24. Fiscal year.
The fiscal year of the Town government shall begin on the first day of July
and shall end on the last day of June of the next year. The fiscal year shall
also constitute the budget and accounting year.
§ C-25. Annual audit. [Amended 11-7-2000]
§ C-26. (Reserved)1
§ C-27. (Reserved)2
§ C-28. Competitive bidding. [Amended 11-7-2000]
Before the Town or School Department makes any purchase of or contracts
for supplies, material or equipment, ample opportunity shall be given for
competitive bidding under the provisions of state law and with such
exceptions as the Town Council may prescribe by ordinance.
§ C-29. Contracts and expenditures prohibited. [Amended
11-7-2000]
No office, department or agency, during any budget year, shall expend
or contract to expend any money or incur any liability, or enter into any
contract which by its terms involves the expenditure of money, for any
purpose, in excess of the amounts appropriated for that general
A. Within three months after the beginning of each fiscal year, the Town
Council by resolution shall arrange for an independent detailed audit of
the books, accounts and other evidence of financial transactions of the
Town and the School Department as of the close of the preceding fiscal
year. This audit shall be conducted either by state auditors or by a
certified public accountant holding a certificate from the state and
having no personal interest in the financial transactions of the Town or
the School Department, without regard to requirements for competitive
bidding. Such examinations shall conform with generally accepted
auditing standards and shall include all procedures necessary for the
auditors to express an informed opinion of the financial practices and
accounts. A copy of the audit report and management letter shall be
filed with the Town Clerk and shall be a public record.
B. The School Department shall provide funds in its annual budget to
cover the expense of its portion of the annual audit as determined by
the auditor.
1. Editor’s Note: Former § C-26, Borrowing in anticipation of taxes, was repealed 6-12-2017
by Ord. No. 871.
2. Editor’s Note: Former § C-27, Issuance of bonds, was repealed 6-12-2017 by Ord. No. 871.
§ C-24 CHARTER § C-29
C:11
classification of expenditures pursuant to this Charter. Any contract, verbal
or written, made in violation of this Charter shall be null and void. Nothing
in this section contained, however, shall prevent the making of contracts or
the spending of money for capital improvements to be financed in whole or
in part from the issuance of bonds, notes or the capital expenditure funds
nor the making of contracts of lease or for services for a period exceeding
the budget year in which such contract is made.
§ C-30. Transfer of appropriations. [Amended 11-7-2000]
§ C-31. Fees shall be paid to Town.
All fees received because of the provisions of any state law or Town
ordinance by any officer or employee shall belong to the Town and shall
be paid to the Town Treasurer at such intervals as the Town Manager may
require.
§ C-32. Administration and disposition of trust property.
Property held by the Town for charitable uses shall be held, administered
and disposed of in the name and on behalf of the Town by the body
entrusted with its administration or, if none is specified, then by the Council,
in accordance with the terms of the gift and the laws of the state with
respect to property held in charitable trusts.
§ C-33. Public hearing on recommended budget. [Amended
11-3-1992; 11-2-2004; 11-2-2010; 6-12-2017 by Ord. No. 871]
The School Committee shall hold a public hearing on its proposed budget
on or before April 1 of each year, and shall submit its budget to the Town
Manager on or before April 15 of each year. All other Town departments
shall submit their proposed budgets to the Town Manager on or before
March 15 of each year. On or before March 15 of each year, the Town
will notify residents by newspaper of general circulation, and by the Town
website or other electronic means, that a copy of the proposed Town budget
A. The Town Council may at any time authorize the transfer of any
unencumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof from one
classification of expenditure to another within the same department,
office or agency or board or commission, provided that the existence of
the balance proposed to be transferred is certified in writing by the
Town Treasurer.
B. All general fund appropriations except for those of the School
Department and those for capital improvements shall lapse at the end
of the budget year to the extent that they have not been expended or
encumbered and the balance thereof shall revert to the general fund;
provided, however, the Town Council may by resolution carry over any
unexpended balance of any such general fund appropriation, or portion
thereof, for one additional fiscal year for the purpose for which such
general appropriation was originally passed.
§ C-29 EAST GREENWICH CODE § C-33
C:12
will be available for review at the Town Hall and on the Town website by
May 1 of each year. The Town Manager shall transmit the Town budget to
the Town Council on or before May 1 of each year. The Town Council shall
hold a public hearing on the recommended budget on or before May 15 of
each year. The Town Clerk shall prepare sufficient copies of the budget to
be available for public distribution prior to the hearing.
§ C-34. Recommended budget. [Amended 11-3-1992; 11-2-2004;
6-12-2017 by Ord. No. 871]
The Town Council may revise the budget as submitted by the Town Manager
and shall adopt a budget on or before June 10 of each year. Any changes
following the public hearing on the recommended budget will be
highlighted in the adopted budget. A copy of the adopted budget will be
available for review at the Town Hall and on the Town website. If the Town
Council recommends an increase in the total expenditures as proposed by
the Town Manager, it shall also provide for increasing the total anticipated
revenues and shall indicate the revenues necessary to maintain a balance
between revenues and expenditures. No revenue from any source other
than the tax levy shall be included in the budget as recommended by the
Town Council unless the facts clearly warrant the expectation that such
amount actually will be realized in cash during the budget year.
§ C-35. (Reserved)3
§ C-36. Publication of budget. [Amended 6-12-2017 by Ord. No.
871]
A copy of the budget, as finally adopted by the Town Council, shall be
certified by the Town Clerk and filed in the office of the Town Treasurer.
Sufficient copies of the budget shall be made available by the Town Clerk for
the use of all offices, departments and agencies and for the use of interested
persons.
3. Editor’s Note: Former § C-35, Electors not restricted, was repealed 6-12-2017 by Ord. No.
871.
§ C-33 CHARTER § C-36
C:13

Part 2
The Electorate
ARTICLE IV
Elections
§ C-37. General Town elections.
A regular election of Town officers shall be held in even-numbered years at
the time provided by law for state elections.
§ C-38. Election laws and conduct of elections.
The provisions of the Constitution and the General Laws of the state now or
hereafter in effect pertaining to elections, general, special and primary, and
all special acts pertaining to elections in the Town now or hereafter in effect
shall govern all Town elections so far as they may be applicable, excepting
those provisions which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter.
§ C-37 CHARTER § C-38
C:15

ARTICLE V
Board of Canvassers
§ C-39. Bipartisan canvassing authority appointed.
There shall be a bipartisan canvassing authority appointed by the Town
Council as provided by the Constitution and laws of the State. This
canvassing authority shall be known as the "Board of Canvassers" and shall
be vested with all the powers and duties now or hereafter vested by law in
the canvassing authority or Board of Canvassers of the Town. All members
of this authority or board now in office shall continue in their positions as
members until the expiration of the terms for which, respectively, they were
appointed.
§ C-40. District moderators and clerks.
The Board of Canvassers, at least 10 days prior to every election, shall
appoint a moderator and a clerk for each polling place, who shall be party
electors in the district for which they are appointed and shall not be of the
same political party.
§ C-39 CHARTER § C-40
C:17

ARTICLE VI
(Reserved)4
§ C-41. through § C-49. (Reserved)
4. Editor’s Note: Former Art. VI, Financial Town Meeting, as amended, was repealed
6-12-2017 by Ord. No. 871, following electoral approval of elimination of the Financial
Town Meeting at the 11-8-2016 General Election. This action of the electorate was
validated and ratified by the General Assembly by House Bill No. 5414, effective
5-19-2017.
§ C-41 CHARTER § C-41
C:19

ARTICLE VII
(Reserved)5
§ C-50. through § C-59. (Reserved)
5. Editor’s Note: Former Art. VII, Financial Town Meeting Procedures, as amended, was
repealed 6-12-2017 by Ord. No. 871.
§ C-50 CHARTER § C-50
C:21

Part 3
The Legislature
ARTICLE VIII
Town Council
§ C-60. Organization of the Town Council.
§ C-61. Qualifications. [Amended 11-7-1978; 11-4-1986]
§ C-62. Appointment of Council members to other offices. [Amended
11-4-2014]
No Council member shall be appointed to any paid town office, position or
employment during the current term of his or her office and for a period of
A. The Town Council shall consist of five Council members elected from
the Town at large.
B. The Town Clerk shall be the presiding officer of the Council until a
President of the Council is elected.
C. The Town Council shall elect from within its own membership a
President and Vice President at its first meeting after all five Council
members have been certified by the Board of Canvassers.
D. The Council President shall preside at meetings of the Council and shall
be recognized as head of Town government for all ceremonial purposes
and by the Governor of the state for purpose of military law, but he or
she has no regular administrative duties.
E. The Council Vice President shall assume the duties of the Council
President in the absence or disability of the Council President.
F. Each Council member has one vote. The presiding officer, with the
exception of the Town Clerk, shall not be deprived of his or her right to
vote on any question.
A. Members of the Town Council shall be qualified electors of the Town
and shall not hold other public office or appointive positions in the
service of the Town of East Greenwich, unless authorized by law or this
Charter.
B. If a member of the Town Council shall cease to posses any of these
qualifications or shall be convicted of a felony or a crime involving
malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office, his or her office
shall immediately become vacant.
C. The Town Council shall be the judge of the qualifications of its own
members and for such purpose has the power to subpoena witnesses
and compel the production of records.
§ C-60 CHARTER § C-62
C:23
one year after the expiration of the term for which he or she was elected or
appointed to the Town Council.
§ C-63. Meetings. [Amended 11-7-2000]
§ C-64. Quorum and voting.
A Town Council quorum shall be a majority of its members. A majority of the
members present at any legal meeting may determine any matter legally
before them, provided that final passage of ordinances or amendments to
ordinances shall require the affirmative vote of the majority of its members.
No official vote on any matter shall be taken at any meeting which is not
open to the public.
§ C-65. Compensation. [Amended 6-12-2017 by Ord. No. 871]
Each member of the Town Council shall receive such individual
compensation for the performance of his or her duties or for the expenses
of his or her office as may be fixed from time to time by the Town Council
and in accordance with the Charter.
§ C-66. Vacancies.
A. The first meeting of each elected Town Council shall be held on the
second Monday following the certification of all five duly elected
members. Thereafter, the Town Council will meet not less than twice
each month.
B. A special meeting of the Town Council shall be called by the Town Clerk
at the request of the Council President or a majority of the members of
the Town Council. Written notice of a special meeting shall be delivered
to each member at least 48 hours prior to the time of such meeting. The
Town Council may meet upon shorter notice by unanimous consent of
its members, which shall be entered in the records of proceedings. The
purpose of a special meeting shall be stated in the notice of the
meeting, and no business shall be transacted at any special meeting
other than that which has been stated.
A. Any vacancy in the membership of the Town Council which occurs one
year or less prior to the time for holding of a regular Town election shall
be filled by the Town Council for the unexpired term within 15 days
from the date on which the vacancy occurred. If for any reason a
majority vote of the remaining members cannot be obtained or if an
appointment is not made within 15 days, the Council President shall
make the appointment to fill the unexpired term.
B. If a vacancy in the Town Council shall occur more than one year prior to
the time for holding a regular Town election, the Town Council shall
within 30 days after the vacancy occurs call a special election for the
purpose of filling such vacancy.
§ C-62 EAST GREENWICH CODE § C-67
C:24
§ C-67. Powers and duties. [Amended 11-4-1986; 11-7-2000;
6-12-2017 by Ord. No. 871]
All legislative powers of the Town shall be vested in the Town Council
except those delegated within this Charter. The Town Council may enact,
repeal or amend ordinances relating to the Town's property, affairs and
government subject to the provisions of the State Constitution and laws
enacted by the General Assembly in conformity with the powers reserved to
the General Assembly. The Town Council may exercise all additional powers
and authority that are consistent with this Charter and have been granted
to it by this Charter, the Constitution or laws of the state. Without limiting
the generality of the foregoing, the Town Council has and exercises the
following specific powers:
A. To enact, amend or repeal ordinances for the preservation of the public
peace, the health, safety, comfort and welfare of the inhabitants of the
Town and for the protection of persons and property.
B. To provide reasonable penalties for the violation of any ordinance in
accordance with state law.
C. To amend, after notice as prescribed by statute and public hearing, the
Zoning Ordinance.6
D. To adopt rules governing the conduct of its meetings and to appoint
regular, standing or special committees.
E. To appoint the Town Manager for an indefinite term.
F. In the event that the Town Manager is at any time absent or unable to
perform the duties of his or her office for a period in excess of 35
consecutive days or in the event that the Town Manager resigns or is
removed from office or if for any other reason a vacancy exists, to
designate an officer of the Town, other than a Town Council member, to
serve as Town Manager with all the powers and duties of the Town
Manager until his or her absence or disability terminates or until a
successor to the Town Manager has assumed the duties of the office.
G. To fill such offices and choose such officials, members of boards and the
like as may be required under the terms of this Charter, ordinances of
the Town or the laws of the state.
H. To provide by ordinance for a personnel classification system consistent
with applicable general or special laws or the provisions of this Charter.
I. To determine the salary of the Town Manager and the compensation of
all officers and employees of the Town except the employees of the
School Department.
6. Editor's Note: See Ch. 260, Zoning.
§ C-67 CHARTER § C-67
C:25
J. To provide rules and regulations with respect to vacations of the Town
Manager, department heads and employees except those of the School
Department.
K. To fix the amount of the official bonds of all officers of the Town as
required by law and this Charter, the premiums of such bonds to be paid
by the Town.
L. To elect Constables to serve civil process and to charge and collect for
licenses issued to such constables such fees as determined by
ordinance.
M. To take any action necessary authorizing the issuance of bonds for any
purpose, including borrowing in anticipation of taxes, and to complete
all the details of the bond transaction in accordance with the laws of the
state.
N. To have the power to inquire into the conduct of any officer, department
or agency of the Town and to make an investigation relating to Town
affairs. For such purposes the Town Council may subpoena witnesses,
administer oaths or affirmations, and compel books, records, papers
and other evidence be produced relative to such investigation.
O. To administer the Town through the Town Manager.
P. To accept gifts of any property, real or personal, on behalf of the Town if
the Town Council deems it for the best interests of the Town, and all
monies given for a particular purpose and accepted on behalf of the
Town by the Town Council may, by resolution, be deposited to the
general fund or a special fund and be appropriated for such purposes by
the Town Council without the necessity of being included in the annual
budget.
Q. To grant, revoke or suspend such licenses or permits as the Town
Council may require by ordinance or resolution or as may be required
or permitted by the laws of the state and this Charter or any
amendment thereof.
R. To act as the Board of License Commissioners. [Amended 11-4-2014]
§ C-67 EAST GREENWICH CODE § C-67
C:26
ARTICLE IX
Ordinances
§ C-68. Proposal of ordinances. [Amended 11-7-1978; 11-7-2000;
11-4-2014]
Every proposed ordinance and amendment to ordinances shall be filed
with the Town Clerk not later than four business days prior to the date
of the meeting at which it is to be introduced. The Clerk shall review the
submission with the Town Manager and prepare the proposed ordinance or
amendment in accordance with the subsequent sections of this article.
§ C-69. Public hearings. [Amended 11-7-1978]
Every ordinance, other than an emergency ordinance, shall be read a first
time by title and explained by its sponsor at the meeting at which it is
introduced and then referred to a subsequent regular or special meeting for
hearing. A public hearing shall be held by the Town Council at the regular
or special meeting to which the matter was referred, or any adjournment
thereof, and no action shall be taken on the ordinance until the next regular
or special Town Council meeting held after the conclusion of the hearing.
§ C-70. Advertising hearings. [Amended 11-7-1978]
Every hearing on an ordinance or amendment to an ordinance, other than
an emergency ordinance, shall be advertised by publication by the Town
Clerk of a notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the Town
once at least five days before the date of hearing. The notice shall set forth
the date, time and place of hearing and either the text of the proposed
ordinance or the amendment of the ordinance or a digest thereof certified
by the Town Solicitor to the Town Clerk as containing an adequate
disclosure of the substance of the ordinance or amendment.
§ C-71. Emergency ordinances. [Amended 11-7-1978; 11-7-2000]
In an emergency affecting the public peace, health, safety, comfort and
welfare of the inhabitants of the Town and for the protection of persons
and property, the Town Council, without hearing, by an affirmative vote
of three members, may adopt on the day of its introduction an ordinance
containing a declaration of emergency, which shall take effect upon its
passage. No zoning ordinance or ordinance granting a franchise or creating
a personnel classification system or amendment of any of the same shall be
passed as an emergency ordinance. The nature of the emergency shall be
specifically stated in the ordinance, and such declaration shall be conclusive
as to the existence of such an emergency. Every emergency ordinance shall
automatically stand repealed as of the 90th day following the date on which
it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in
the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists.
§ C-68 CHARTER § C-72
C:27
§ C-72. Ordinance enacting clause.
The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be: "The Town Council of the
Town of East Greenwich hereby ordains."
§ C-72 EAST GREENWICH CODE § C-72
C:28
ARTICLE X
Codification of Ordinances
§ C-73. Revision and recodification of ordinances.
The Town Council within seven years following the effective date of this
Charter and every 10th year thereafter shall arrange for a revision or
codification of the ordinances of the Town which it deems appropriate to
continue in effect. The Town Solicitor shall supervise the publication of
the aforementioned revision or codification of ordinances and may, with
the Town Council's authorization, contract for the services of persons or
organizations experienced in the revisions and codification of ordinances
and statutes. Copies of said revision or codification of ordinances shall be
made available to the public at a cost to be set by the Town Council.
§ C-73 CHARTER § C-73
C:29

ARTICLE XI
Initiative and Referendum
§ C-74. General authority. [Amended 11-7-1978]
§ C-75. Commencement of proceedings. [Amended 11-7-1978]
Any five qualified electors of the Town may commence initiative or
referendum proceedings by filing with the Town Clerk an affidavit stating
they will constitute the petitioners' committee and be responsible for
circulating the petition and filing it in proper form, stating their names and
addresses and specifying the address to which all notices to the committee
are to be sent, and setting out in full the proposed initiative ordinance or
citing the ordinance sought to be reconsidered. Promptly after the affidavit
of the petitioners' committee is filed, the Town Clerk shall issue the
appropriate petition blanks to the petitioners' committee.
§ C-76. Petitions. [Amended 11-7-1978; 11-7-2000]
A. Initiative. The qualified electors of the Town have the power to propose
ordinances to the Town Council and, if the Town Council fails to adopt
an ordinance so proposed without any change in substance, to adopt or
reject it at a Town election. These initiatives may not pertain to the
budget or capital program or any ordinance relating to the
appropriation of money, levy of taxes or salaries of Town officers or
employees.
B. Referendum. The qualified electors of the Town have the power to
require reconsideration by the Town Council of any adopted ordinance
and, if the Town Council fails to repeal an ordinance so reconsidered, to
approve or reject it at a Town election. Such power shall not extend to
the budget or capital program or any emergency ordinance or
ordinance relating to appropriation of money or levy of taxes.
A. Number of signatures. Initiative petitions for purposes of proposing
ordinances to the Town Council must be signed by electors equal in
number to 5% of the total number of electors. If a proposed ordinance
so initiated is not adopted by the Town Council without change of
substance, it shall then be submitted to the registered electors of the
Town at a Town election as hereinafter provided, but only if petitions
proposing the ordinance have been signed (either before or after
presentation to the Town Council) by electors equal in number to 10%
of the total number of electors. Referendum petitions must be signed by
electors equal in number to 5% of the total number of electors. If an
ordinance so required to be reconsidered by the Town Council is not
repealed by the Town Council, the proposal to repeal the same shall
then be submitted to the registered electors of the Town at a Town
election as provided, but only if petitions proposing the reconsideration
have been signed (either before or after reconsideration by the Town
§ C-74 CHARTER § C-76
C:31
§ C-77. Submission to electors. [Amended 11-7-1978; 11-7-2000]
The vote of the Town on a proposed or referred ordinance shall be held
not less than 30 days and not later than one year from the date of a final
Town Council vote thereon. If no regular Town election is to be held within
the period prescribed in this section, the Town Council shall provide for a
special election; otherwise, the vote shall be held at the same time as such
regular election, except that the Town Council may at its discretion provide
for a special election at an earlier date within the prescribed period. Copies
of the proposed or referred ordinance shall be made available at the polls
and the Town Hall.
§ C-78. Withdrawal of petitions. [Amended 11-78-1978]
Council) by electors equal in number to 10% of the total number of
electors.
B. Rules. To be counted as a signer of a petition, the signer must be a
qualified registered voter of the Town at the time the petition is
presented to the Town Clerk. The term "the total number of electors" as
used herein means the total number of qualified registered electors of
the Town at the most recent regular Town election. The Board of
Canvassers has the authority to issue further rules not inconsistent with
these provisions regulating the form of petitions, the form of evidence
to be required with respect to the circulation and signature of petitions
and other procedural matters which reasonably should be regulated
with respect to initiative and referendum petitions. The Town Clerk
shall make all determinations as to the sufficiency of petitioners, the
validity of signatures and the like, subject to the right of the petitioners'
committee to appeal the same to the Board of Canvassers, whose
determination shall be final and binding on all parties.
C. Procedure as to valid petitions. When an initiative or referendum
petition has been finally determined sufficient, the Town Council shall
promptly consider the proposed initiative ordinance or reconsider the
referred ordinance, in both cases in the same manner as provided for
adoption of an ordinance proposed by a member of the Town Council,
including public hearing. If the Town Council fails to adopt a proposed
initiative ordinance without any change in substance within 60 days or
fails to repeal the referred ordinance within 60 days after the date of
public hearing, and if by the expiration of that period valid petitions
signed by the requisite number of electors are on file with the Town
Clerk, it shall submit the proposal or referred ordinance to the electors
of the Town.
A. An initiative or referendum petition may be withdrawn at any time prior
to the 15th day preceding the day scheduled for a vote of the Town by
filing with the Town Clerk a request for withdrawal signed by at least
four members of the petitioners' committee. Upon the filing of such
§ C-76 EAST GREENWICH CODE § C-78
C:32
§ C-79. Results of election. [Amended 11-7-1978; 11-4-1986]
request the petition has no further force or effect, and all proceedings
thereon shall be terminated.
B. If an initiative or referendum petition bearing the signatures of at least
5% of the total number of electors has not been submitted to the Town
Clerk within 120 days after the receipt of petition blanks by the
petitioners' committee, then the initiative or referendum petition shall
be considered as withdrawn and has no further force or effect and all
proceedings thereon shall be terminated.
A. Initiative. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a proposed
initiative ordinance votes in its favor, it shall be considered adopted
upon certification of the election results and shall be treated in all
respects in the same manner as ordinances of the same kind adopted by
the Town Council; provided, however, any initiative ordinance enacted
under this Charter may not be repealed by the Town Council less than
one year following its adoption. If conflicting ordinances are approved
at the same election, the one receiving the greatest number of
affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict.
B. Referendum. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a referred
ordinance votes against it, it shall be considered repealed upon
certification of the election results. No referred ordinance repealed
under this Charter shall be reenacted by the Town Council less than one
year following its repeal.
§ C-78 CHARTER § C-79
C:33

ARTICLE XII
Town Solicitor
§ C-80. Appointment. [Amended 11-7-2000; 11-4-2014]
There shall be a Town Solicitor appointed by the Town Council to serve at
its pleasure. The Solicitor need not be required to devote full time to the
duties of the office.
§ C-81. Functions. [Amended 11-7-2000]
A. The Town Solicitor shall be the attorney for the Town and chief legal
advisor to the Town Council, Town Manager and all Town departments,
offices, boards, commissions, and agencies. The Solicitor's duties and
functions shall include representing the Town in all legal proceedings
and performing such related functions as may be required now and
hereafter by ordinance, state law, or which may be assigned by the
Town Council.
B. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the appointment of a law firm to
perform the duties of the Town Solicitor; nor shall anything in this
section prohibit the Town Council from providing for the appointment of
Assistant Town Solicitors if, in its judgment, the workload of the Town
Solicitor's office shall justify such appointment; nor shall anything in
this section prohibit the Council from making provision for the hiring of
special counsel to assist or act in place of the Town Solicitor in
extraordinary and limited circumstances when, in the judgment of the
Council, such provision will best serve the interests of the Town.
Nothing in this section shall prohibit the School Department from
retaining counsel to be compensated from funds provided in its budget.
§ C-80 CHARTER § C-81
C:35

Part 4
Administration
ARTICLE XIII
Town Manager
§ C-82. Appointment.
The Town Manager shall be appointed by a majority vote of all Town Council
members.
§ C-83. Qualifications.
The Town Manager shall be chosen by the Town Council solely on the
basis of his or her executive and administrative qualifications with special
reference to his or her actual experience in or knowledge of accepted
practice in respect to the duties of his or her office as hereinafter set forth.
At the time of his or her appointment the Town Manager need not be a
resident of the Town or state, but within 120 days shall establish a residence
within the Town and shall continue residing in the Town during his or her
tenure in office.
§ C-84. Removal.
The Town Council may remove the Town Manager at its discretion by a vote
of a majority of all members of the Town Council, with or without a hearing,
as the Town Council in its discretion determines. There shall be no right of
appeal from the decision of the Town Council.
§ C-85. Powers and duties. [Amended 11-7-2000]
The Town Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Town.
With the consent of the Town Council he or she may head one or more
departments. He or she shall be responsible to the Town Council for the
proper administration of all affairs of the Town and to that end has power
and shall be required to:
A. Appoint and, when necessary for the good of the service, suspend or
remove any officer, including department heads and employees of the
Town, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or law or personnel
ordinance. All appointments, suspensions and removals of departments
and officers made by the Town Manager shall be subject to the approval
of a majority of all members of the Town Council;
B. Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the Town Council together
with a message describing its important features, and be responsible
for its administration after adoption;
C. Prepare and submit to the Town Council as of the end of the fiscal year a
complete report on the finances and the administrative affairs of the
Town for the preceding year;
§ C-82 CHARTER § C-85
C:37
§ C-86. Assignment of duties.
The Town Manager, with the approval of the Town Council, may assign the
duties of two or more administrative officers to one person or divide the
duties of any office among two or more persons.
§ C-87. Acting Town Manager.
By letter filed with the Town Clerk, the Town Manager shall designate,
subject to approval of the Town Council, a qualified officer of the Town to
D. Keep the Town Council advised of the financial condition and future
needs of the Town and make such recommendations as he or she may
deem desirable;
E. Recommend to the Town Council a standard pay schedule for each
appointive office and position in the Town service, including minimum,
intermediate and maximum rates;
F. Recommend to the Town Council adoption of such measures as he or
she may deem necessary or expedient for the health, safety or welfare
of the Town or for the improvement of administrative services;
G. Negotiate contracts on behalf of the Town subject to the approval of the
Town Council;
H. See that the terms and conditions imposed in favor of the Town in any
contract or franchise are faithfully kept and performed;
I. See that all laws and ordinances are duly enforced and that all licenses,
permits and privileges granted by the Town are faithfully preserved;
J. Be responsible for the care and preservation of property and equipment
of the Town;
K. Attend all meetings of the Town Council unless excused;
L. Investigate the affairs of the Town or any department or division thereof
and all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration
of the government of the Town and services maintained by the public
utilities in the Town;
M. Be responsible for the conduct and performance of all administrative
functions and services which are not imposed by this Charter, by Town
ordinance or by law upon some other officer;
N. Coordinate the activities of all boards, commissions and committees as
may be required by the Town Council; and
O. Perform such other duties as may be required by the Town Council or as
are specified in this Charter.
P. Reorganize departments subject to the approval of the Town Council,
notwithstanding any section to the contrary. [Amended 11-4-2014]
§ C-85 EAST GREENWICH CODE § C-87
C:38
exercise the powers and perform the duties of Town Manager during his or
her temporary absence or disability for a period of 35 consecutive days or
less. During such absence or disability the Town Council may revoke the
designation at any time and appoint another officer of the Town to serve
until the Town Manager returns or his or her disability ceases.
§ C-87 CHARTER § C-87
C:39

ARTICLE XIV
Town Clerk
§ C-88. Town Clerk. [Amended 11-4-1986]
There shall be a Department of Town Clerk, which will be headed by the
Town Clerk, who shall be appointed by the Town Manager with the approval
of the Town Council.
§ C-89. Powers and duties of the Town Clerk. [Amended 6-12-2017
by Ord. No. 871]
The Town Clerk shall be the Clerk of the Town Council, Clerk of the Probate
Court, Clerk of the Board of Canvassers, and the Recorder of Deeds. It shall
be the duty of the Town Clerk to:
§ C-90. Deputy Town Clerk. [Amended 11-7-2000]
When the Town Clerk is not available, the Deputy Town Clerk shall perform
all the duties of the office of the Town Clerk and such other duties as may
be required.
A. Make a permanent record of all proceedings and certify by signature all
actions of the aforesaid bodies;
B. Be custodian of the Town Seal and of the official documents and records
of the Town;
C. Direct and supervise the recordings of deeds, mortgages, vital
statistics, licenses and permits and such other records as shall by
ordinance and law be required to be kept by the Town Clerk;
D. Issue birth certificates, marriage licenses, burial permits, and such
other licenses and permits as are required by ordinance and law to be
issued by the Town Clerk;
E. Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or by
law pertaining to town clerks and such other duties appropriate to
office as the Town Manager and Town Council may require.
§ C-88 CHARTER § C-90
C:41

ARTICLE XV
Finance
§ C-91. Department of Finance. [Amended 11-7-1978]
There shall be a Department of Finance, the head of which shall be the
Director of Finance, and within which Department there shall be a Town
Treasurer, Tax Collector and Tax Assessor. The Director of Finance shall be
appointed by the Town Manager with the approval of the Town Council. The
Director of Finance may serve in the capacity of and as any one or more of
the following positions: Town Treasurer, Tax Collector or Tax Assessor.
§ C-92. Duties of Town Treasurer. [Amended 11-7-1978]
The Town Treasurer has all the powers, rights and duties prescribed under
the laws of the State of Rhode Island.
§ C-93. Tax Collector. [Amended 11-7-1978]
There shall be in the Department of Finance a Town Tax Collector.
§ C-94. Duties of Tax Collector.
The Tax Collector shall collect all taxes and special assessments for the
collection of which the Town is responsible. The Tax Collector has all the
powers, rights and duties prescribed under the General Laws of the State
of Rhode Island.
§ C-95. Delinquent installments.
§ C-96. Tax Assessor. [Amended 11-7-1978]
There shall be in the Department of Finance a Town Tax Assessor, who shall
be appointed by the Town Manager with the approval of the Town Council.
The Tax Assessor shall be responsible for the fixing of an assessed valuation
for purposes of taxation on all taxable real estate and personal property and
for the preparation of an assessment and tax roll for the Town in the manner
provided by law and ordinance.
A. No amounts received for taxes shall be applied to any current
installment until all previous installments of taxes have been paid.
B. Pursuant to and in accordance with the General Laws, the Town
Treasurer annually shall conduct a sale of all properties upon which
taxes remain unpaid for a period of one year from the date the taxes
first become due. Exceptions may be granted by the Town Council upon
recommendation of the Tax Collector.
§ C-91 CHARTER § C-97
C:43
§ C-97. Board of Assessment Review. [Amended 11-4-1986]
There shall be a Board of Assessment Review which shall consist of three
members, no more than two of whom shall be from the same political party
at any one time and two alternates who shall not be members of the same
political party. Each member shall serve a three-year term, and the terms
shall be on a staggered basis. The alternates shall serve one-year terms. The
appointments shall be made by the Town Council for a term of three years.
Any vacancy shall be filled by the Town Council for the unexpired term.
§ C-98. Duties of Board of Assessment Review.
The Board of Assessment Review shall hear and consider the appeal of any
property owner concerning the amount of his or her assessed valuation as
determined by the Tax Assessor. The Board of Assessment Review shall keep
an accurate record of its proceedings, which shall be available for public
inspection.
§ C-99. Correction.
If it appears that the valuation of any property has been erroneously or
incorrectly assessed, the Board of Assessment Review has authority to order
a correction. Such determination shall be certified by the Board to the Tax
Assessor whose duty it shall be to make the correction in valuation as the
Board has determined. If the tax roll has been certified by the Tax Assessor,
he shall transmit the findings of the Board to the Town Council which may
cancel in whole or in part the tax based on such valuation in order to effect
a correction.
§ C-100. Procedure.
The Board of Assessment Review has the authority to adopt rules and
regulations as to the procedure in presenting, considering and disposing of
complaints or appeals and may hold hearings, administer oaths and receive
testimony and exhibits.
§ C-101. Rights of appeal.
The taking of an appeal to the Board of Assessment Review or any action
thereon shall not be construed to limit or restrict the right of any taxpayer
to apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for relief from any assessed
valuation or tax originally determined by the Tax Assessor.
§ C-102. Tax revaluation survey. [Amended 11-7-2000]
The Town shall provide for an evaluation of all property subject to taxation
in accordance with the General and Public Laws of this state.
§ C-97 EAST GREENWICH CODE § C-102
C:44
ARTICLE XVI
Public Works Department
§ C-103. Director of Public Works.
There shall be a Department of Public Works, the head of which shall be the
Director of Public Works, who shall be appointed by the Town Manager with
the approval of the Town Council. He or she shall be responsible for the
efficient operation of all of the activities of the Department of Public Works.
The Director may further organize the Department into separate divisions
or offices.
§ C-104. Functions.
The functions of the Public Works Department shall be to:
A. Supervise, operate and maintain all public works of the Town, except as
otherwise provided herein, including but not limited to roads and
highway structures, storm and sanitary systems, water supply systems,
historical cemeteries, public signs, traffic control devices, resource
recovery area, garbage and trash collection and disposal, and public
buildings;
B. Issue building permits, enforce building construction, land and building
use and sanitation regulations in accordance with applicable laws and
ordinances;
C. Provide for engineering services;
D. Supervise the performance of the duties of the Building Inspector,
Minimum Housing Inspector, Tree Warden, Fence Viewer, Sealer of
Weights and Measures, Inspector of Wells and Inspector of Sidewalks;
E. Perform such other duties as required by this Charter or by law or
ordinance.
§ C-103 CHARTER § C-104
C:45

ARTICLE XVII
Public Safety
§ C-105. Permanent Police Department.
§ C-106. Chief of Police.
A. Organization. There shall be a permanent Police Department and such
other subordinate police officers as shall from time to time be
determined by the Town Manager with the approval of the Town
Council and upon the recommendation of the Chief of Police. The Chief
of Police has the authority to establish and maintain divisions within the
Police Department, including but not limited to a Detective Division,
Criminal Division and Juvenile Division. The further organization of the
Department into divisions or officers or grades shall be made by the
Chief of Police with the approval of the Town Manager and the Town
Council.
B. Function of the Police Department. The Police Department shall be
responsible for the preservation of the public peace, prevention of
crime, apprehension of criminals, protection of the rights of persons
and property, regulation of traffic, and the enforcement of the laws of
the state and ordinances of the Town and regulations in accordance
therewith. The Chief of Police and other members of the Department
have all the powers and duties vested in such police officers by the laws
of the state and Town ordinances.
A. Appointment. The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Town
Manager with the approval of the Town Council.
B. Succession. In case of the extended absence or disability of the Chief of
Police, the Town Manager shall appoint an Acting Chief of Police with
the approval of the Town Council.
C. Dismissal. The Town Manager at his or her discretion may remove the
Chief of Police with the approval of a majority of all members of the
Town Council. Such removal shall be without a hearing but based on
written reasons filed by the Town Manager with the Town Council.
There shall be no right to appeal from the decision of the Town Manager
to any other authority within the Town. Nothing herein shall affect any
appeal rights the Chief of Police may have under the General Laws of
Rhode Island. [Amended 11-7-1978; 11-4-1986]
D. Interference with the Chief of Police. Neither the Town Manager nor
any member of the Town Council shall interfere directly or indirectly
with the performance of duties by the Chief of Police to the extent that
any such person shall meddle with, intervene in, or attempt to intervene
in the decisions or policies established by the Chief of Police for the dayto-
day operations of the Department and for the conduct of its
members. Nothing in this Charter, however, prevents the Town
Manager from exercising general supervision over the Department and
§ C-105 CHARTER § C-106
C:47
§ C-107. Police officers.
its affairs or prevents the Town Council from requesting information
about the policies and procedures of the Department or from making
any investigation of the Department authorized by provisions of this
Charter. [Amended 11-4-1986]
A. Appointment and tenure. [Amended 11-7-1978; 11-4-1986]
(1) All police officers on the permanent police force below the rank of
Chief of Police shall be appointed or promoted, as the case may be,
by the Town Manager with the approval of the Town Council and
upon the recommendation of the Chief of Police, provided that they
have satisfactorily passed such qualifying tests as the Town Council
has established by ordinance.
(2) They shall hold their respective offices, in accordance with the
Rules and Regulations of the Personnel Board approved by the
Town Council by ordinance. At the time of their permanent
appointment, all members of the force shall have served for a
period of not less than 12 months in probationary status, during
which time they may be removed by the Town Manager with the
approval of the Town Council and upon the recommendation of the
Chief of Police with or without cause.
B. Dismissal. Any member of the permanent force below the rank of Chief
of Police may be dismissed by the Town Manager with the approval of
the Town Council in accordance with the General Laws of Rhode Island.
If the General Laws of Rhode Island do not provide a dismissal
procedure, then dismissal shall be in accordance with the Rules and
Regulations of the Personnel Board approved by the Town Council by
ordinance. [Amended 11-7-1978; 11-4-1986]
C. Rules and regulations. The rules and regulations for the conduct of all
members of the Department below the rank of Chief of Police shall be
those rules and regulations applicable to all Town employees, provided
that the Personnel Board and the Chief of Police may recommend rules
and regulations specifically applicable to the members of the Police
Department, which shall be effective if approved by the Town Council
by ordinance. Changes in such rules and regulations may be made from
time to time in the same manner. [Amended 11-7-1978]
D. Qualifications for appointment and promotion. The Town Council shall
provide by ordinance standards for qualification for appointment as a
member of the permanent police force and for promotion to the various
ranks and, for this purpose, shall require appropriate tests.
E. Decrease in number of permanent police force. The Town Council,
notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions, has the right to
decrease the number of police officers on the permanent police force
for the purpose of remaining within appropriations currently available
§ C-106 EAST GREENWICH CODE § C-107
C:48
§ C-108. Constables and reserve officers.
§ C-109. Permanent Fire Department. [Amended 11-4-2014]
§ C-109.1. Fire Chief. [Added 11-4-2014]
for the payment of compensation within the Police Department. For
this purpose the Town Council shall, without making any charges and
without cause, have the right to remove a police officer or officers
who are members of the permanent police force. In any such case or
cases, the Town Council shall order the removal of the officer or officers
having the lowest rank and seniority in service. Any officers so removed
have precedence in the order of their seniority over all other candidates
for future appointments to the permanent police force.
A. Appointment and tenure. In addition to the members of the permanent
police force of the Town, the Town Manager, upon the recommendation
of the Chief of Police and with the approval of the Town Council, may
from time to time appoint additional Constables or reserve officers for
occasional service and for limited terms.
B. Dismissal. Any Constable or reserve officer may be dismissed in
accordance with the General Laws of Rhode Island or, there being none
applicable, dismissal may be by the Town Manager upon the
recommendation of the Chief of Police and with the approval of the
Town Council with or without cause. [Amended 11-4-1986]
A. Organization. There shall be a permanent Fire Department and such
other fire personnel as shall from time to time be determined to be
necessary by the Town Manager with the approval of the Town Council
and upon the recommendation of the Fire Chief. The Fire Chief has the
authority to establish and maintain divisions within the Fire
Department. The further organization of the Department shall be made
by the Fire Chief with the approval of the Town Manager and the Town
Council.
B. Fire Department mission. The mission of the East Greenwich Fire and
Rescue Services Department is the protection of life and property by
preventing and suppressing fires, educating and rescuing citizens, and
providing emergency medical services.
A. Appointment. The Fire Chief and Deputy Fire Chief shall be appointed
by the Town Manager with the approval of the Town Council.
B. Succession. In case of the extended absence or disability of the Fire
Chief, the Town Manager shall appoint an Acting Fire Chief with the
approval of the Town Council.
C. Dismissal. The Town Manager at his or her discretion may remove the
Fire Chief and Deputy Fire Chief with the approval of a majority of all
members of the Town Council. Such removal shall be without a hearing,
§ C-107 CHARTER § C-109.1
C:49
§ C-109.2. Firefighters. [Added 11-4-2014]
but based on written reasons filed by the Town Manager with the Town
Council. There shall be no right to appeal from the decision of the Town
Manager to any other authority within the Town. Nothing herein shall
affect any appeal rights the Fire Chief and Deputy Fire Chief may have
under the General Laws of Rhode Island.
A. Appointment and tenure.
(1) All firefighters on the permanent Fire Department, below the rank
of Fire Chief and Deputy Fire Chief, shall be appointed or
promoted, as the case may be, by the Town Manager with the
approval of the Town Council and upon the recommendation of the
Fire Chief, provided that they have satisfactorily passed
promotional exams.
(2) They shall hold their respective offices, in accordance with the
Rules and Regulations of the Fire Department, as approved by the
Town Council. At the time of their permanent appointment, all
members of the Department shall have served for a period of not
less than 12 months in probationary status, during which time they
may be removed by the Town Manager, with or without cause, upon
the recommendation of the Fire Chief.
B. Dismissal. Any member of the permanent Department, below the rank
of Fire Chief and Deputy Fire Chief, may be dismissed by the Town
Manager with the approval of the Town Council in accordance with the
General Laws of Rhode Island. If the General Laws of Rhode Island do
not provide a dismissal procedure, then dismissal shall be in
accordance with the Rules and Regulations of the Fire Department.
C. Rules and Regulations. The rules and regulations for the conduct of all
members of the Department below the rank of Fire Chief and Deputy
Fire Chief shall be set forth in the Rules and Regulations of the Fire
Department.
D. Decrease in number of permanent firefighters. The Town Council,
notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions, has the right to
decrease the number of firefighters on the permanent Fire Department
for the purpose of remaining within appropriations currently available
for the payment of compensation with the Fire Department. For this
purpose the Town Council shall, without making any charges and
without cause, have the right to remove a firefighter or officer who are
members of the permanent Fire Department. In any such case or cases,
the Town Council shall order the removal of the firefighter or officer
having the lowest rank and seniority in service. Any officers so removed
have precedence in the order of their seniority over all other candidates
for future appointments to the permanent Fire Department.
§ C-109.1 EAST GREENWICH CODE § C-109.2
C:50
ARTICLE XVIII
Additional Departments or Officials
§ C-110. Creation of new or abolishing or changing offices and
agencies. [Amended 11-4-1986]
The Town Council may create, abolish or change by ordinance such other
departments, offices and agencies of the Town as required and shall define
their powers and duties. The head of each new department, office or agency
so established shall be appointed by the Town Manager with the approval of
the Town Council.
§ C-110 CHARTER § C-110
C:51

Part 5
Boards And Commissions
ARTICLE XIX
Town Planning Board
§ C-111. Membership and organization. [Amended 11-7-2000]
There shall be a Town Planning Board which shall consist of seven regular
members appointed by the Town Council, each for a term of three years
and one alternate member appointed for a term of two years. The alternate
member shall be eligible to vote in the absence of any regular member.
Any vacancy during the unexpired term of an appointed member shall
be filled by the Town Council for the remainder of the term. The Town
Council may remove a Planning Board member after a public hearing if that
member misses three consecutive meetings or 25% of the meetings during
the course of one calendar year.
§ C-112. General powers and duties.
The Town Planning Board shall have such powers and perform such
functions as are granted or assigned to it by the laws of the state and
ordinances of the Town.
§ C-113. Specific powers.
The powers of the Town Planning Board shall include but not be limited to
the following:
§ C-114. Specific duties. [Amended 11-7-2000]
The duties of the Town Planning Board shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:
A. It shall have made available to it the advice and services of the Public
Works Department staff to assist the Town Planning Board in the
performance of its functions;
B. It may request additional assistance for special survey work of the Town
Manager or the Superintendent of Schools, who may at their discretion
provide services or make departmental staff available to the Town
Planning Board for such purposes;
C. Within its budget appropriation, it may contract with qualified
consultants for such services as it may require;
D. It has the right to require all Town officials and officers, departments,
boards and commissions to submit such data as is available and which
would assist the Town Planning Board in the performance of its duties.
A. The Town Planning Board shall serve as the governing body for the
Town on all matters pertaining to planning and development of the
§ C-111 CHARTER § C-114
C:53
Town. It shall keep itself informed of the plans of the state, adjoining
municipalities and the School Committee that will affect the
development of the Town.
B. The Town Planning Board shall be responsible for the development and
improvement of the Town using a Comprehensive Plan. It shall
continuously collect and maintain data concerning present and
projected land use. It shall continuously review the existing
Comprehensive Plan. A public hearing shall be held prior to the
adoption of any amendment to the Comprehensive Plan by the Town
Planning Board and the Town Council.
C. The Town Planning Board shall file an opinion with the Town Council on
all proposed amendments to the Zoning Ordinance,7 giving due
consideration to the relationship of such amendments to the
Comprehensive Plan, and shall recommend to the Town Council
amendments to the Zoning Ordinance wherever there is a proposed
major change in or extension of land use, transportation routes, public
facilities, or public utility systems. At least once every two years the
Town Planning Board shall review the Zoning Ordinance and the
Comprehensive Plan and make recommendations to the Town Council
concerning revisions.
D. The Town Planning Board shall receive and act upon all applications for
platting and subdivision of land within the Town.
E. The Town Planning Board shall report annually to the Town Council at
the end of the fiscal year, summarizing the work of the preceding year
and recommending plans for future development of the Town.
7. Editor's Note: See Ch. 260, Zoning.
§ C-114 EAST GREENWICH CODE § C-114
C:54
ARTICLE XX
Zoning Board of Review
§ C-115. Organization.
There shall be a Zoning Board of Review which shall consist of five members
and two alternates to be appointed by the Town Council. Each member shall
serve a five-year term, and the terms shall be on a staggered basis. The
alternates shall serve one-year terms. Any vacancy during the unexpired
term of a member or an alternate shall be filled by the Town Council for the
remainder of the term.
§ C-116. Powers and duties. [Amended 11-7-1978]
A. The Zoning Board of Review has those powers and duties as shall be set
forth in the General Laws and Public Laws of the State of Rhode Island
and ordinances of the Town.
B. The Zoning Board of Review shall keep accurate minutes of all meetings
and votes.
§ C-115 CHARTER § C-116
C:55

ARTICLE XXI
Personnel
§ C-117. General provisions. [Amended 11-7-1978; 11-7-2000]
There shall be a personnel system covering all persons employed by the
Town, with the exceptions provided in § C-121, which shall be under the
jurisdiction of the Personnel Board and which shall be organized to achieve
the following objectives:
§ C-118. Personnel Board. [Amended 11-7-1978; 11-4-1986]
There shall be a Personnel Board consisting of five members appointed by
the Town Council. No member of the Personnel Board shall be employed
by or be an official of the Town, nor shall be a member of any local, state
or national committee of a political party or an official or member in any
partisan political club or organization, nor shall hold or be a candidate for
any elective office. Each member of the Personnel Board shall serve a threeyear
term, and the terms shall be on a staggered basis. Members shall
serve conditioned only upon good behavior and shall be removed only for
cause. Vacancies occurring during a term shall be filled by the Town Council
for the balance of the term. Members of the Board shall serve without
compensation, but funds will be provided for reasonable and necessary
expenses.
A. Town government shall provide equal employment opportunities that
are free of personal and political considerations and are in conformity
with federal and state laws governing nondiscrimination in
employment.
B. The Town Council may execute, at its sole discretion, written
employment agreements of up to three years in duration with any of its
employees, consistent with the efficient operation of Town government.
C. All jobs will be evaluated and job descriptions prepared in order to
establish a consistent basis for measuring and ranking similar jobs.
D. Appointments, promotions and other actions requiring the application
of merit shall be based on necessary qualifications, performance
evaluations, and seniority if two or more candidates are judged to be
equally qualified.
E. To insure effective working relations, fair administration of the
personnel system shall be conducted in consideration of the rights and
interests of employees, consistent with the best interests of the public
and the Town.
F. Tenure of employees covered by the personnel system shall be subject
to good behavior, satisfactory job performance, the availability of
related Town funds, and continuation of the position.
§ C-117 CHARTER § C-119
C:57
§ C-119. Duties of the Personnel Board. [Amended 11-7-1978;
11-3-1992; 11-7-2000]
It shall be the duty of the Personnel Board to:
§ C-120. Administration.
The personnel system will be administered by the Town Manager.
§ C-121. Scope and coverage. [Amended 11-7-1978; 11-7-2000]
The personnel system shall include all positions in the Town except as
follows:
A. Advise the Town Council on matters of personnel policy as requested by
the Town Council.
B. Advise the Town Manager on matters of personnel administration.
C. Advise the Town Council and the Town Manager in the development of a
Personnel Ordinance, of personnel rules, a job classification plan, a
uniform pay plan, and the recommendations to be made by the Town
Manager under Subsection E of § C-85.
D. Represent the public interest in the improvement of personnel
administration in the Town service.
E. Make any inquiry which it may consider desirable concerning personnel
administration in the Town service and make recommendations to the
Town Council with respect thereto.
F. Send, in writing, to the Board of Canvassers any proposed changes in
compensation for Town Council and School Committee members. Any
such change shall become effective only upon approval of the voters of
the Town at a general or special election.
G. To perform such other duties as may be requested by the Town Council
or required by ordinance.
A. The Town Manager shall administer the personnel system as now or
hereafter set forth in the Charter or by ordinance.
B. The Town Manager shall prepare such personnel reports and provide
such personnel information as is directed by the Personnel Board.
A. All elected officials and members of boards and commissions.
B. Town Manager, Town Solicitor, Probate Judge, Municipal Court Judge,
Town Sergeant.
C. Employees of the School Department.
D. Volunteer personnel and personnel appointed to serve without pay.
§ C-119 EAST GREENWICH CODE § C-121
C:58
E. Consultants and counsel rendering temporary professional service.
F. Such other positions as may be excepted by ordinance or this Charter.
§ C-121 CHARTER § C-121
C:59

ARTICLE XXII
Advisory Boards or Commissions
§ C-122. Creation and abolishment. [Amended 11-7-1978]
The Town Council shall create or abolish by ordinance advisory boards
or commissions as may be required by law or may from time to time be
deemed necessary by the Town Council. The members of such commissions
or boards shall be appointed by the Town Council.
§ C-122 CHARTER § C-122
C:61

Part 6
Public Schools
ARTICLE XXIII
Public Schools
§ C-123. School Committee.
§ C-124. Qualifications of School Committee members.
Members of the School Committee shall have the same qualifications and
shall be subject to the same restrictions as are provided by this Charter for
members of the Town Council.
§ C-125. Powers and duties of School Committee. [Amended
11-7-2000]
A. Membership. There shall be a School Committee consisting of seven
members, each of whom shall be elected from the Town at large by the
electors of the Town of East Greenwich at the regular biennial elections
held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November in the
even-numbered years for a term of four years and until his or her
successor is elected and qualified. Four members of the School
Committee shall be elected at the first said election after the adoption
of the Charter (1974) and at said elections every fourth year thereafter,
and three members shall be elected at the subsequent biennial election
(1976) and at said elections every fourth year thereafter. The School
Committee shall elect from within its own membership a Chair and Vice
Chair at its first meeting following its certification by the Board of
Canvassers. [Amended 11-7-2000]
B. Vacancies. If there is a vacancy in the membership of the School
Committee which shall occur when there is one year or more remaining
in the term of that member, the Town Council shall, within 30 days after
the vacancy occurs, set a date for a special election for the purpose of
filling such vacancy; and if there is a vacancy in the membership of the
School Committee which shall occur when there is less than one year
remaining in the term of that member, the Town Council shall appoint
someone to finish the term. [Amended 11-2-2004]
C. Compensation. The School Committee may receive such annual
compensation as may from time to time be fixed by the Town Council
and in accordance with the Charter. [Amended 6-12-2017 by Ord.
No. 871]
A. The School Committee shall determine and control all policies affecting
the administration, maintenance and operation of the public schools
and has all the powers and is subject to all the duties prescribed by the
laws of the state.
B. The School Committee shall adopt its own rules and order of business.
§ C-123 CHARTER § C-125
C:63
C. The School Committee shall appoint a Superintendent of Schools as its
chief administrative agent.
D. The appointment and removal of all school employees shall be made by
the School Committee upon recommendation of the Superintendent of
Schools, except as may be provided otherwise by the laws of the state.
E. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the School Committee, as far as is
consistent with the laws of the state, shall deal with the administration
of the public schools solely through the Superintendent of Schools, and
neither the School Committee nor any member thereof shall give orders
to any subordinate of the Superintendent of Schools, either publicly or
privately.
F. The School Committee shall submit to the Town Manager budget
estimates in the same manner as other departments.
G. The School Committee shall supervise and be responsible for the
purchase, lease, storage, distribution and maintenance of such
supplies, equipment, materials or services as are required by the public
schools. Purchases by the School Committee shall be subject to the
same rules and regulations for competitive bidding as for the Town.
H. Costs for requests for Town employees to maintain and care for school
buildings, grounds and other property shall be charged by the Finance
Director against the appropriation for the public schools.
I. The School Committee shall prepare a complete report of its finances
and activities at the close of the fiscal year. Such report shall be
included as a separate section in the annual report to the Town Council
by the Town Manager.
J. The meetings of the School Committee except when in executive
session shall be open and accessible to the public. Final action shall be
taken only in open meeting, except on disciplinary and other personnel
matters, the disclosure of which, in the opinion of the School
Committee, would be detrimental to any pupil or member of school
personnel involved. When the School Committee considers the
disclosure in said cases detrimental as aforesaid, its action shall be
recorded separately and may be kept confidential and shall not be
considered a public record.
§ C-125 EAST GREENWICH CODE § C-125
C:64
The Code
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Codification of ordinances — See Charter,
§ C-73.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Statutes and statutory construction — See
R.I.G.L. § 43-3-1 et seq.
Maximum penalties allowed by state
law — See R.I.G.L. § 45-6-2.
Adoption of ordinances — See R.I.G.L.
§ 45-6-1 et seq.
§ C-125 CHARTER § C-125
C:65

ARTICLE I
Definitions; Code Provisions
[Adopted 6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 595 as Ch. 1 of the 1993 Code]
§ 1-1. Designation and citation of Code. [Amended 3-14-2016 by
Ord. No. 849]
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall be
designated and cited as the "Code of the Town of East Greenwich, Rhode
Island."
§ 1-2. Definitions and rules of construction.
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances hereafter enacted,
the following interpretation shall be placed on the words and phrases
hereinafter mentioned, unless such construction or interpretation shall be
manifestly inconsistent with the evident intent of the Town Council or
repugnant to the context or to the evident purport of any ordinance:
A. Definitions.
CHARTER — Refers to the Charter of the Town of East Greenwich,
Rhode Island, as printed in the Code of the Town of East Greenwich.
CODE — Refers to the Code of the Town of East Greenwich, Rhode
Island, as designated in § 1-1.
CORPORATE LIMITS, CORPORATION LIMITS, TOWN LIMITS — The
legal boundary of the Town of East Greenwich.
COUNCIL — The Town Council of the Town of East Greenwich.
COUNTY — The County of Kent in the State of Rhode Island.
G.L. — The latest edition or reenactment of the General Laws of Rhode
Island, Reenactment of 1956.
KEEPER, PROPRIETOR — Includes persons, firms, associations,
corporations, clubs and partnership, whether acting by themselves or
through a servant, agent or employee.
MONTH — A calendar month.
OATH — Construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by
law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases
the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm"
and "affirmed."
OWNER — Applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant
by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
PERSON — Includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, club, society, body corporate or politic, or any other group
acting as a unit, as well as a natural person.
§ 1-1 CHARTER § 1-2
C:67
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Includes every species of property except
real property, as herein described.
PREMISES — Place or places.
PRESIDENT — The President of the Town Council.
PROPERTY — Includes real and personal property.
PUBLIC PLACE — Includes, without limitation, any park, cemetery,
schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto, and all beaches, canals or
other waterways, and any public street or way.
REAL PROPERTY — Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments and
rights thereto and interests therein.
RESIDENCE — The place adopted by a person as his place of
habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of
returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the
place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence.
SEAL — The Town or Corporate Seal.
SIDEWALK — Any portion of a street between the vertical curbline or
edge of pavement or edge of travelled way and the adjacent property
line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways; such
portion or a sidewalk is sometimes designated and known as the
pavement "border" area.
STATE — The State of Rhode Island.
STREETS, HIGHWAYS, WAYS — Includes public boulevards, avenues,
courts, lanes, alleys, squares, drives, roads, corners and sidewalks.
TENANT, OCCUPANT — Applied to a building or land, includes any
person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies, the whole or
a part of such building or land, either alone or with others.
TOWN — The Town of East Greenwich in the County of Kent and the
State of Rhode Island.
WEEK — Seven days.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING — Includes any representation of words, letters
or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
YEAR — A calendar year.
B. Word usage.
(1) Computation of time. The time in which an act is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and including the last day, except
that when the last day falls on a Sunday or a legal holiday the act
may be done on the next succeeding day which is not a Sunday or a
legal holiday. When a public office in which an act is to be
performed is closed to the public for the entire day which
constitutes the last day for doing such act, or before its usual
§ 1-2 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 1-2
C:68
closing time on such day, then such act may be performed on the
next succeeding day which is not a Sunday or legal holiday.
(2) Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring
the head of a department or other officer of the Town to do some
act or to make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize
the head of the department or other officer of the Town, as the case
may be, to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to
perform the required act or make the required inspection, unless
the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise.
(3) Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend
and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and
corporations as well as to males.
(4) Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any
provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum
requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any
provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject
matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the
provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be
deemed to be controlling.
(5) Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such persons or officers.
(6) Name of officer. Whenever the name of an officer is given it shall be
construed as though the words "of the Town of East Greenwich"
were added.
(7) Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be
construed according to the common and approved usage of the
language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may
have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be
construed and understood according to such meaning.
(8) Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend
and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one
person and thing.
(9) Or/and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the
sense requires it.
(10) Preceding/following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall
mean next before and next after, respectively.
(11) Signature, subscription. The signature or subscription of a person
shall include a mark when the person cannot write.
(12) Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future
as well as the past and present.
§ 1-2 CHARTER § 1-3
C:69
§ 1-3. Catchlines of sections, history notes and references.
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type,
the history notes, and the references scattered throughout the Code shall
not be deemed or taken to be a substantive part of any section nor, unless
expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections,
including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
§ 1-4. Effect of repeal of ordinance.
§ 1-5. Severability of parts of Code.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Town Council that the
sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are
severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of
this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by
the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of
the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of the
Code, since such part of the Code would have been enacted by the Town
Council without the incorporation in this Code of any unconstitutional
phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.
§ 1-6. Amendments to Code.
A. The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force
before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect.
B. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty
incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or
proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed
or cause of action arising under the ordinances repealed.
A. All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or
in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the
numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein, or in
the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part
thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be
excluded from the Code by omission thereof from reprinted pages
affected thereby, and the subsequent ordinances as numbered and
printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence
of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and
subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new
code of ordinances by the Town Council.
B. Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by
amending such provisions by specific reference to the section of the
Code in substantially the following language: "That section _____ of the
Charter and Code of the Town of East Greenwich, Rhode Island, is
hereby amended to read as follows: (Set out new provisions in full)."
§ 1-3 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 1-6
C:70
§ 1-7. Ordinances to be numbered consecutively.
The Town Clerk shall number all ordinances consecutively in the order of
their adoption.
§ 1-8. Supplementation of Code.
C. If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the
following language may be used: "That the Charter and Code of the
Town of East Greenwich, Rhode Island, is hereby amended by adding a
section (or article, chapter or other designation, as the case may be), to
be numbered _____, which reads as follows: (Set out new provisions in
full)."
D. In lieu of the foregoing subsection, when the Town Council desires to
enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature embracing a
subject not previously existing in the Code, which the Town Council
desires to incorporate into the Code, a provision in substantially the
following language may be made a part of the ordinance: "It is the
intention of the Town Council, and it is hereby ordained, that the
provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made part of the
Charter and Code of the Town of East Greenwich, Rhode Island, and the
sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish such
intention."
E. All sections, articles, chapters or other provisions of this Code desired
to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section number,
article number, chapter or other number, as the case may be.
A. By contract or by Town personnel, supplements to this Code shall be
prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the Town
Council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive
permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the Town Council
or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by
the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of
a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the
Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become
obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared
that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through
the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the
supplement.
B. In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code
which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the
omission thereof from reprinted pages.
C. When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the
person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement)
may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of
ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do
so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may:
§ 1-6 CHARTER § 1-8
C:71
§ 1-9. Certain ordinances not affected by Code.
(1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and
other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make
changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to
be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new
material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers;
(4) Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning
to "this chapter," "this article," etc., as the case may be, or to
"sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the
sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the
ordinance incorporated into the Code); and
(5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the
original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but
in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or
effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already
embodied in the Code.
A. Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be
construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the
following when not inconsistent with this Code:
(1) Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by
the Town, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the Town, or
any evidence of the Town's indebtedness, or any contract,
agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or obligation assumed
by the Town or creating interest and sinking funds;
(2) Any right or franchise, permit or other right granted by any
ordinance;
(3) Any personnel regulations; any ordinance or resolution
establishing salaries of Town officers and employees or civil service
rules;
(4) Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating,
relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any
street, alley or other public way in the Town;
(5) Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades in the
Town;
(6) Any appropriation ordinance or any ordinance levying or imposing
taxes;
(7) Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing
taxes therefor;
§ 1-8 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 1-9
C:72
§ 1-10. Altering Code.8
It shall be unlawful for any person in the Town to change or amend by
additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or
delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code
in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Town to be
misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished
as provided in Article III, General Penalty, of this chapter.
§ 1-11. Prosecution where same act unlawful under different
provisions.
In all cases where the same offense may be made punishable or shall be
created by different clauses or sections of the ordinances of the Town, the
prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not more than
one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense.
(8) Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in
the Town;
(9) Any ordinance establishing the official plat of the Town;
(10) Any Zoning Map amendment or land use, rezoning or Zoning
Ordinance;
(11) Any ordinance annexing territory or excluding territory from the
Town;
(12) Any ordinance prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations,
prescribing through streets, parking limitations, parking
prohibitions, one-way traffic, limitations on loads of vehicles or
loading zones, not inconsistent with such Code;
(13) Any subdivision ordinance;
(14) Any ordinance creating special districts or assessing taxes
therefor;
(15) Any ordinance granting specific tax exemptions;
(16) Any temporary or special ordinance;
(17) Any administrative ordinance.
B. All such ordinances are herby recognized as continuing in full force and
effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code.
8. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV). This ordinance also repealed original § 1-11, General penalty; continuing violations,
of the 2005 Code, which immediately followed this section.
§ 1-9 CHARTER § 1-11
C:73

ARTICLE II
Procedure for Prosecution
[Adopted 6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 595 as Secs. 14-56 to 14-61 of the
1993 Code]
§ 1-12. Who may make complaints.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to preclude any person
from making complaint under any of the various sections of the Code of the
Town, unless otherwise specified in such section.
§ 1-13. Initiation of prosecutions.
§ 1-14. Conformity with state law required.
Complaints made pursuant to this article and the proceedings under this
article shall, except as provided in this article, conform in all respects to the
proceedings prescribed by the statutes of the state with regard to offenses
within the jurisdiction of the District Court.
§ 1-15. Court costs paid by Town.
In all cases where the court costs are not collected from the respondent or
other persons liable to pay such court costs, they shall be paid by the Town.
§ 1-16. Disposition of fines.
In all convictions pursuant to complaints under this Code or any of the
ordinances of the Town, the fines, penalties and forfeitures recovered,
unless otherwise specified, shall belong to the Town.
§ 1-17. Council may remit penalties.
The Town Council may at any time, for reasons satisfactory to it, remit all
penalties and costs, or any part of such penalties and costs, and discharge
any person imprisoned under this Code or the ordinances of the Town.
A. All violations of this Code or any of the ordinances of the Town shall be
prosecuted by complaint and warrant directed to the Sheriff of Kent
County, the police officers, Constables or Town Sergeant.
B. No officer of the law prosecuting in his official capacity shall be
required to give surety for costs, but shall give his personal
recognizance merely, and no costs shall be taxed against him unless the
court trying the complaint shall find such complaint to have been
without probable cause and shall, in rendering judgment, certify the
same upon such warrant, but all other persons shall give surety for
costs in the manner prescribed by law.
§ 1-12 CHARTER § 1-17
C:75

ARTICLE III
General Penalty
[Adopted 5-8-2006 by Ord. No. 764]
§ 1-18. General penalty; continuing violations. [Amended 2-24-2020
by Ord. No. 891]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a
violation of any provision of the Code, or any ordinance, rule or regulation
adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine of
not more than $500 and/or required to pay restitution in cases involving
property damage or personal injury in an amount up to the actual cash value
of the property damage or personal injury and/or be required to provide
community service for the Town for not more than 10 days for any one
offense, unless other penalties therefor or penalties within other limits are
specifically prescribed by statute. Each act of violation and each day upon
which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense.
The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly
provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or
not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to
the penalty prescribed above, the Town Council may pursue other remedies
such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses
or permits.
§ 1-18 CHARTER § 1-18
C:77

ARTICLE IV
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 3-14-2016 by Ord. No. 849]
§ 1-19. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to the authority contained in § C-73 of the Charter of the Town of
East Greenwich, the ordinances of the Town of East Greenwich of a general
and permanent nature, adopted by the Town Council of the Town of East
Greenwich, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and sections
by General Code, LLC, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 260, together
with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as
the "Code of the Town of East Greenwich, Rhode Island," hereinafter known
and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-20. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of the 2005 Code and the ordinances in force immediately prior
to the enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of
such ordinances and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such
provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the prior ordinance. All
such provisions are hereby continued in full force and effect and are hereby
reaffirmed as to their adoption by the Town Council of the Town of East
Greenwich, and it is the intention of said Town Council that each such
provision contained within the Code is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed
as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of former ordinances as
are omitted from this Code shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by
the provisions of § 1-21 below, and only new or changed provisions, as
described in § 1-24 below, shall be deemed to be enacted from the effective
date of this Code, as provided in § 1-26 below.
§ 1-21. Inconsistent legislation repealed; repeal of specific
ordinances.
A. Repeal of inconsistent ordinances. Except as provided in § 1-9, Certain
ordinances not affected by Code, all ordinances or parts of ordinances
enacted on or before July 13, 2015, that are inconsistent with the
provisions contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby
repealed as of the effective date given in § 1-26; provided, however, that
such repeal shall only be to the extent of such inconsistency, and any
valid legislation of the Town of East Greenwich which is not in conflict
with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain in full force
and effect.
B. Repeal of specific ordinances. The Town Council of the Town of East
Greenwich has determined that the following chapters/articles from the
2005 Code are no longer in effect and hereby specifically repeals the
following:
§ 1-19 CHARTER § 1-21
C:79
§ 1-22. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Town Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended
to include such changes.
§ 1-23. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-21A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-24. Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation.
(1) Chapter 11, Alarm Systems, of the 2005 Code, adopted June 22,
1993, by Ord. No. 595.
(2) Chapter 34, Article IV, Commission on Environmental Affairs, of the
2005 Code, adopted July 14, 1992, by Ord. No. 575.
(3) Chapter 78, Article II, Department of Public Welfare, of the 2005
Code, adopted October 25, 1990, by Ord. No. 556.
(4) Chapter 93, Article III, Affordable Housing Development Fees, of
the 2005 Code, adopted November 6, 2006, by Ord. No. 778, as
amended.
(5) Chapter 104, Fire Prevention, of the 2005 Code, adopted June 22,
1993, by Ord. No. 595.
(6) Chapter 203, Smoking, of the 2005 Code, adopted April 25, 2000,
by Ord. No. 686, as amended.
(7) Chapter 218, Article II, Signs Over Sidewalks, of the 2005 Code,
adopted June 22, 1993, by Ord. No. 595.
C. The repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed
so as to revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no
longer of any effect.
A. Nonsubstantive changes. In compiling and preparing the ordinances of
the Town for adoption and revision as part of the Code, certain
nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes were made in one or
more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the Town Council that all
such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so
changed had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, changes and revisions of a substantive
§ 1-21 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 1-24
C:80
§ 1-25. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-26. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after March 14, 2016.
nature, as set forth in Schedule A9 attached hereto and made a part
hereof, are hereby made to various ordinances included in the Code.
These changes are enacted to bring provisions into conformity with the
desired policies of the Town Council, and it is the intent of the Town
Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the
legislation so changed had been previously formally amended to read
as such. All such changes and revisions shall be deemed to be in effect
as of the effective date of the Code specified in § 1-26.
C. Nomenclature. The following nomenclature changes are made
throughout the Code:
(1) References to "Recreation Department" are revised to read "Parks
and Recreation Department."
(2) References to "Comprehensive Plan" are revised to read
"Comprehensive Community Plan."
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
9. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-24B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or repealed by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article IV. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, repealed) 3-14-2016 by Ord. No.
849." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
Town offices.
§ 1-24 CHARTER § 1-26
C:81
Chapter 6
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III. Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 15.
§ 6-1. Findings.
The Town Council finds that employing or permitting persons to perform or
exhibit their nude or seminude bodies to other persons as an inducement
to such other persons to purchase alcoholic beverages can lead to criminal
activity, moral degradation and disturbances of the peace and good order
of the community. In addition, such exploitation of such nude and seminude
acts is adverse to the public's interest in the quality of life, tone of
commerce and total community environment in the Town of East
Greenwich.
§ 6-2. Prohibitions.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining, owning or operating an
establishment located within the boundaries of the Town at which
alcoholic beverages are offered for sale for consumption on the
premises:
(1) To suffer or permit any female person, while on the premises of said
establishment, to expose to the public view that area of the human
female breast at or below the top of the areola thereof.
(2) To suffer or permit any female person, while on the premises of said
establishment, to employ any device or covering which is intended
to give the appearance of or simulate such portions of the human
female breast as described in Subsection A(1).
(3) To suffer or permit any person, while on the premises of said
establishment, to expose to public view his or her genitals, pubic
area, buttocks, anus or anal cleft.
(4) To suffer or permit any person, while on the premises of said
commercial establishment, to employ any device or covering which
is intended to give the appearance of or simulate the genitals, pubic
area, buttocks, anus or anal cleft.
B. It shall be unlawful for any female person, while on the premises of an
establishment located within the Town at which alcoholic beverages are
served or offered for sale for consumption on the premises, to expose to
public view that area of the human female breast at or below the top of
the areola thereof or to employ any device or covering which is
§ 1-26 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 6-2
C:82
§ 6-3. Liquor license revocation.
If the owner, operator, licensee, lessor, lessee, manager, employee or any
other person participating in the operation of the establishment located
within the Town at which alcoholic beverages are offered for sale for
consumption on the premises shall violate or be in violation of any of the
provisions of § 6-2, the Town Council shall revoke the liquor license for said
establishment after giving reasonable notice thereof to the holder of said
license and affording the holder an opportunity to be heard as to why the
license should not be revoked.
§ 6-4. Violations and penalties.10
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of
an offense against the Town punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article III,
General Penalty, of the East Greenwich Code.
Chapter 15
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Adult entertainment — See Ch. 6.
All-night businesses — See Ch. 51, Art. I.
Alcoholic beverage license fees — See Ch. 93.
Noise — See Ch. 152.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See R.I.G.L. § 3-1-1 et
seq.
Penalties for violations — See R.I.G.L.
§ 3-11-5.
§ 15-1. Consumption or possession by minors prohibited.
It shall be an offense for any person who has not attained the age of 21
years to consume or have in his possession alcoholic beverages of any kind
within the Town.
intended to give the appearance or simulate such areas of the female
breast as described herein.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person, while on the premises of an
establishment located within the Town at which alcoholic beverages are
offered for sale for consumption on the premises, to expose to public
view his or her genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or anal cleft.
10.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 6-2 CHARTER § 15-2
C:83
§ 15-2. Consumption or possession in public prohibited. [Amended
1-25-2016 by Ord. No. 847]
§ 15-3. Illegal consumption or possession by minors declared a
nuisance. [Amended by 3-11-2002 by Ord. No. 721; 2-24-2020 by
Ord. No. 892]
Any place in the Town at which the illegal consumption or possession of
alcoholic beverages by persons under 21 years of age is occurring shall
be declared a public nuisance. Any owner or resident of such a place
who knowingly permits the illegal possession or consumption of alcoholic
beverages by persons under 21 years of age shall have committed a
violation of this section.
§ 15-4. Liquor license regulations. [Amended 4-26-1994 by Ord. No.
609; 8-11-1998 by Ord. No. 661]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession any open
bottle, open can, drinking glass or drinking cup containing an alcoholic
beverage of any kind while on any public street, public highway, public
sidewalk or on any public lands in the Town, including but not limited to
recreational areas and public places of assembly.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic beverages of
any kind in the Town while on any public street, public highway or on
any public lands in the Town, including but not limited to recreational
areas and public places of assembly.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession any
alcoholic beverages while on any lands or in any buildings owned by the
Town and used for recreational or educational purposes.
D. Notwithstanding any other provisions of Chapter 15, the Town Council
may at any time grant permission for the consumption and/or
possession of alcoholic beverages on any land, including sidewalks, or
in any building owned by the Town and used for recreational or
educational purposes, under the terms and conditions as specified by
the Town Council.
A. The conditions and regulations for obtaining and maintaining a liquor
license in the Town are as follows:
(1) Applicants for a license or a renewal shall provide at the time of
application an exact description of the premises to be licensed. The
area to be licensed shall be clearly delineated, as well as the
seating area, serving areas, exits and associated parking.
(2) The building, electrical and plumbing inspectors shall inspect the
premises and issue their findings to the Town Council on the status
of the premises. Applicants shall, before being issued a license or a
renewal, correct any violations of the Building, Electrical or
Plumbing Codes which may exist.11
§ 15-2 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 15-4
C:84
(3) A license must be posted in plain view and shown to any authorized
person upon demand. Additionally, the licensee shall post the name
of the manager or person in charge of the licensed premises in
plain view with the license at all times.
(4) A telephone and toilets in good working order, accessible to the
public, must be maintained by all holders of Class A, B, C and D
licenses on the main floor within each licensed building.
(5) No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served or dispensed after the
legal closing hour.
(6) Consumption of alcoholic beverages is not allowed on the licensed
premises or in the parking area of a Class A license holder.
(7) No persons shall be admitted to the premises after the legal closing
hour.
(8) Minors shall not be allowed to loiter in or around the premises.
(9) All patrons shall leave the licensed premises not later than 20
minutes after 1:00 a.m. All employees shall leave the licensed
premises within one hour after the legal closing time. However, the
owner, general managers and/or staff of any establishment may
enter or be in a licensed establishment at any time for a legitimate
business purpose; provided, however, that the owner or general
managers obtain prior written approval from the Town Council or
its designee, who shall notify the Police Department. Management
and bona fide employees may not consume alcoholic beverages
after the legal closing time nor before the legal opening time. No
employee shall be allowed on the premises earlier than two hours
before the legal opening time and, during this period, there shall be
no consumption of alcoholic beverages. The Town Council or its
designee may authorize additional hours for maintenance purposes
upon written application and after conducting a hearing thereon. In
the event of extenuating circumstances (emergency) that occur
after the normal business hours, the licensee may request an
extension of time for cleaning and/or maintenance purposes from
the commanding officer on duty at the Police Department. Such
extension, if granted, shall be for a specific time. No one, other
than employees, on-duty police and enforcement personnel shall be
admitted to the premises after the required closing time (1/2 hour
after the legal closing time) nor before the legal opening time.
[Amended 9-11-2017 by Ord. No. 872]
(10) Routine periodic services, such as duct cleaning and carpet
shampooing, the performance of which are outside these hour
restrictions, shall require the permission of the Chief of Police or
his designee at least 48 hours in advance of the services. Such
request shall be submitted in writing. Any emergency services shall
11.Editor's Note: See Ch. 38, Building Construction.
§ 15-4 CHARTER § 15-4
C:85
be permitted with the permission of the Police Department;
however, a written explanation of the incident shall be submitted to
the Chief of Police within 24 hours after the incident. Abuse of this
privilege shall not be tolerated.
(11) The licensed premises, associated parking and outside areas, and
the conduct of patrons therein and thereon, shall be efficiently and
affirmatively supervised by the licensee so as to preclude the
annoyance or disturbance of the public and persons residing in the
surrounding area and to ensure that no unlawful activity is
engaged in by patrons, agents or employees. Patrons shall not be
allowed to congregate or remain in the associated parking or
outside areas longer than is reasonably necessary for them to go to
the licensed premises from their vehicles or to their vehicles from
the licensed premises. Patrons shall not be allowed to consume any
alcoholic beverage in the associated parking areas or in any areas
on the property other than the licensed premises as delineated in
accordance with Subsection A(1) of this section.
(12) All fights or acts of violence or any violation of the laws of the state
or Town on the licensed premises or adjacent areas under the
control of the licensee shall be reported immediately to the Police
Department by the licensee.
(13)No alcoholic beverages shall be removed from the licensed
premises of a Class B, C or D licensee by any person.
(14) At all times while the premises are occupied, police and other
enforcement officials while on duty must be admitted and granted
access to the entire licensed premises, including the parking lot
and associated areas surrounding the building.
(15)No licensee or any agent, servant, employee or representative
thereof shall in any way interfere with the official duties or
activities of any police or other enforcement official. All licensees,
their agents, servants, employees or representative shall promptly
identify themselves to any police or other enforcement official
when requested to do so.
(16)No licensee or any agent, servant, employee or representative
thereof shall harass, either verbally or physically, any police or
other enforcement official while performing his official duties on or
within the licensed premises or adjacent parking lot and other
areas surrounding the building.
(17) The licensee shall review the rules and regulations set forth in
these conditions with all employees, agents, servants and
representatives thereof.
(18) Live entertainment shall not be permitted on any licensed premises
without a valid annual permit for such entertainment having first
been issued by the Town Council. Live entertainment shall include
§ 15-4 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 15-4
C:86
instrumentalists, vocalists, shows, bands, disc jockeys and other
forms of entertainment. [Amended 3-14-2106 by Ord. No. 849]
(19)No dancing shall be permitted unless a valid permit is issued by the
Town Council.
(20)No licensee shall permit any ordinance of the Town to be violated
on or within its premises by any agent, patron, servant, employee
or representative thereof.
(21)No loud noises, music, amplified or not, or other nuisance shall be
permitted to annoy and disturb nearby residents or persons on
adjoining streets or sidewalks. Such noise shall include but shall
not be limited to the disposal of trash.
(22)No music or dancing in any form shall be permitted after 12:45
a.m. in any Class B establishment.
(23) Upon receipt or renewal of a liquor license, the licensee shall sign a
receipt for a copy of the rules and regulations set forth in this
section.
(24) Parking areas and other outside areas associated with and used by
the patrons and/or workers of the licensed premises shall be kept
clean and free of litter.
(25) The Town Council may, if it deems reasonably necessary for public
health and safety, require a license holder to provide for police
details at certain specified times.
(26) Holders of licenses issued by the Town Council must notify it
through the Town Clerk within 10 days of any of the following
changes occurring in the business of the licensee:
(a) If a partnership, they must report any change in the
partnership agreement, oral or written, whereby any interest,
financial or otherwise, in the business is given to any person,
firm or corporation not mentioned in the license application.
(b) If a corporation having less than 25 stockholders reports any
pledge, transfer or contract to pledge or transfer stock of the
licensed corporation to a person, firm or corporation not
mentioned in the application for a license.
(c) All newly elected officers or directors must be reported to the
Town Council within 30 days.
(d) Any acquisition by any person of more than 10% of any class of
corporate stock must be reported within 30 days.
(e) Notice of any transfer of 50% or more of any class of corporate
stock shall be made to the Town Council only by written
§ 15-4 CHARTER § 15-4
C:87
§ 15-5. Signing of liquor license conditions. [Amended 3-14-2106 by
Ord. No. 849]
All liquor license applicants shall sign two copies of the form provided
by the Town Clerk's office certifying their compliance. One copy is to be
returned to the applicant, and one copy is to be retained by the Town Clerk.
§ 15-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-14-2106 by Ord. No.
849]
Except as provided in R.I.G.L. § 3-11-5, violations of the provisions of this
chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article III, of the Code
of the Town of East Greenwich.
§ 15-7. Alcoholic beverage policy. [Added 7-8-2013 by Ord. No. 828;
amended 3-14-2106 by Ord. No. 84912]
It is the intention of the Town of East Greenwich to provide for the safe and
responsible use of alcoholic beverages in/on all public property, grounds
and facilities. Through the East Greenwich Municipal Alcohol Policy, the
Town has taken an important step in preventing alcohol-related problems
application to the licensing board subject to the procedures for
a transfer of a license.
(27) All servers of alcohol shall be required to attend a substance abuse
training program. All servers of alcoholic beverages shall be
required to produce proof of attendance at a substance abuse
program to the Town Clerk within 60 days of the date of hire.
(28) License holders shall not permit the serving of minors nor shall
they permit the serving of alcoholic beverages to persons who are
so intoxicated that they cannot reasonably be expected to be
responsible for their own safety or the safety of others.
(29) Any attempt to utilize false identification must be immediately
reported to the police.
(30) All licensees shall comply strictly with the conditions of this
section. Violations shall be considered cause for suspension or
revocation of the license.
(31) Effective August 1, 2017, any applicant or holder of a retail license
for the sale of alcoholic beverages, except for those holders of class
F liquor licenses, are to file a certificate of insurance and maintain
commercial general liability insurance as a condition of holding a
retail license. Insurance coverage shall be no less than $300,000.
[Added 9-11-2017 by Ord. No. 872]
12.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 15-4 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 15-7
C:88
at municipal events and in municipal locations. The policies include the
following:
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — A beverage containing in excess of 3.2%
alcoholic content by volume.
MINOR — A person under the legal drinking age of 21.
SPECIAL EVENT — Conducting lawful sales and/or consumption of
alcoholic beverages on specified dates and times in compliance with all
state and Town laws, codes and regulations.
USER(S) — Those individuals, associations, entities, firms or
corporations that provide alcoholic beverages for sale and/or
consumption in/on all public property, grounds and facilities.
USERS' AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE(S) — A representative that
shall be available to those performing bar, door or floor duties, as well
as attendees, to manage problems, concerns or other issues that may
result from sales or consumption of alcoholic beverages.
B. Users shall maintain valid licenses and permits as required by state and
Town laws, codes and regulations as applicable to the activity or event
being conducted.
C. Insurance. A minimum of $1,000,000 in liquor liability insurance will be
required for special events in/on all public property, grounds and
facilities, festivals, fairs, carnivals and concerts. The Town of East
Greenwich shall be named as co-insured on such insurance. Proof of
purchase shall be provided at least 14 days prior to the activity with a
thirty-day notice of cancellation.
D. Minors and alcohol-related events. When alcoholic beverages are being
consumed, minors must be accompanied by a responsible adult of legal
age. Minors must not be served or provided alcoholic beverages either
directly or indirectly by an adult. When minors are present in/on public
property, grounds or facilities and alcoholic beverages are being
consumed, the user must rent the entire building.
E. Alcohol marketing practices prohibited. Practices, including, but not
limited to, oversized drinks, double shots of spirits, drinking contests,
volume discounts and unlimited free alcohol or alcohol marketing
events, which encourage increased immoderate consumption, are
prohibited.
F. Event workers and training.
(1) For a special event where alcoholic beverages will be sold, the user
shall provide a list specifying employees, volunteers or other event
workers who will be involved in the provision, dispensing, and sales
of alcoholic beverages, as well as employees, volunteers or event
§ 15-7 CHARTER § 15-7
C:89
workers who shall monitor the consumption of alcoholic beverages
by attendees. The Town Manager, the Director of Parks and
Recreation, the Chief of Police, or their designees shall have the
right to regulate or prohibit any individual from acting in such
capacities.
(2) The Police Chief or his/her designees may require certification of
alcohol server training at special events and shall have the right to
request modification of certification requirements for any special
event where alcoholic beverages will be served.
G. Enforcement.
(1) Violations of any type, willful or not, shall be a consideration factor
in approval or disapproval of a user's future request(s) for use of
public property, grounds and facilities for special events involving
sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages.
(2) Nothing in this section shall prevent any violation, willful or not,
from being investigated as a separate matter by any governmental
agency charged with enforcement of alcoholic beverage codes and
regulations. Nothing in this section shall preclude any
governmental agency authorized to regulate alcoholic beverages
from entering public property, grounds and facilities for the
purposes of investigating compliance with all applicable state and
Town laws, codes and regulations.
(3) Violations of this section or any Town ordinance in conjunction with
the use requested shall incur the following fines:
(a) First offense: $250.
(b) Second offense: $350.
(4) Notwithstanding the foregoing, this license may be revoked at any
time without the right to a hearing, at the sole discretion of the
Town Council.
H. Workers of legal age; duties required. All employees, volunteers or
other event workers engaged in the provision, dispensing and/or sales
of alcoholic beverages at regular activities or special events, or
engaged in the monitoring of consumption of same by patrons or
attendees, shall be a minimum of 21 years of age.
I. Procedures for obtaining approval. Prior to the event, the user shall:
(1) Obtain confirmation from the authorized Town representative that
the public property, grounds and/or facility is available for rental on
the date required.
(2) Obtain approval for sales and/or consumption of alcoholic
beverages from the Town Council.
§ 15-7 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 15-7
C:90
(3) Obtain all permits for provision, dispensing, sale and/or
consumption of alcoholic beverages as required by state and Town
laws, codes and regulations. Evidence of such permits shall be
provided to the authorized Town representative at least 14 days
prior to the event.
(4) Provide the names of employees, volunteers or other event workers
engaged in the provision, dispensing and/or sale of alcoholic
beverages, and those engaged in monitoring the consumption of
same, to the authorized Town representative 14 days prior to the
event. Where certification of alcohol server training is required,
proof of such certification shall also be provided 14 days prior to
the event.
(5) Purchase liquor liability insurance in accordance with the
requirements of Subsection C of this section.
J. Rules, controls and responsibilities of users.
(1) Users acknowledge by executing the municipal facility permit or
rental agreement that they will strictly observe and ensure
compliance with the controls of this section.
(2) All required permits shall be conspicuously displayed in the
immediate area of the public property, grounds and/or facility
where the alcoholic beverages are to be provided, dispensed, sold
or consumed.
(3) Users are encouraged to provide a variety of safe transportation
options for impaired patrons or attendees.
(4) Users shall inform their employees, volunteers or other event
workers of the potential for litigation involving the misuse of
alcoholic beverages and shall provide them with the knowledge
necessary to lessen the likelihood of such legal action.
(5) The Director of Parks and Recreation, Town Manager, Chief of
Police, or their designees reserve the right to require submittal of a
security plan and/or the presence of police officers or qualified
security personnel for the duration of an event, the cost of which
will be borne by the user. Any such security plan must receive
written approval from the Police Chief before the event may be
held.
(6) Users shall ensure that the required certified alcohol servers are on
site and performing designated duties at the appropriate times
where required.
(7) At least one of the user's authorized representatives, as indicated
on the public property, grounds and facility permit or rental
agreement, shall be available at the designated municipal location
during the entire duration of the event to assure compliance with
§ 15-7 CHARTER § 15-7
C:91
all state and Town laws, codes and regulations, as well as the
provisions of this section, and shall also be present to assure the
proper removal of alcoholic beverages from the public property,
grounds and facility upon conclusion.
(8) Users' authorized representatives shall be available to those
performing bar, door or floor duties, as well as to attendees, to
manage problems, concerns or other issues that may result from
sales or consumption of alcoholic beverages.
(9) All alcoholic beverages used in/on public property, grounds and
facilities shall be purchased, dispensed, sold and/or consumed in
compliance with all state and Town laws, codes and regulations.
(10) Users shall ensure that alcoholic beverages sold or consumed in/on
public property, grounds and facilities are not removed from the
designated locations within those events or facilities by patrons or
attendees.
(11) All bottles shall be retained within the bar area. All beverages shall
be served in unbreakable cups. The Police Chief or his/her designee
may amend this control when alcoholic beverages are to be served
at a formal event.
(12) If alcoholic beverage tickets are purchased from a designated
ticket seller in/on public property, grounds or facilities, a maximum
of two tickets (servings) per person will be permitted at one time.
(13) Minors shall not be served or otherwise provided with alcoholic
beverages. The only acceptable form of identification shall be
government-issued photo identification. Such identification shall be
inspected before providing/serving a person who appears to be
under the age of 21.
(14) Users shall request that individuals participating in masquerade
events unmask or otherwise identify themselves to event
organizers for the purpose of age identification.
(15) Users shall ensure that while on public property, grounds or
facilities, the physical setting is safe and accommodating for both
drinkers and nondrinkers of alcoholic beverages.
(16) All exits shall be monitored by users and kept clear of obstructions
at all times.
(17) Nonalcoholic drinks shall be available without charge or at a cost
lower than that of drinks containing alcohol.
(18) Announcements near the end of a special event or near the close of
business for a regular activity, stating that provision, dispensation
or sales of alcoholic beverages will cease soon, are prohibited.
§ 15-7 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 15-7
C:92
§ 15-8. Outdoor sidewalk liquor service. [Added 7-8-2013 by Ord.
No. 828; amended 1-25-2016 by Ord. No. 847; 3-14-2016 by Ord. No.
849; 7-11-2016 by Ord. No. 858; 10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 861]
Upon approval by the Town Council of an application for outdoor sidewalk
liquor service, the holder of a valid BV liquor license may serve liquor at an
outside table only in conjunction with the service of a full meal. The liquor
must be served by a server employed by the license holder and may only
be served with a meal. This service may not be provided to patrons waiting
to be seated, but only for those patrons actually seated who have or will be
ordering a meal. The service of liquor alone without a meal at an outside
table is strictly prohibited. This service may be provided seven days a week,
from 11:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. Applications may be granted annually for the
period of December 1 through November 30. An application fee of $150
shall accompany all applications for this service. The tables with outdoor
sidewalk liquor service shall be separated from the rest of the sidewalk area
by a temporary physical barrier. This service may be revoked at any time
without the right to a hearing at the sole discretion of the Town Council.
Chapter 19
AMUSEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III. Fees — See Ch. 93, Art. I.
(19) The sale and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages shall cease not
later than the time specified on the municipal events permit or
rental agreement or any time established by state or Town laws,
codes or regulations, whichever is more stringent.
(20) Should users become aware of a situation that could lead to
disruption, injury or property damage, they shall take immediate
action to prevent patrons or attendees from engaging in such
activities or conduct.
(21) Police shall be notified by users of any potentially disruptive,
injurious or damaging situations before they become out of control.
(22) Users shall indemnify, defend and save harmless the Town of East
Greenwich from any and all claims, demands, causes of action,
costs or damages that the municipality may suffer, incur or be liable
for, resulting from users' nonperformance of their obligations/
duties under this section.
(23) Violations of this section shall include serving someone to
intoxication; serving someone who is already intoxicated; serving
persons not of legal age; and failing to prevent impaired individuals
from driving.
§ 15-7 CHARTER § 15-8
C:93
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Regulation of bowling alleys and billiard
tables — See R.I.G.L. § 5-2-1.
Licensing of game rooms — See R.I.G.L.
§ 5-2-10 et seq.
Local licensing of amusements — See R.I.G.L.
§ 5-22-5.
Licensing of bingo games — See R.I.G.L.
§ 11-19-30 et seq.
§ 15-8 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 15-8
C:94
ARTICLE I
Bingo and Beano
[Adopted 6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 595 as Secs. 10-61 to 10-69 of the
1993 Code]
§ 19-1. Conditions of licenses.13
Bingo and beano licenses granted under the provisions of R.I.G.L.
§ 11-19-30 et seq., shall be issued only upon the following conditions:
§ 19-2. License issuance or denial.
The Town Clerk shall issue the bingo and beano license when the license
shall have been granted by the Town Council, and if the application is not
granted, the fee deposited with the application shall be returned by the
Town Clerk to the applicant.
§ 19-3. Display of licenses.
The bingo and beano license must be on the premises where the game is
carried on and shall be displayed in full view while the bingo or beano game
is going on.
§ 19-4. Scope of license; transferability.
No bingo and beano license granted under the provisions of this article shall
confer any authority whatsoever upon any person or organization other than
the one named to act thereunder, and such license shall be nontransferable.
§ 19-5. Hours.
No bingo or beano game shall be carried on or conducted between the hours
of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m.
A. Application required. Applications for licenses by any organization
which shall be entitled to such licenses by virtue of R.I.G.L. § 11-19-30
et seq., shall be signed by a duly qualified officer of such organization;
shall be upon forms provided by the Town Clerk, with whom the
applicant shall deposit the fee required by this article.
B. Application contents. The application shall state the name of the
organization, the names and residence addresses of the principal
officers and persons conducting such game, and the exact date and
place where the bingo or beano game is to be carried on.
C. Fee. Fees for the licensing are hereby fixed in accordance with the
schedule in Chapter 93, Fees.
13.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 19-1 CHARTER § 19-6
C:95
§ 19-6. Participation by minors.
No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted to participate in a
bingo or beano game licensed under this article.
§ 19-7. Location.
A bingo or beano game licensed under this article shall be conducted only
on the premises where the sponsoring organization conducts its regular
meetings.
§ 19-8. Records, report required.
Each organization shall, within five days after the holding of a bingo or
beano game regulated by this article, render to the Town Council a full and
complete report of its gross receipts and expenditures resulting from the
holding of such game and showing the net proceeds resulting therefrom for
use by such organization. Such organization shall maintain financial records
of the conduct of such games, which records shall be open for inspection
and audit at reasonable times by the Town Council.
§ 19-9. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Chief of Police of the Town.
§ 19-10. Violations and penalties.14
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, of the Code of the Town of East Greenwich.
14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 19-6 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 19-10
C:96
ARTICLE II
Jukeboxes, Electronic or Video Games and Mechanical Devices
[Adopted 6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 595 as Secs. 10-96 to 10-113 of the
1993 Code; amended in its entirety 5-8-2006 by Ord. No. 764]
§ 19-11. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ELECTRONIC OR VIDEO GAME — Any machine which, upon the insertion
of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or key, may be operated by the public
generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not
registering a score. It shall include any device which is constructed or
operated by the methods or principles of electronics or which utilizes the
transactions similar thereto under whatever name they may be described.
JUKEBOX — Any music vending machine, contrivance or device which, upon
the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or key into any slot, crevice or
other opening, or by the payment of any price, operates or may be operated
for the emission of songs, music or similar amusement.
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any machine which, upon the
insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, may be operated by the
public generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether
or not registering a score. It shall include such devices as marble machines,
pinball machines, skill ball, mechanical grab machines, and all games,
operations or transactions similar thereto under whatever name they may
be indicated.
PERSON — Any person, firm, corporation or association which owns any
such machine; the person, firm, corporation or association in whose place of
business any such machine is placed for use by the public; and the person,
firm, corporation or association having control over such machine.
§ 19-12. License required.
Any person displaying for public patronage or keeping for operation any
jukebox, electronic or video game, or mechanical amusement device shall
be required to obtain a jukebox, electronic or video game, or mechanical
amusement device license from the Town upon payment of a license fee.
§ 19-13. Separate license required for each machine.
Not more than one machine shall be operated under one jukebox, electronic
or video game, or mechanical amusement device license, and the applicant
or licensee shall be required to secure a license for each and every machine
displayed or operated by him.
§ 19-11 CHARTER § 19-14
C:97
§ 19-14. Application for license required; contents.
Application for such jukebox, electronic or video game, or mechanical
amusement device license shall be made to the Town Council upon a form
to be supplied by the Town Clerk for that purpose and shall contain the
following information:
§ 19-15. Referral of application.
Application for a jukebox, electronic or video game, or mechanical
amusement device license shall be made out in duplicate, one copy being
referred to the Chief of Police and the other copy to the Building Official.
§ 19-16. Investigation by Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police shall investigate the location wherein it is proposed to
operate such machine, ascertain if the applicant is a person of good moral
character, and either approve or disapprove the application for a jukebox,
electronic or video game, or mechanical amusement device license.
§ 19-17. Inspection by Building Official.
The Building Official shall inspect all wiring and connections to the
machine, determine if the machine complies with the Electrical Code of the
Town and the state and all related building and zoning requirements, and
shall either approve or disapprove the application for a jukebox, electronic
or video game, or mechanical amusement device license.
§ 19-18. Approval prerequisite to license.
No jukebox, electronic or video game, or mechanical amusement device
license shall be issued to any applicant unless approved by the Chief of
Police and the Building Official.
§ 19-19. License fees.
Every applicant, upon application for a jukebox, electronic or video game,
or mechanical amusement device license, shall pay the annual license fee
for the privilege of operating or maintaining for operation each jukebox,
A. Name, address and date of birth of the applicant.
B. Prior arrests and convictions of applicant, if any.
C. Place where machine or device is to be displayed or operated and the
business conducted at that place.
D. Description of machine to be covered by the license, mechanical
features, name of manufacturer, serial number, and such additional
information as may be required from time to time.
E. Other such information as is stipulated by the Town Clerk.
§ 19-14 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 19-19
C:98
electronic or video game, or mechanical amusement device. Such fee shall
be payable in full whether or not such license is issued for a full year.15
§ 19-20. Issuance of license to minors prohibited.
No jukebox, electronic or video game, or mechanical amusement device
license shall be issued to any applicant unless he is over 18 years of age.
§ 19-21. License expiration. [Amended 3-26-2012 by Ord. No. 819]
Each jukebox, electronic or video game, or mechanical amusement device
license shall expire on December 1 of each year.
§ 19-22. Display of license.
The jukebox, electronic or video game, or mechanical amusement device
license provided for in this article shall be posted permanently and
conspicuously at the location of the machine in the premises wherein the
device is to be operated or maintained to be operated.
§ 19-23. Transfer from one machine to another.
Such jukebox, electronic or video game, or mechanical amusement device
license may be transferred from one machine or device to another similar
machine upon application to the Town Council to such effect and the giving
of a description and the serial number of the new machine or device.
§ 19-24. Change of location.
If the licensee shall move his place of business to another location within the
Town, the jukebox, electronic or video game, mechanical amusement device
license may be transferred to such new location upon application to the
Town Council, giving the street and number of the new location. The new
location shall be approved by the Chief of Police and the Building Official in
the same manner as provided in this article.
§ 19-25. License revocation.
Every jukebox, electronic or video game, or mechanical amusement device
license issued under this article is subject to the right, which is hereby
expressly reserved, to revoke the license should the licensee, directly or
indirectly, permit the operation of any jukebox, electronic or video game, or
mechanical amusement device contrary to the provisions of this article, the
ordinances of the Town or the laws of the state. The license may be revoked
by the Town Council after written notice to the licensee, which shall specify
the ordinance or law violations with which the licensee is charged, if after a
hearing the licensee is found to be guilty of such violations. Ten days' notice
of the hearing shall be given the licensee. At such hearing the licensee and
his attorney may present and submit evidence of witnesses in his defense.
15.Editor's Note: See Ch. 93, Fees, Art. I.
§ 19-19 CHARTER § 19-26
C:99
§ 19-26. Playing of jukeboxes during certain hours prohibited.16
No person holding a jukebox, electronic or video game, or mechanical
amusement device license under this article shall permit the playing of
jukeboxes after closing.
§ 19-27. Gambling devices prohibited.
Nothing in this article shall in any way be construed to authorize, license or
permit any gambling devices whatsoever, or any mechanism that has been
judicially determined to be a gambling device, or in any way contrary to law
or that may be contrary to any future laws of the state.
§ 19-28. Violations and penalties.17
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, in addition to the
revocation of his license, shall be fined as provided in Chapter 1, Article III,
for each such breach, and each day of operation of any jukebox, electronic
or video game, or mechanical amusement device without a license as
provided in this article shall constitute a separate offense.
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 19-26 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 19-28
C:100
ARTICLE III
Pinball or Game Rooms
[Adopted 6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 595 as Secs. 10-131 to 10-137 of
the 1993 Code]
§ 19-29. License required.
No person shall own, keep or operate a pinball or game room in the Town
without first obtaining a license therefor from the Town Council.
§ 19-30. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
GAME ROOM — Those places which derive their principal source of income
from machines described in the definition of "pinball room."
PINBALL ROOM — Any public place, building or room where three or
more gaming devices, machines or apparatuses are kept for the use and
entertainment of the public or any place where the purpose of such business
is to maintain three or more machines which, upon the insertion of a coin,
slug, token, plate or disc, may be operated by the public generally for use
as a game or amusement, whether or not registering a score and whether
its operation demands skill or chance, or both.
§ 19-31. Application for license.
The license required for a pinball or game room shall not be issued until
application therefor is made to the Town Council. Such application shall be
made on a form to be supplied by the Town Clerk and shall include the
following:
A. Name and address of each owner and operator of the premises where
the proposed activity is to take place.
B. An exact and detailed description of each activity for which a license is
sought.
C. The number and description of each type of table or device or machine
to be used in the premises.
D. The dimensions of the premises, building or room where the tables,
devices or machines are to be placed.
E. The type of business conducted on the premises wherein the tables,
devices or machines are to be placed.
F. A statement as to whether the tables, devices or machines are to be
owned or leased by the applicant.
§ 19-29 CHARTER § 19-31
C:101
§ 19-32. Duration of license.
No license issued for a pinball or game room shall extend for a term in
excess of one year.
§ 19-33. License fee.
There shall be a license fee for a pinball or game room as established by the
Town Council.18
§ 19-34. Renewal of license.
Any license holder may seek renewal of his pinball or game room license by
filing an application therefor in compliance with § 19-31.19
§ 19-35. Violations and penalties.20
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, of the Code of the Town of East Greenwich.
G. A statement as to whether the tables, devices or machines are to be
used for profit.
H. Any further information as shall be specifically required by the Town
Council.
18.Editor's Note: See Ch. 93, Fees.
19.Editor's Note: Original § 19-35, Number of licenses, of the 2005 Code, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. IV).
20.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 19-31 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 19-35
C:102
ARTICLE IV
Pool and Billiard Tables
[Adopted 6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 595 as Secs. 10-151 to 10-157 of
the 1993 Code]
§ 19-36. License required.
No person shall keep a billiard table, bagatelle table, pool table, scippio
table, or any table of similar character in any shop, saloon or place of
business in the Town, or own or keep any such table for public use or profit
in the Town, without first having obtained a license therefor from the Town
Council.
§ 19-37. License fees.
The fee for a pool and billiard license required by this article shall be as
provided in Chapter 93, Fees.
§ 19-38. License year.
The pool and billiard license required by this article shall be issued as of
January 1 of each year and shall terminate on December 31 next following.
§ 19-39. Premises requirements.
The premises licensed under this article shall be open at all times to the
inspection of the Town Council, Chief of Police and all members of the Police
Department, and no shades, shutters, blinds or other obstructions shall be
permitted or allowed at the windows on the premises where such billiard
tables, pool tables or other tables of similar character are kept that shall
prevent a clear view of the interior of the premises.
§ 19-40. Hours of operation.
No person, as owner or keeper of billiard tables, pool tables or tables
of similar character, shall be permitted to keep open for public use the
premises where such billiard tables or pool tables shall be located from
the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight, Monday through Saturday, and
between the hours of 12:00 noon and 10:00 p.m. on Sundays.
§ 19-41. Playing games for money prohibited.
No game for money or other valuable consideration shall be allowed on any
billiard table, bagatelle table, pool table or table of similar character for
which a pool and billiard license is issued.
§ 19-42. Intoxicating liquors, gambling and drugs on premises.
The keeping of intoxicating liquors upon such premises, the playing of
policy, lottery, distribution of lottery tickets, or the sale of cocaine or other
§ 19-36 CHARTER § 19-42
C:103
drugs upon the licensed premises shall be considered sufficient cause for
revocation of the pool and billiard license.
§ 19-43. Violations and penalties.21
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, of the Code of the Town of East Greenwich.
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 19-42 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 19-43
C:104
Chapter 23
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 93, Art. I.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Dogs — See R.I.G.L. § 4-13-1 et seq.
Vicious dogs — See R.I.G.L. § 4-13.1-1 et seq.
Animals at large — See R.I.G.L. § 4-15-1 et
seq.
Cat identification program — See R.I.G.L.
§ 4-22-1 et seq.
Local health regulations — See R.I.G.L.
§ 23-19.2-1 et seq.
§ 19-43 CHARTER § 19-43
C:105

ARTICLE I
Administration and Enforcement
§ 23-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows:
AT LARGE — Any animal shall be deemed to be at large when he is off the
property of his owner and not under restraint as hereinafter defined.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — The person employed by the Town as its
officer for the enforcement of this chapter, and shall include any police
officer of the Town or any other person designated by the Town Council.
DOG POUND — Any premises designated by action of the Town Council for
the purpose of impounding and caring for all animals found running at large
in violation of this chapter.
EXPOSED TO RABIES — An animal has been exposed to rabies within the
meaning of this chapter if it has been bitten by, or been exposed to, any
animal known to have been infected with rabies.
KENNEL — Any person, group of persons or corporation engaged in the
commercial business of breeding, buying, selling or boarding dogs.
LEASHED — An animal is leashed within the meaning of this chapter when
it has a cord, chain or leash attached to or affixed to its collar or harness,
and is held or being led by a person capable of controlling the animal.
OWNER — Any person, group of persons or corporation owning, keeping or
harboring an animal.
RESTRAINT — An animal is under restraint within the meaning of this
chapter when it is leashed, within a motor vehicle, on the property of its
owner or keeper, or on the property of a person other than its owner or
keeper, provided that such person is agreeable to the animal's presence.22
§ 23-2. Exemptions.
§ 23-3. Violations and penalties.
A. Hospitals, clinics and other premises operated by licensed
veterinarians for the care and treatment of animals are exempt from the
provisions of this chapter, except where expressly stated.
B. The licensing and vaccination requirements of this chapter shall not
apply to any dog or cat belonging to a nonresident of the Town and kept
within the Town for not longer than 30 days, provided that all such dogs
shall at all times be kept under restraint by the owner.
22.Editor's Note: The definition of "spayed female," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 23-1 CHARTER § 23-3
C:107
§ 23-4. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Animal Control
Officer or any police officer of the Town.
§ 23-5. Complaints; filing of complaint form.
All complaints made under the provisions of this chapter shall be made to
the Animal Control Officer and may be made verbally; provided, however,
that such complaint shall be within 48 hours, reduced to writing on forms
provided by the Animal Control Officer and shall be signed by the
complainant showing his or her address and telephone number, if any; and
provided, further, that any complaint made by a police officer need not be
reduced to writing as provided in this section.
§ 23-6. Authority of officer to enter premises; seizure of animal.
In the discharge of the duties imposed by this chapter, the Animal Control
Officer or police officer shall have the authority at all reasonable times to
enter upon any premises (but such authority does not include the right
to enter any residence on such premises) to examine any animal which is
allegedly in violation of any provision of this chapter. The said officers shall
have the further authority to take possession of any animal and remove it
from the premises.
§ 23-7. Interference with officer.
No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest the Animal Control Officer
in the performance of his/her duties, to seek to release any animal in the
custody of the Animal Control Officer, except as provided in this chapter.
§ 23-8. Records.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person convicted of
violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished by the payment
of a pecuniary penalty as follows:
(1) For the first offense, a penalty not exceeding $25.
(2) For the second offense within a year, a penalty not exceeding $50.
(3) For the third and any subsequent offense within a year, a penalty
not exceeding $75.
B. Such pecuniary penalties shall be recovered by an action of debt, or by
complaint and warrant, to the use of the Town.
A. It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer to keep, or cause to be
kept, accurate and detailed records of all bite cases reported to him or
her and the results of the investigation of such cases.
§ 23-3 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 23-8
C:108
B. It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer to keep, or cause to be
kept, accurate and detailed records of the impoundment and disposition
of all animals coming into his or her custody.
§ 23-8 CHARTER § 23-8
C:109

ARTICLE II
Confinement and Impoundment
§ 23-9. Confinement of certain dogs by owners required;
destruction of dogs under emergency conditions.
§ 23-10. Wild animals.
No wild animal may be kept within the Town; provided, however, that
wild animals may be kept for exhibition purposes by circuses, zoos and
educational institutions in accordance with such ordinances as shall be
adopted by the Town Council. Any wild animal which escapes and is found
at large may be destroyed by the Animal Control Officer.
§ 23-11. Restraint.
An owner shall keep his/her animal under restraint at all times and shall not
permit such animal to be at large. This section shall not apply to cats or to
hunting dogs in the process of training or when in legal pursuit of wild game
in season.
§ 23-12. Impoundment; care; notice; disposition; destruction.
A. Every female animal in heat shall be kept confined in a building or
secure enclosure or in a veterinary hospital or boarding kennel in such
a manner that the female animal cannot come into contact with another
animal except for intentional breeding purposes.
B. Every fierce, dangerous or vicious dog shall be kept confined by its
owner within a building or secure enclosure, and the owner shall not
take such dog out of such building or secure enclosure unless such dog
is securely muzzled.
C. When in the judgment of a veterinarian an animal should be destroyed
for humane reasons, such animals may not be reclaimed and shall be
destroyed. Under emergency conditions, the Animal Control Officer
may destroy an injured animal, but only after making every reasonable
effort to procure the services of a veterinarian, including transportation
of the animal to a veterinarian's office. Every effort to communicate
with the owner concerning the animal's condition must be made.
A. An animal which is at large may be apprehended by the Animal Control
Officer and impounded at the dog pound. An impounded animal may be
claimed by its owner at any time during the impoundment by payment
of the fees provided in Chapter 93, Fees. An impounded animal which is
not claimed by its owner within five days may at any time thereafter be
disposed or in a humane manner under the direction of the Animal
Control Officer, such disposition to be in the manner provided in this
chapter. The owner of the animal which is at large shall be in violation
of this chapter.
§ 23-9 CHARTER § 23-12
C:111
§ 23-13. Redemption; ownership; disposition or destruction.
§ 23-14. Impoundment fees.
An impounded animal may be claimed by the owner by payment of the
daily impoundment fee listed in Chapter 93, Fees, for each day the animal
was impounded, plus any veterinarian charges for emergency services and
medication provided during its impoundment. In addition, an impoundment
fee shall be charged if a violation of this chapter is determined to have
occurred. Such fee shall be payable to the Town Treasurer's office.
B. Immediately upon impounding an animal, the Animal Control Officer
shall make every reasonable effort to notify the owner of the animal of
the impoundment and to inform the owner of the animal of the
conditions under which he or she may regain custody of the animal.
C. When an animal is at large and its ownership is known to or may be
readily ascertained by the Animal Control Officer, such animal need not
be impounded, but the owner of such animal shall be in violation of this
chapter.
A. The owner of an impounded animal shall be entitled to regain
possession of the impounded animal, except as provided in this chapter
in the cases of certain animals, upon the payment of the impoundment
fee set forth in Chapter 93, Fees.
B. One who purports to be the owner of an impounded animal may
establish his or her ownership by a license receipt, affidavits of
neighbors, photographs or other documents which would lead the
Animal Control Officer to reasonably conclude that the animal
impounded is owned by the purported owner.
C. An animal which is impounded and which is not claimed by its owner in
the manner provided in this section within five days after its
impoundment may be disposed of under the direction of the Animal
Control Officer, as follows: Disposition may be by transfer of title to a
charitable organization for the protection, prevention of cruelty to or
rescue of animals, having preference for any such organization in the
Town or its immediately surrounding communities, or by euthanasia by
a veterinarian.
§ 23-12 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 23-14
C:112
ARTICLE III
Regulation and Control
§ 23-15. Noisy or trespassing animal declared nuisance; abatement.
§ 23-16. Dogs in commercial establishments and eating places
prohibited.23
No dogs are allowed in any commercial establishment within the Town
during the time such commercial establishment is open to the public or in
any eating place within the Town at any time. Guide, hearing and service
dogs are excluded from this section.
A. The keeping or harboring of any animal or fowl, whether licensed or
not, which by habitual howling, yelping, barking or other noise disturbs
or annoys three or more families in a neighborhood, is unlawful and is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Each day such nuisance exists
shall constitute a separate offense, and the owner or custodian shall be
subject to penalties as provided under § 23-3.
B. Trespass. [Amended 9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 823]
(1) It shall be unlawful to allow or permit any animal to trespass on
private or public property so as to damage or destroy any property
or thing of value, and such trespass is hereby declared to be a
nuisance, and any such animal may be impounded by the Animal
Control Officer.
(2) It shall be unlawful to allow any animal to be at large or leashed
within the fenced area surrounding Carcieri Field. Notwithstanding
any section of this chapter to the contrary, the fine for the first and
any subsequent violations of this subsection shall be $100.
C. Whenever it shall be affirmed in writing and signed by a resident of the
Town or by a person regularly employed in the neighborhood, and such
complaint is verified by the Animal Control Officer, that an animal is a
habitual nuisance by reason of trespassing, howling, barking or other
noise, or damage to property, or in any other manner causing undue
annoyance, the Animal Control Officer, if he/she finds the nuisance to
exist, shall serve notice upon the owner or custodian of such animal
that such nuisance must be abated within a period not to exceed three
days after the service of such notice. Failure to comply with such notice
shall constitute a violation of this chapter, and the owner or custodian
shall be subject to penalties as provided under § 23-3.
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 23-15 CHARTER § 23-17
C:113
§ 23-17. Number of dogs limited; exception.
It shall be unlawful to keep more than three dogs at the same residence.
This provision shall not apply to licensed kennels or any litter of dogs less
than three months of age.
§ 23-18. Business of keeping swine.
§ 23-19. Keeping swine restricted.
A. No person shall carry on the business of keeping swine within the limits
of the Town without a license therefor first granted by the Town
Council.
B. All applications to keep swine as a business shall be referred to the
State Department of Health, which shall report thereupon before such
applications are granted by the Town Council.
C. All licenses to keep swine as a business shall be for the current year,
shall terminate on the last day of December in each year, shall be issued
by the Town Clerk under the direction of the Town Council, and shall
contain the condition that they may be revoked at any time by the Town
Council.
D. This section shall not apply to owners or lessees of land who are
keeping swine for their own personal use.
A. No person shall keep any swine for business or personal use except in a
farming zone and unless a license therefor has been first granted by the
Town Council.
B. All applications to keep swine for personal use shall be referred to the
Chief of Police and State Department of Health, which shall report
thereon before such applications are granted by the Town Council.
C. All licenses to keep swine for personal use shall be for the current year
and shall terminate on the last day of December in each year, and shall
be issued by the Town Clerk under the direction of the Town Council,
and shall contain the condition that they may be revoked at any time by
the Town Council. The price of the license shall be found in the license
schedule in Chapter 93, Fees.
§ 23-17 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 23-19
C:114
ARTICLE IV
Canine Waste Removal
§ 23-20. Removal and disposal required.
It shall be the duty of each person who owns, possesses or controls a dog to
remove and dispose of any feces left by his/her dog on any sidewalk, street,
park or other public area. It shall further be the duty of each person who
owns, possesses or controls a dog to remove and dispose of any feces left
by his/her dog on any private property neither owned nor occupied by said
person.
§ 23-21. Means of removal to be in possession of owner.
No person who owns, possesses or controls such dog shall appear with such
dog on any sidewalk, street, park or other public area, or on any private
property neither owned nor occupied by said person, without such means of
removal of any feces left by such dog.
§ 23-22. Acceptable removal tools and implements.
The means of removal shall be any tool, implement or other device carried
for the purpose of picking up and containing such feces, unexposed to the
person or the public. Disposal shall be accomplished by transporting such
feces to a place suitable and regularly reserved for the disposal of human
feces, to a place specifically reserved for the disposal of canine feces, or to
a place so designated as appropriate by the Department of Public Works.
§ 23-23. Violations and penalties.
Violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $10 for
the first offense, not exceeding $15 for the second offense, not exceeding
$25 for the third offense and any subsequent offenses within a year, to be
recovered by an action of debt or by complaint and warrant to the use of the
Town.
§ 23-24. Exception for handicapped persons.
This article shall not apply to a licensed dog accompanying any handicapped
person who, by reason of his/her handicap, is physically unable to comply
with the requirements of this article.
§ 23-20 CHARTER § 23-24
C:115

ARTICLE V
Rabies Control
§ 23-25. Bite reports; isolation; examination and diagnosis;
vaccination; quarantine; infected animals.
A. Every animal which bites a person shall be promptly reported to the
Animal Control Officer and shall thereupon be securely quarantined at
the direction of the Animal Control Officer for a period of 14 days. Such
animal shall not be released from such quarantine except by written
permission of the Animal Control Officer. At the discretion of the Animal
Control Officer, the quarantine may be on the premises of the owner, at
the dog pound or, at the owner's option and expense, in a veterinary
hospital of his or her choice. In the case of stray animals, or in the case
of animals whose ownership is not known, such quarantine shall be at
the shelter designated by the Animal Control Officer.
B. The owner, upon demand by the Animal Control Officer, shall forthwith
surrender any animal which has bitten a human or which is suspected
of having been exposed to rabies for supervised quarantine, the
expenses of which shall be borne by the owner. The animal may be
reclaimed by the owner if it is adjudged free of rabies upon payment of
such fees set forth from time to time by the Town Council.
C. When rabies has been diagnosed in an animal under quarantine or
rabies is suspected by a licensed veterinarian, and the animal dies while
under such observation, the Animal Control Officer shall immediately
send the head of such animal to the State Health Department for a
pathological examination and shall notify the proper public health
officer of reports of human contact and diagnosis.
D. When either of the reports required in Subsection C of this section
indicates a positive diagnosis of rabies, the President of the Town
Council or Councilman designated by him or her shall recommend an
areawide quarantine for a period of 90 days, and upon invoking of such
emergency quarantine, no animal shall be taken into the streets or
permitted to be in the streets during the period of the quarantine.
During the quarantine, no animal may be taken or shipped from the
Town without written permission of the Chief of Police or his or her
designated authority.
E. During the quarantine period required by Subsection D of this section,
and as long afterward as necessary to prevent the spread of rabies, all
dogs and cats three months of age and older shall be required to be
vaccinated against rabies with a rabies vaccine approved by the
Biologics Control Section of the United States Department of
Agriculture. The types of approved antirabies vaccine to be used and
the recognized duration of immunity for each shall be established by
the State Department of Health. All vaccinated dogs and cats shall be
restricted (by leashing or confinement on enclosed premises) for 30
days after vaccination. During the quarantine period, the State
§ 23-25 CHARTER § 23-25
C:117
§ 23-26. Physician to report.
It shall be the duty of every physician or other medical practitioner to
report to the Animal Control Officer at the Police Department the names and
addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted by animals, together with
such other information as will be helpful in rabies control.
Department of Health shall be empowered to provide for a program
of mass immunization by the establishment of temporary emergency
rabies vaccination clinics appropriately located in the Town.
F. No animal which has been impounded by reason of it being a stray or
unclaimed by its owner is allowed to be claimed during the period of the
rabies emergency quarantine, except by special authorization of the
Animal Control Officer.24
G. Animals bitten by a known rabid animal shall be immediately destroyed
or, if the owner is unwilling to destroy the exposed animal, strict
isolation of the animal in a kennel or other place designated by the
Animal Control Officer for six months shall be required. If the animal
has been previously vaccinated within the time limits established by the
State Department of Health based on the kind of vaccine used, the
animal shall be revaccinated and confined within a building or secure
enclosure for 30 days.
H. If there are additional positive cases of rabies occurring during the
period of the quarantine, such period of quarantine may be extended
for an additional six months.
I. No person shall kill, or cause to be killed, any rabid animal, any animal
suspected of having been exposed to rabies, or any animal biting a
human except as provided in this section, nor remove such an animal
from the Town without written permission from the Animal Control
Officer.
J. The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall, upon demand,
be surrendered to the Animal Control Officer.
K. The Animal Control Officer shall direct the disposition of any animal
found to be infected with rabies.
L. No person shall fail or refuse to surrender any animal for quarantine or
destruction as required in this section when demand is made therefor
by the Animal Control Officer.
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 23-25 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 23-27
C:118
§ 23-27. Veterinarians to report.
It shall be the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report to the Animal
Control Officer any animal considered by the veterinarian to be a rabies
suspect.
§ 23-28. Dogs and cats to be vaccinated.
No dog or cat over six months old shall be permitted within the Town limits
unless such dog or cat shall have been vaccinated or immunized in the
manner set forth in this article within a period of 12 months, if such dog
or cat shall have been vaccinated or immunized with the one-year vaccine,
or within a period of 24 months, if such dog shall have been vaccinated or
immunized by the two-year vaccine.
§ 23-29. Keeping unvaccinated dog or cat.
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or harbor any dog or cat
over six months old within the Town unless such dog or cat shall have been
vaccinated or inoculated in accordance with the provisions of this article
and unless said dog has been issued a license by the Town. Cats shall not be
required to be licensed.
§ 23-30. Vaccine standards; certificate.
The vaccination or immunization referred to in § 23-28 shall be by a vaccine
approved by the State Department of Health and shall be certified to by
a licensed veterinarian. The certificate shall be dated as of the date of
inoculation or vaccination, shall show the rabies tag number, the sex and
breed of the dog or cat and the owner thereof, and whether the vaccine
given is the one-year vaccine or the two-year vaccine. Such certificate shall
certify that the dog or cat has been properly vaccinated or inoculated in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
§ 23-31. Certificate prerequisite to license.
No license shall be issued for any dog required to be licensed unless the
person making application therefor shall first present to the Town Clerk or
other person duly authorized to issue such license a current certificate of
vaccination or inoculation, as provided in this article, for the dog for which
such license is requested.
§ 23-32. Impounding of unvaccinated dogs and cats.
A. Any dog or cat over six months old found within the limits of the Town
without evidence that such dog or cat has been vaccinated or
inoculated in accordance with the provisions of this article shall be
impounded by any police officer or other authorized person for a period
not exceeding five days, during which time such dog or cat may be
returned to is owner upon proof of ownership, vaccination of the dog or
§ 23-27 CHARTER § 23-32
C:119
cat, and payment by such owner of all impoundment fees required by
§ 23-14 of this chapter.
B. At the expiration of the five-day period mentioned in Subsection A of
this section, any dog or cat not so claimed by its owner shall be
disposed of.
§ 23-32 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 23-32
C:120
Chapter 34
BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Comprehensive permits — See Ch. 63.
Departments — See Ch. 78.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 159.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Local boards of appeal — See R.I.G.L.
§ 23-27.3-127.0 et seq.
Board of tenants' affairs — See R.I.G.L.
§ 45-25-18.2 et seq.
Land Development and Subdivision Review
Enabling Act — See R.I.G.L. § 45-23-25 et seq.
Town authorities — See R.I.G.L. § 45-26-7.
§ 23-32 CHARTER § 23-32
C:121

ARTICLE I
(Reserved)25
§ 34-1. through § 34-3. (Reserved)
25.Editor’s Note: Former Article I, Building Code Board of Appeals, adopted 8-13-1991 by
Ord. No. 568 (Secs. 4-16 to 4-18 of the 1993 Code), as amended, which immediately
followed, was repealed 4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 850.
§ 34-1 CHARTER § 34-1
C:123

ARTICLE II
Cove Management Commission
[Adopted 6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 595 as Secs. 7-36 to 7-40 of the
1993 Code; amended in its entirety 2-9-2009 by Ord. No. 799]
§ 34-4. Establishment; purpose. [Amended 3-14-2016 by Ord. No.
849]
The Cove Management Commission is hereby established in the Town of
East Greenwich to recommend for adoption by the Town Council policies
and regulations that apply to the use and management of the tidal waters
adjacent to the Town known as "East Greenwich Cove." The Town further
recognizes that it has a responsibility to promote the health, safety and
welfare of all who use the cove and to preserve this important natural
resource for the future.
§ 34-5. Responsibilities.
It shall be the responsibility of the Cove Management Commission to:
§ 34-6. Authority.
The Cove Management Commission shall have the power to:
A. Develop regulations for boating safety, use of the cove, moorings,
permits and fees.
B. Identify, mark and work to maintain accessibility to public rights-of-way
in conjunction with the policies of the Coastal Resources Management
Council.
C. Establish the necessary procedures to implement decisions.
D. Promote and coordinate activities which encourage improvement to the
cove.
E. Provide comments and recommendations to the Planning Department,
Planning Board, Zoning Board of Review, Town Council or other entity
on all public and private development proposals and any permit
notifications from state agencies for activities in the area east of the
Amtrak rail line.26
A. Recommend regulations for the speed, management and control of all
vessels on the public waters within the confines of East Greenwich
Cove.
B. Recommend regulations for the number, size, type, location, use and
maintenance of all anchorages, moorages and ramps within the waters
or cove of the Town.
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 34-4 CHARTER § 34-6
C:125
§ 34-7. Availability.
The Cove Management Commission shall be available to the Town
administration and other boards and commissions for consultation and
advice.
§ 34-8. Membership; meeting procedure.
C. Recommend regulations for minimum mooring specifications,
inspection of moorings, assignation and removal of moorings and fees
and collection of fees for mooring use.
D. Recommend a job description for the position of Harbormaster.
E. Designate upon a map of the public waters within the Town the places
where permanent or temporary moorings, anchorages and boat ramps
may be maintained.
F. Recommend regulations for regattas, races, marine parades,
tournaments and exhibitions.
G. Recommend regulations for waterskiing, skin diving and scuba diving
in East Greenwich Cove.
H. Recommend regulations for houseboats that are not self-propelled and
for the removal of wrecks or derelict or abandoned boats or docks.
A. The Cove Management Commission shall be comprised of seven
members who are qualified electors of the Town.
B. The Commission shall be appointed by the Town Council, each member
to serve for a term of three years.
C. A Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and Secretary shall be elected by the
members of this Commission; the Commission shall adopt bylaws and
any rules of procedure deemed necessary for its own governance.
D. No member of the Commission shall pass on any matter in which he
may have a conflict of interest.
E. The Commission shall meet at the request of the Chairperson. All
meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public.
F. The Commission shall keep a record of its proceedings and actions,
which shall be on file and open to public inspection at the office of the
Town Clerk.
G. A majority of the members of the Cove Management Commission shall
constitute a quorum. The concurring vote of a simple majority of
members present and eligible to vote is required to pass on any issue.
H. There may be one nonvoting, ex officio member from the Warwick
Harbor Committee.
§ 34-6 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 34-8
C:126
ARTICLE III
Juvenile Hearing Board
[Adopted 6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 595 as Secs. 2-151 to 2-156 of the
1993 Code]
§ 34-9. Establishment.
There is hereby established within the Town a Juvenile Hearing Board with
the powers set forth in this article for the purpose of hearing all cases
referred to such Board by the Chief of Police of the Town with respect to
persons resident in the Town under the age of 18 who are charged with
violating the criminal laws of the state or the Town.
§ 34-10. Referral.
§ 34-11. Composition; terms; compensation. [Amended 7-26-2004
by Ord. No. 747]
The membership of the Juvenile Hearing Board shall consist of five persons
and two alternates over the age of 18 years, to be appointed by the Town
Council, all of whom shall have been resident for at least three years within
the Town. The Town Council shall appoint one member whose term shall
expire on December 1, 1981, and thereafter, until his successor is appointed
A. No person who is a resident of the Town and under the age of 18 shall
be referred to the Family Court for commission of a juvenile offense
without having first been offered the opportunity to have his case heard
before the Juvenile Hearing Board established herein, if the offense is
one which, if committed by an adult, would be a misdemeanor;
provided, however, that this requirement shall not apply in the case of
any person:
(1) Charged with the crime of assault or battery;
(2) Who shall have been twice previously referred to the Juvenile
Hearing Board or have been once previously referred and refused
or failed to abide by the sanctions imposed or make the restitution
recommended; and/or
(3) Who at the time of commission of such juvenile offense shall be
within the custody and control of the Family Court.
B. The Chief of Police may offer referral to the Juvenile Hearing Board to
any other juvenile offender where, in the opinion of the Chief of Police,
such referral would be beneficial to the juvenile concerned and the
community at large. No referral to the Juvenile Hearing Board shall be
made by the Chief of Police until such person, together with his legal
guardians, shall have, in writing, waived such person's right to a
hearing in the Family Court with respect to the offense charged, shall
have agreed to guilt, and shall have agreed to abide by the decision of
the Juvenile Hearing Board.
§ 34-9 CHARTER § 34-11
C:127
and qualified; two members whose terms shall expire on December 1,
1982, and thereafter until their successors are appointed and qualified; two
members whose terms shall expire on December 1, 1983, and thereafter
until their successors are appointed and qualified. The two alternates shall
be appointed for one-year terms. During the month of November 1980, and
annually thereafter, the Town Council shall appoint a member or members
to succeed the member or members whose terms will then next expire, to
serve for a term of three years, commencing on December 1, and thereafter
until their successors are appointed and qualified. In the event of a vacancy
occurring in the office of a member by death, resignation or otherwise, such
vacancy shall be filled in like manner as the original appointment, but only
for the remainder of the term of the former member. No member of the
Juvenile Hearing Board shall be entitled to receive any compensation by
reason of his service on the Board.
§ 34-12. Duties.
The Juvenile Hearing Board shall hear all cases referred to it by the Chief
of Police and shall recommend sanctions, other than incarceration, and
shall direct restitution for any injuries resulting from the commission of
such offense. In those cases in which the Board shall order restitution, it
shall attempt to assist the juvenile offender and his parents in providing a
means whereby the offender may make such restitution, including, without
limiting the generality of the foregoing, attempting to provide, with the
agreement of the Town Manager or the Superintendent of Schools, suitable
employment by the Town. In any such proceeding the Juvenile Hearing
Board, prior to imposing sanctions, shall request the juvenile offender and
his parents to agree to the sanctions imposed and the amount of restitution
and manner of making the restitution. In ordering restitution, the Juvenile
Hearing Board shall take into account the juvenile offender's ability to pay,
and the amount of actual damage caused as a result of the commission of
such offense.
§ 34-13. Meetings.
The Juvenile Hearing Board shall meet not less than once each month. It
shall give notice of the matters to be heard before it to the Chief of Police,
the juvenile officer, and the juvenile offender and his parents, not less than
seven days prior to the date of the hearing. Any juvenile offender shall be
entitled to be represented by counsel and present evidence in his behalf.
A majority of the members of the Juvenile Hearing Board shall constitute a
quorum, and its proceedings shall be closed to the public, except that the
Juvenile Hearing Board may, with the consent of such juvenile and his legal
guardians, transact its business in public. The Juvenile Hearing Board shall
elect one from its members as its Chairman and one as its Vice Chairman.
In the absence of the Chairman, the Vice Chairman shall be the presiding
officer. A majority of the members present shall be required to take any
action. The Juvenile Hearing Board shall have the power from time to time
to draft rules governing its proceedings or to amend or repeal any rules
theretofore adopted.
§ 34-11 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 34-14
C:128
§ 34-14. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all juveniles alleged to have committed an offense
after the date of the enactment of the ordinance from which this article
derives.
§ 34-14 CHARTER § 34-14
C:129

ARTICLE IV
Planning Board
[Adopted 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 677 (Sec. 2-196 of the 1993 Code)]
§ 34-15. Planning Board.27
For the purpose of promoting the health, safety and morals and general
welfare of the citizens of the Town and in accordance with the provisions
of R.I.G.L. § 45-23-25 et seq., the power and authority is hereby granted
to the Planning Board of the Town to adopt, modify and amend rules and
regulations governing and restricting the platting or other subdivision land
within the Town and to control the subdivision of such land pursuant to such
rules and regulations.28
27.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
28.Editor's Note: See Ch. A263, Development and Subdivision Review Regulations.
§ 34-15 CHARTER § 34-15
C:131

ARTICLE V
Finance Advisory Board
[Adopted 10-24-2000 by Ord. No. 701; 4-9-2001 by Ord. No. 711;
6-10-2003 by Ord. No. 734 (Secs. 2-131 to 2-133 of the 1993 Code)]
§ 34-16. Purpose.
It is the intent of the Town to establish a finance board to advise the Town
Council and the Town Manager on finance matters for which assistance is
requested.
§ 34-17. Composition; terms; compensation.
There shall be a Finance Advisory Board consisting of five members to be
appointed by the Town Council. Appointments shall be for three-year terms.
At the time of readoption of this section, one member shall be appointed
for a term of three years and two members shall be appointed for a term
of two years; all terms to expire March 31 of the appropriate year. Said
Board members shall continue to hold their respective offices until their
successors are qualified. Members of said Finance Advisory Board shall
serve without pay. The Town Manager shall be an ex officio nonvoting
member of the Board.
§ 34-18. Duties.
The duties of the Finance Board shall be limited to advising the Town
Council and/or Town Manager on issues for which an opinion has been
requested, such as:
A. Issues involving Town audits and insurance.
B. Budgetary policy representing the public interest in keeping the Town
fiscally sound.
C. Make any inquiry which it may consider necessary concerning any
request forwarded to it and recommend with respect thereto.
§ 34-16 CHARTER § 34-18
C:133

ARTICLE VI
East Greenwich Board of Tenants' Affairs
[Adopted 3-12-2001 by Ord. No. 708 (Secs. 2-81 to 2-87 of the 1993
Code)]
§ 34-19. Establishment.
In accordance with R.I.G.L. §§ 45-25-18.2 and 45-26-7, there is hereby
created the East Greenwich Board of Tenants' Affairs.
§ 34-20. Composition; terms.
§ 34-21. Organization.
The Board shall be organized initially by the members appointed by the
Town Council. Elections of tenant members shall be completed and the first
organizational meeting held within 90 days after passage of this article. The
Board shall meet thereafter not less than once each month and at such other
times as the demands of business require. The Board shall adopt its own
rules of procedure, shall keep a record of its proceedings, and shall comply
with R.I.G.L. § 42-46-1 et seq. A majority of the members shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of business. Clerical and secretarial staff shall
be supplied by the Town Housing Authority.
§ 34-22. Compensation.
The Town shall pay compensation to the members of the Board, which shall
be a reasonable per-diem allowance as determined by the Town Council
for each day that the Board is in session. Sums paid the representatives
from the housing projects shall not be counted as income for purposes of
determining continuing eligibility for occupancy.
A. The Board shall consist of eight persons. One-half of the members shall
be elected from among the tenants occupying housing projects. Each
housing project shall elect two representatives. The remaining
members of the Board shall be appointed by the Town Council from
residents of the neighborhoods in which the projects are located. The
members of the Town Council and the senator and representative
representing the housing project shall be notified of and may attend all
Board meetings.
B. The terms of all members shall be for two years, and no person shall
serve more than two consecutive terms. All those members first
appointed by the Town Council shall serve terms of one year, and all
those members first elected shall serve terms of two years. Thereafter,
the term of office for all members, whether appointed or elected, shall
be two years; provided, however, that should an elected member cease
to be a resident of the housing project or should a neighborhood
member cease to reside in the neighborhood, that member shall be
deemed to have vacated his or her seat.
§ 34-19 CHARTER § 34-23
C:135
§ 34-23. Responsibilities; determinations; power and veto.
§ 34-24. Hearings and review.
A. The Board shall:
(1) Advise the Housing Authority on matters concerning the general
welfare of the tenants of housing projects and facilities.
(2) Review and veto rules of the Housing Authority promulgated in
accord with R.I.G.L. § 45-25-18.1 prior to publication.
(3) Meet on a regular basis with available federal, state and local
government officials or their representatives to propose and
develop specific legislation designed to alleviate the problems of
those tenants living on fixed or limited incomes, and to transmit all
proposals to the appropriate government representatives for
consideration.
B. Final determinations reached on matters heard by way of review shall
be binding on the Housing Authority.
C. The power of review and veto shall be exercised by a two-thirds
majority of those present and voting.
A. The tenant or applicant affected shall have a right to a hearing and
review by the Board where a determination is made by the project
management or by the Housing Authority:
(1) That an applicant shall be denied admission to public housing;
(2) That a tenant's right of use and occupation shall thereafter be
terminated; or
(3) That any obligation of a tenant shall be increased or otherwise
altered.
B. The tenant or applicant shall be given written notice of any
determination affecting his or her status, and the reasons therefor, and
notice of his or her right to a hearing, and within seven days of delivery
of the notice, the tenant or occupant may petition the Board, in writing,
for a hearing and review. Upon receiving that petition, the Board shall
set a date for the hearing and shall inform the tenant or applicant of the
date, time and place of the hearing.
C. If the tenant or applicant fails to petition for a hearing within seven
days, he or she will be held to have waived his or her right to the
hearing, but he or she will not be held to have waived his or her right to
contest the propriety of the Housing Authority's action in any later
court proceeding.
D. The tenant or applicant shall be entitled to a fair hearing before the
Board and shall have the right to be represented by counsel.
§ 34-23 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 34-25
C:136
§ 34-25. Action to regain possession of premises.
If a decision to terminate a right of use and occupation is upheld by
the Board upon review, an action to regain possession of the premises
shall not be brought thereafter until the right of use and occupation has
been terminated by lawful notice. If an action to regain possession of the
premises is brought by the Housing Authority, the tenant shall have a right
to a trial de novo on the issue of whether there was just cause to terminate
the tenant's right of use and occupancy.
§ 34-25 CHARTER § 34-25
C:137

ARTICLE VII
Emergency Management Agency
[Adopted 8-27-2001 by Ord. No. 713 (Secs. 2-111 to 2-112 of the
1993 Code)]
§ 34-26. Organization.
Subject to the approval of the Town Council, the Town Manager shall
be responsible for all emergency management activities, including the
assignment of emergency management functions to Town officials and
agencies and the preparation of appropriate plans.
§ 34-27. Director.
The Emergency Management Director and a Deputy Director will
coordinate and administer emergency management matters as set forth in
federal, state and local laws, plans and ordinances.
§ 34-26 CHARTER § 34-27
C:139

ARTICLE VIII
Affordable Housing Commission
[Adopted 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 780]
§ 34-28. Collection and deposit of fees.
§ 34-29. Establishment; composition; compensation; officers;
meetings. [Amended 3-9-2009 by Ord. No. 802]
A. The Town Council shall adopt, after a public hearing, the methodology
for the determination of the fee in lieu of construction to be charged
under this article.
B. Fee collection. The Finance Director shall receive and collect all fees
and shall deposit and maintain such fees dedicated to the development
and preservation of affordable housing in a separate and segregated
account known as the "Affordable Housing Trust Fund," which shall be
administered and distributed as provided herein. Any funds that remain
unused or unallocated in such fund at the end of the Town's fiscal year
(including interest, other earned income, or repayment on loans) shall
remain deposited in and for the use of the Affordable Housing
Commission in the next fiscal year.
A. Establishment. There shall be and is hereby established a commission
consisting of five members to be known as the "Affordable Housing
Commission."
B. Appointment. The members of the Affordable Housing Commission
shall be appointed by the Town Council.
C. Qualifications. Each member of the Affordable Housing Commission
shall be a resident and elector of the Town of East Greenwich and shall
not be delinquent on any tax obligation to the Town of East Greenwich.
Each member of the Affordable Housing Commission shall be chosen
for his or her demonstrated interest in preserving and/or promoting the
development of affordable housing and the stabilization of
neighborhoods in the Town of East Greenwich.
D. Term. Members shall be appointed for terms of three years. Initial
appointments shall be made so as to stagger term expirations. Two
members shall be appointed for three years, two members shall be
appointed for two years, and one member shall be appointed for one
year.
E. Compensation. Members of the Affordable Housing Commission shall
serve without compensation.
F. Quorum. For the purpose of conducting any official business, three
members of the Affordable Housing Commission shall constitute a
quorum.
§ 34-28 CHARTER § 34-29
C:141
§ 34-30. Operation; powers and duties.
G. Election of officers. The members of the Affordable Housing
Commission shall elect, by a majority vote of the total members of the
Affordable Housing Commission, officers consisting of a Chair, Vice
Chair and Secretary.
H. Compliance with Open Meetings Law.29 All meetings of the Affordable
Housing Commission shall be held and conducted in accordance with
the Open Meetings Law. All records of the Commission shall be held and
be subject to public disclosure in accordance with the law.
A. The Town Manager or designee shall be responsible for the carrying out
of the functions, duties and purposes of the Affordable Housing
Commission and shall perform these and such additional duties as
assigned by the Town Council.
B. Budget. The budget of the Commission shall be approved by the Town
Council and subject to all Town policies and procedures. [Amended
6-12-2017 by Ord. No. 871]
C. Annual report. The Commission shall prepare an annual report at the
conclusion of the Town's fiscal year. The report shall set forth the state
of affordable housing in the Town, describing the activities and
functions of the Affordable Housing Commission, summarizing the
developments, programs and services funded by the Affordable
Housing Commission, and setting forth the expenditures made by the
Affordable Housing Commission from the Affordable Housing Trust
Fund.
D. Powers and duties.
(1) Study and recommendations. The Affordable Housing Commission
shall make (or seek from other sources) an ongoing study of the
status and quality of affordable housing in the Town of East
Greenwich and shall make annual recommendations regarding
actions to be taken by the Town of East Greenwich to improve the
quantity and quality of affordable housing in the Town of East
Greenwich.
(2) Programs. The Affordable Housing Commission shall establish and
provide funding for a development loan program and a grant
program. In addition, the Commission is authorized to create,
sponsor, fund and promote such other and further programs and
services designed to develop and preserve affordable housing in
the Town of East Greenwich, including, but not limited to,
education, consulting and technical support.
(a) Loan programs.
29.Editor's Note: See R.I.G.L. § 42-46-1 et seq.
§ 34-29 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 34-30
C:142
[1] The Commission is authorized to make low-interest and
no-interest loans to housing developers for the
rehabilitation, modification, construction and preservation
of affordable housing in the Town of East Greenwich,
provided that all loans made hereunder shall be subject to
land use restriction agreements that the units will be used
for affordable housing for their entire useful economic life,
and all loans for new construction shall incorporate
universal design standards to provide affordable housing
for the disabled. The loan proceeds shall be disbursed by
the Finance Director as approved by the Town Council
with a recommendation by the Affordable Housing
Commission. Loans shall be for approved eligible
construction costs actually incurred and not for
administrative project costs such as developer overhead,
development fees, or other expenses.
[2] Notwithstanding any ordinance to the contrary,
construction of any new affordable housing units under
this article shall be exempt from the Town's impact fee.
(b) Grant programs. The Affordable Housing Commission is
authorized to make forgivable loans and grants to housing
developers, property owners and tenants to promote the
development and preservation of affordable housing in the
Town of East Greenwich, provided that all grants made
hereunder shall be administered to promote neighborhood
stabilization and shall contain, where appropriate, conditions
such as reasonable restrictions on and provisions for the
oversight of tenants and landlords. Projects eligible for grants
include, but are not limited to, projects such as modifications
to accommodate people with disabilities; lead-based paint
abatement; emergency home repair assistance; temporary
emergency services to prevent homelessness (including
mortgage assistance, rent assistance, and utility assistance);
emergency and transitional housing; security deposit, utility
deposit, down payment and closing costs assistance; and
correction of building or fire code deficiencies. Each project
eligible for funding shall be sponsored by a housing or
neighborhood organization operating in the immediate project
area. The grant proceeds shall be disbursed by the Finance
Director as approved by the Town Council with a
recommendation by the Affordable Housing Commission.
Grants shall be approved for actual construction costs actually
incurred and not for administrative project costs such as
development overhead, development fees or other expenses.
(c) Construction program. The Affordable Housing Commission is
authorized to acquire property for the purpose of construction
§ 34-30 CHARTER § 34-30
C:143
or conversion to affordable units which are managed or sold by
the Affordable Housing Commission and the Town Council.
E. Support services. All loans and grants made hereunder shall include
provisions for support services where appropriate to promote the
development and preservation of affordable and accessible housing in
the Town of East Greenwich.
F. Review standards. For the purposes of carrying out the provisions of
this article, the Affordable Housing Commission shall have the authority
to establish written standards, rules and regulations for funds from the
Affordable Housing Trust Fund that shall be made to and for the benefit
of households earning no more than 80% of the area's median income.
G. Funding restrictions and preferences.
(1) Health and safety. The recipient of any expenditure of funds from
the Affordable Housing Trust Fund shall comply with all applicable
federal, state and local laws relating to health and safety, including,
but not limited to, housing codes, occupation safety codes, product
codes and standards, and consumer safety.
(2) Antidiscrimination. The recipient of any expenditure of funds from
the Affordable Housing Trust Fund shall comply with all applicable
federal, state and local laws relating to discrimination on the basis
of race, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, age or other
prohibited classifications. The Affordable Housing Commission may
give preference to funding projects that require the use of 30% or
greater participation of minority business enterprises or
disadvantaged business enterprises or that promote the
employment opportunities of persons with low income or persons
with disabilities.
(3) Environmental impact. The recipient of any expenditure of any
funds from the Affordable Housing Trust Fund shall comply with all
applicable federal, state and local laws relating to the environment.
The Affordable Housing Commission may give preference to
funding projects that exceed existing environmental requirements
and standards or that incorporate energy-efficient designs and
materials.
§ 34-30 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 34-30
C:144
ARTICLE IX
Historic Cemetery Advisory Commission
[Adopted 9-9-2013 by Ord. No. 829; amended in its entirety
12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 831]
§ 34-31. Establishment.
There shall be and is hereby established a committee consisting of five
members to be known as the "East Greenwich Historic Cemetery Advisory
Commission."
§ 34-32. Purpose.
The purpose of the Historic Cemetery Advisory Commission shall be as
follows: The Commission shall maintain an inventory of historical
cemeteries within the Town; the Commission shall work to increase
awareness among affected property owners and the general public about
the importance of such sites; the Commission may formulate, develop and
recommend plans and programs to restore, rehabilitate and maintain
historical cemeteries; the Commission may recommend to the Town Council
any actions, including ordinance amendments, as may be necessary to
implement such plans and programs; the Commission shall investigate
sources of funds to carry out its plans and programs, including fund-raising,
grants, Town Council appropriations, and/or sponsorships.
§ 34-33. Membership.
The membership shall be comprised of five members who are qualified
electors of the Town of East Greenwich. Such members shall be appointed
by the Town Council from among a group of actively interested citizens.
Membership terms shall be staggered. Initially, the Council shall appoint
one member for a one-year term, two members for a two-year term, and
two members for a three-year term. Thereafter, each term shall be for three
years with appropriate term limits applying.
§ 34-34. Procedures.
A. The Commission shall annually elect a Chairperson and a Vice Chair
from among the membership.
B. The Commission may adopt rules of procedure as it deems necessary
for its own governance.
C. Meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public, and the
Commission will meet at the request of the Chairperson as often as it
sees fit.
D. The Commission shall keep a record of its proceedings and actions,
which shall be on file and open to public inspection at the Town Hall.
§ 34-31 CHARTER § 34-34
C:145
E. A simple majority of members of the Commission shall constitute a
quorum, and the concurring vote of a simple majority of those members
present and eligible to vote at a meeting shall be required to pass on
any issue.
§ 34-34 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 34-34
C:146
ARTICLE X
IT Governance Council
[Adopted 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 866]
§ 34-35. Establishment.
The Town of East Greenwich recognizes that technology capabilities must
remain contemporary, flexible, scalable, secure, environmentally conscious,
and responsive to new goals and dynamically evolving service and
operational requirements. The IT Governance Council (ITGC) is hereby
established in the Town of East Greenwich consisting of members appointed
by the Town Council.
Structure
§ 34-36. Purpose.
The ITGC establishes IT strategy, adopts IT policies and standards, and
approves processes and criteria for prioritization of IT programs. The ITGC
is not established to act as a managing body for the IT Department(s)
of the Town (Municipal and School). ITGC is empowered to develop and
maintain its own operating processes, procedures, schedule, committees
and subcommittees within the scope as defined in the Charter.
§ 34-37. Responsibilities.
§ 34-35 CHARTER § 34-37
C:147
A. ITGC is responsible to the Town Council and shall provide a full report
of activities and accomplishments at least quarterly (more often if
necessary); preferably before budget planning for the next fiscal year
begins.
B. The ITGC shall assist in determining priorities for investment in
technology based on government service demands and other factors,
including resource availability and opportunities.
C. The ITGC shall establish priorities:
(1) Mandated requirements.
(2) Leveraging of prior investments in technology.
(3) Enhancing security.
(4) Improving service quality and efficiency.
(5) Ensuring a current and supportable technology infrastructure.
D. The ITGC shall adopt fundamental principles or objectives (review and
update as needed) and promulgate these across all Town departments
and the School District.
E. The ITGC sponsors the implementation and maintenance of the Town IT
Strategic Plan.
(1) The Town IT Strategic Plan will focus on the technology supporting
the specific business process requirements supporting all Town
departments, including, but not limited to, public safety, facilities
management, public works and other local government activities. It
is the responsibility of the individual departments to define and
manage appropriate business processes supporting their primary
delivery of service.
(2) The Town IT Strategic Plan will focus on the technology supporting
the specific educational goals and of objectives for the East
Greenwich School District Technology Plan. It is the responsibility
of the School District to define outcomes required to support the
educational goals and objectives of the District. The Town IT
Strategic Plan will incorporate these outcomes.
F. Budget responsibilities.
(1) The ITGC shall ensure the cost-effective delivery and performance
of information technology projects and services and their
alignment to the business plan.
(2) The ITGC shall establish and review business case justification for
all requested capital initiatives and IT operational expenditures
and recommend funding to the Town Manager and Superintendent
before any expenditure is made.
§ 34-37 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 34-37
C:148
§ 34-38. Membership.
§ 34-39. Procedures.
G. The ITGC shall establish and periodically review standards, policies and
procedures for the areas of project management, systems development,
service delivery, personnel management and technical architecture.
H. The ITGC shall establish and periodically review guidelines and
standards for the protection of information from unauthorized access
and ensure appropriate levels of confidentiality for citizens, businesses
and employees.
A. The ITGC shall be comprised of up to 13 members with terms of two
years.
B. Members shall include:
(1) Two Town Council representatives.
(2) Two School Committee representatives.
(3) Town Manager.
(4) School Department Superintendent.
(5) Town IT Director.
(6) School IT Director.
(7) Police or Fire Chief (Public Safety), at the discretion of the Town
Manager.
(8) School Principal (Elementary, Middle School or High School), at the
discretion of the School Superintendent.
(9) Town department head, at the discretion of the Town Manager.
(10) Two at-large members; one appointed by the Town Council
President and one appointed by the School Committee Chair.
A. The ITGC will be chaired by the Town Manager, and a Vice Chairperson
will be elected from among the membership.
B. The ITGC will establish an annual meeting schedule, and all meetings
shall be open to the public.
C. The ITGC shall keep a record of its proceedings and actions, which shall
be on file and open to the public.
D. A majority of the members of the ITGC shall constitute a quorum. The
concurring vote of a simple majority of members present and eligible to
vote is required to pass on any issue.
§ 34-37 CHARTER § 34-39
C:149
Chapter 38
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Building Code Board of Appeals — See Ch. 34,
Art. I.
Fees — See Ch. 93.
Stormwater pollution prevention — See Ch.
207.
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
State Building Code — See R.I.G.L.
§ 23-27.3-100.0 et seq.
§ 38-1. Code adopted.
The Building Code of the Town shall be the Rhode Island State Building
Code, as adopted and as amended from time to time.
§ 38-2. Fire limits established. [Amended 7-14-1992 by Ord. No.
576; 2-22-2000 by Ord. No. 685]
A. The fire limits in the Town are hereby established as being bounded and
described as follows:
(1) Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of Division Street
with Peirce Street and thence running easterly along Division
Street to its intersection with Marlborough Street; thence running
southerly along Marlborough Street to its intersection with Long
Street; thence running easterly along Long Street to the New York,
New Haven and Hartford Railroad right-of-way; thence running
southerly along the west side of the said right-of-way to London
Street; thence running westerly along London Street to its
intersection with Marlborough Street; thence running southerly
along Marlborough Street to its intersection with Rocky Hollow
Road; thence running westerly along Rocky Hollow Road to its
intersection with Upland Avenue; thence running southerly along
Upland Avenue and the prolongation of Upland Avenue to its
intersection with Greenwich Boulevard; thence continuing
southerly along Greenwich Boulevard and westerly along
Greenwich Boulevard to its intersection with Post Road; thence
running southerly along Post Road to its intersection with Cedar
Avenue; thence running westerly along Cedar Avenue to a point
formed by the intersection of the prolongation of Second Street;
thence running northerly along the prolongation of Second Street
and Second Street itself to its intersection with First Avenue;
§ 34-39 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 38-2
C:150
§ 38-3. Public property exempted.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to property owned by the
Town, the state or the United States.
§ 38-4. Schedule of permit fees. [Amended 12-17-2007 by Ord. No.
786.2; 6-13-2016 by Ord. No. 85630; 7-23-2018 by Ord. No. 877]
thence running westerly along First Avenue to its intersection with
Cliff Street; thence running northerly along Cliff Street to its
intersection with Friendship Street; thence running westerly along
Friendship Street to its intersection with William Street; thence
running northerly along William Street and the prolongation of
William Street to its intersection with Somerset Street; thence
running easterly along Somerset Street to its intersection with
Liberty Street; thence running northerly along Liberty Street to
its intersection with Peirce Street; thence running northerly along
Peirce Street to its intersection with Division Street and the point
of beginning; for the purpose of this description the lines referred
to above along the roads, streets and avenues shall be the
respective center lines.
B. In addition to the foregoing, all properties in the Town located easterly
of the above-described fire district and zoned Commercial Downtown -
CD-1 and CD-2 or M/LIO shall be included within and constitute a part
of the fire district.
C. Also, the fire limits shall contain all of the land laid out and delineated
as Lot Nos. 1 and 115 on Assessor's Plat 6 of the Tax Assessor's records
as appears of record on December 31, 1967.
D. Also, in addition to the foregoing, all properties in the Town zoned or
used for commercial or industrial purposes shall be included within and
constitute a part of the fire district in which only structures of Type 1, 2
or 3 construction shall be erected or constructed.
A. Building permit fee schedule.
(1) Fee schedule: determined by the State of Rhode Island.
B. Electrical, plumbing and mechanical permit fee schedule.
(1) Fee schedule: determined by the State of Rhode Island.
(2) Late filing fee: $275 or 50% of the required permit fee, whichever is
greater.
(3) Reinspection fee: $55.
(4) CE/ADA state fee not included.
30.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided an effective date of 7-1-2016.
§ 38-2 CHARTER § 38-5
C:151
§ 38-5. Site plans.
Any person seeking a building permit shall first submit a site plan with the
following information:
§ 38-6. Waiver for buildings in historic district or for historic
structures. [Added 2-9-1995 by Ord. No. 620; amended 3-14-1996 by
Ord. No. 629; 4-22-1997 by Ord. No. 646; 10-12-1999 by Ord. No.
680]
A. Location of the main structure, relative to all property lines.
B. Location of all accessory structures relative to all property lines and
main structure.
C. Maximum groundwater elevation and/or depth, as reported on the
individual sewage disposal system for the lot.
D. Maximum depth and elevation of the bottom of the foundation.
E. Location of any wetland as designated in accordance with the General
Laws.
F. Location of a fixed convenient bench mark on the property.
G. The elevation of the road in front of the proposed dwelling unit.
H. A site grading plan if the proposed first floor is lower than the elevation
of the public highway.
I. A site grading plan if the driveway, at any point, is lower than the street
elevation.
J. A site grading plan if the garage floor elevation is lower than the street
elevation.
A. Definitions. As used in this section unless the context otherwise
indicates:
BUILDING OFFICIAL — The Building Official of the Town of East
Greenwich.
BUILDING PERMIT FEE — The fee imposed by § 38-4 of this chapter or
any amendment thereto and shall include any fee for signs.
HISTORIC DISTRICT or HISTORIC STRUCTURE — As described and
determined in Article XI (Historic Districts) of Chapter 260, Zoning, of
the Code of the Town of East Greenwich and all amendments thereto.
B. Waiver of building permit fee. The Building Official shall waive the
building, plumbing, mechanical and electrical permit fees for
reconstruction, replacement, renovation or restoration to existing
structures within the Historic Districts or to existing historic structures
within the Town of East Greenwich. However, the requirement for a
building permit or other required permit, adherence to the State
§ 38-5 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 38-6
C:152
§ 38-7. Violations and penalties.32
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, of the Code of the Town of East Greenwich.
Chapter 43
BURIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Town regulation of burial grounds — See
R.I.G.L. § 23-18-10.
§ 43-1. Burials prohibited in described area.
Pursuant to R.I.G.L. § 23-18-10, further burials are hereby prohibited in that
portion of the following described premises on the southeasterly side of Post
Road lying within the Town and designated in the tax records of the Town
as Lot No. 29 on Assessor's Plot No. 11:
Building Code and any review required under Chapter 260, Article XI
(Historic Districts), are not waived. This section shall not be applicable
to other types of construction within the Historic Districts. No building
permit fee shall be waived unless the application for same is made
following the passage of this section. Waiver of fees under this section
shall not exceed $750 per property.31
C. Zoning compliance. The provisions of this section shall not apply in any
case where there has not been compliance with Chapter 260, Zoning, of
the Code of the Town of East Greenwich.
A. Beginning at a point in the southeasterly line of said Post Road at the
southwesterly corner of land now or lately of Joseph and Margaret
Pezzuco; thence running southeasterly at an angle of 86º33'30" with the
said southeasterly line of Post Road interior to the parcel hereby
conveyed, bounding northeasterly on said Pezzuco land 538.80 feet to
an angle; thence turning an interior angle of 235º50' and running
northeasterly bounding northwesterly still on said Pezzuco land 195.60
feet to a corner; thence turning an interior angle of 217º54'30" and
running still northeasterly bounding northwesterly on said Pezzuco
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 38-6 CHARTER § 43-1
C:153
§ 43-2. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, of the Code of the Town of East Greenwich.
Chapter 47
BURNING, OPEN
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Restrictions on open air fires — See R.I.G.L.
§ 2-12-6.
Burning in open fires — See R.I.G.L.
§ 23-23-18.
87.14 feet to land now or lately of Martin R. Johnson; thence turning an
interior angle of 107º25'30" and running easterly bounding northerly
on said Johnson land to land of the New York, New Haven and Hartford
Railroad Company; thence turning and running southerly bounding
easterly on said railroad company land 610 feet to land of the City
of Warwick; thence turning and running northwesterly bounding
southwesterly on said City of Warwick land to the middle of a brook
called "Nelson Brook"; thence running southerly in the middle of said
brook to a point in range in line with the northerly line of land of the
U.S. Government (Naval Water Supply); thence turning and running S
62º W 370 feet to land now or lately of Clemente Palazzo and wife;
thence turning and running N 8º20' E 580 feet, more or less, to the
northeasterly corner of said Palazzo land; thence turning and running
N 70º 35' W along the wall bounding southwesterly on said Palazzo land
260 feet; turning and running N 78º 1.0' W bounding still southwesterly
on said Palazzo land in part and in part on land of Mary Palazzo
93.88 feet to a corner of walls; thence turning and running S 72º
26' W bounding southeasterly on said Mary Palazzo land 171 feet to
a turn in a wall; thence turning and running N 34º 32' W along the
wall bounding southwesterly still on said Palazzo land 214.20 feet;
thence turning and running N 52º 58' W still bounding southwesterly
on said Palazzo land 84.10 feet; thence turning and running N 36º
41' W still bounding southwesterly on said Palazzo land in part and in
part on land lately of John Tessitore et al., 135 feet; thence continuing
northwesterly bounding southwesterly on land now or lately of Mary
Palazzo, life tenant, along the southwesterly line of a private road on
land hereby granted to the Post Road; thence running northeasterly
bounding northwesterly on Post Road to the point or place of beginning,
all distances given in the above description is to be taken as more or
less.
§ 43-1 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 43-2
C:154
§ 47-1. Outdoor fires prohibited.
Every person who shall kindle or maintain any outdoor fire or cause to be
kindled or maintained any outdoor fire in the Town shall be guilty of an
offense.
§ 47-2. Exceptions.
Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prevent:
§ 47-3. Issuance of permits.34
Each such permit shall describe the premises where the burning is to take
place, indicate the name and address of the permittee and the date of
expiration of the permit, which shall fall within a period not to exceed three
months from the date of issuance of such license. Such permits shall be
issued for land clearances in farming zones only, with the exception that
such permits may be issued for initial land clearances in all other zones.
§ 47-4. Violations and penalties.35
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, of the Code of the Town of East Greenwich.
Chapter 51
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Noise — See Ch. 152.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 170.
A. Cooking of food on barbecues, fireplaces or grills;
B. Fires authorized by the Fire Department for the purpose of training
firefighters and retarding the spread of fires; and
C. Burning of large quantities of cut wood or brush material resulting from
maintenance or clearance of land during daylight hours, provided that a
written permit for such burning has been issued by the Fire Chief
pursuant to § 47-3 below.33
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
34.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV).
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 43-2 CHARTER § 47-4
C:155

ARTICLE I
All-Night Businesses
[Adopted 6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 595 as Sec. 10-3 of the 1993 Code]
§ 51-1. License required.
To control the hours of business and operations and to protect the citizens
of the Town, no persons shall keep open or suffer to be kept open any store,
shop, restaurant or diner or other place of trade, entertainment or place
of business under his control in this Town after 1:00 a.m., nor shall any
persons open any such store, shop or other place specified in this section
before 4:00 a.m. without first having obtained a license for permission to
operate between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 4:00 a.m.
§ 51-2. Criteria for granting license.
A license to operate between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 4:00 a.m. may
be granted by the Town Council if, in its opinion, the health, safety and
well-being of the residents of the Town would not be adversely affected.
The Town Council shall consider the following in its determination to either
grant or deny the application to operate between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and
4:00 a.m.:
§ 51-3. Exception.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to prevent druggists
from opening their shops at any time for the purpose of selling medicines
for the use of the sick.
§ 51-4. Violations and penalties.36
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, of the Code of the Town of East Greenwich.
A. The location of the premises.
B. The type of business.
C. The size of the property.
D. The proposed hours of operation.
E. The security available during the hours of operation.
F. Demonstrated need on part of applicant.
36.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 51-1 CHARTER § 51-4
C:157
Chapter 55
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS
§ 55-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROJECT —
§ 55-2. Deadline for requests from Town agencies and officials.
Not later than November 1 of each year, any Town agency, official or
department having need for capital improvement projects as defined by
§55-1 shall submit requests for capital improvement projects to the Town
Manager.
§ 55-3. Procedure for submitting requests.
Annually, each department updates prior year capital project requests and
identifies new projects and/or funding needs, and submits their requests to
the Town Manager for consideration and incorporation into the CIP (Capital
Improvement Plan). The Town Manager in association with the Finance
Director shall prepare a proposed plan for submittal to the Town Council
based on their review and evaluation of each requested project with the
appropriate agency or department head.
A major, nonrecurring, tangible, fixed asset. Capital projects generally
include one or more of the following categories:
(1) Property acquisition or lease of land and/or buildings.
(2) Major improvements to an existing facility.
(3) New building construction.
(4) Major equipment and vehicles.
A.
Capital project costs may include related architectural and engineering
fees, site work and bond issuance costs.
B.
Facilities and infrastructure refer to all public facilities, including both
municipal and school, such as buildings, streets, bridges, wastewater
systems, parks and transfer station facilities.
C.
The estimated cost for a capital project must be over $10,000, and the
project must have an expected useful life greater than the life span of
any debt used to fund the project.
D.
§ 51-4 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 55-4
C:158
§ 55-4. Project priority.
In evaluating requests and recommending a capital improvement project,
the Town Manager shall establish a priority for all projects, based upon the
following criteria:
§ 55-5. Financial aspects.
The Town Manager with the support of the Finance Director shall review
all requests with respect to the financial resources of the Town and shall
prepare a schedule indicating the effects of the requested projects upon the
proposed annual budgets for the six-year capital plan. This schedule shall
include projected debt service costs, annual maintenance and operating
costs, increases in any service or user charge, a recommendation for any
new service charges, user fees, and increases in any existing licenses or
permits to support a proposed project request. The impact on the property
tax rate for the six years of the proposed plan shall also be projected.
§ 55-6. Presentation to Town Council.
No later than during the month of February of each year, the Town Manager
shall present to the Town Council a proposed six-year CIP (Capital
Improvement Plan). The Town Council shall publish a detailed draft CIP (
Capital Improvement Plan), as part of the overall annual Operating Budget
Program and make it available to the public as outlined in the Town Charter,
on or before May 1 as noted in the Charter Section C-33. The Town Council
shall adopt the annual Operating Budget Program, including the CIP
(Capital Improvement Plan), on or before June 10 as noted in the Charter
Section C-34.
Chapter 63
A. Projects address health and safety concerns;
B. Protection of public property;
C. Meet any federal or state mandates and/or legal obligations;
D. Secure any outside funding such as federal, state or private to reduce
the tax burden;
E. Preservation of the tax base while continuing to maintain
infrastructure/assets;
F. CIP (Capital Improvement Plan) should be based on available financial
resources and determine the impact on public health and safety should
a project be deferred;
G. The first year of the CIP’s (Capital Improvement Plan) pay-as-you-go
element is the capital budget portion of the Town’s general operating
budget, and, therefore, the balancing of overall need and affordability
becomes a major consideration.
§ 55-4 CHARTER § 55-6
C:159
COMPREHENSIVE PERMITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Affordable Housing Commission — See Ch.
34, Art. VIII.
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
Development and Subdivision Review
Regulations — See Ch. A263.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Comprehensive housing production and
rehabilitation — See R.I.G.L. § 42-128-8.1 et
seq.
Low- and moderate-income housing — See
R.I.G.L. § 45-53-1 et seq.
§ 63-1. Purpose.
§ 63-2. Local review board.
§ 63-3. Administration.
A. This chapter of the Code establishes procedures and standards for
receipt, processing and disposition of applications for comprehensive
permits for construction or rehabilitation of affordable housing.
B. Applications for comprehensive permits shall be made on forms and
attachments provided by the Town of East Greenwich and shall state
that at least 25% of the total number of dwelling units proposed will be
affordable as defined by R.I.G.L. § 42-128-8.1(d)(1).
A. The Planning Board of the Town of East Greenwich is designated as the
"local review board" to administer acceptance, evaluation and decisions
on comprehensive permits in accordance with R.I.G.L. § 45-53-3,
Subdivision (9).
B. The local review board has the same power to issue permits or
approvals as any local board or official who would otherwise act with
respect to the application, including, but not limited to, the power to
attach to the permit or approval conditions and requirements with
respect to height, site plan, size or shape, or building materials.
A. The Town Manager, as chief administrative officer of the Town, or his
designee shall be the administrative officer for applications for
comprehensive permits.
B. The administrative officer shall take or oversee the following actions for
each application for a comprehensive permit that is submitted:
(1) Receive and record applications for comprehensive permits for new
construction or rehabilitation of housing.
§ 55-6 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 63-3
C:160
§ 63-4. Content required of all applications.
The following is required for all applications.
(2) Coordinate with Town staff (Planning Director, Public Works
Director, Finance Director, Town Clerk, and others as appropriate)
in the review of all applications for comprehensive permits.
(3) Determine whether each application is complete, that it meets the
requirements of § 63-1B, and that it contains proposals, plans and
other information needed to review the application under this
section of the Code of the Town of East Greenwich.
(4) Issue a notice of completeness if the application is found to be
complete or a notice of rejection if the application is incomplete. A
notice of rejection shall specify the items in which the application is
not complete.
(5) Conduct a review of complete applications and determine whether
they comply with §§ 63-4 and 63-5 or § 63-6, as appropriate.
(6) Distribute copies of each complete application to the Technical
Review Committee and to all municipal officials and agencies
concerned, as determined by the scope and content of the
application. Specify a date by which all comments and questions on
the application must be returned.
(7) Present each application, all pertinent information thereon, and all
comments from entities that reviewed the application to the local
review board. Record the action of the local review board on each
application.
(8) Issue comprehensive permits for those applications approved or
approved with conditions by the local review board. Issue notices of
denial for those applications not approved by the local review
board.
(9) Issue a notice that a comprehensive permit has expired if
construction or rehabilitation under that permit is not initiated
within 12 months or completed within 60 months, unless the local
review board and the applicant agree on a longer period or a
phased development.
(10) File all notices and actions for each application listed in this
section.
C. The Town Solicitor shall be the legal counsel to the local review board
unless relieved of that responsibility by the Town Council.
A. A completed application form together with all attachments.
B. A letter of eligibility issued by the Rhode Island Housing and Mortgage
Finance Corporation or, in the case of projects funded by other state or
§ 63-3 CHARTER § 63-4
C:161
§ 63-5. Content required for applications for minor projects.
§ 63-6. Content required for applications for major projects.
federal agencies, an award letter indicating the subsidy or an
application in such form as may be prescribed for a municipal
government subsidy.
C. A written request by the applicant to build and/or rehabilitate
affordable housing under a comprehensive permit rather than to submit
separate applications to each official or agency involved.
D. A list of each provision of each ordinance and regulation from which
relief is sought. Specify the type or quantity of relief sought for each
provision.
E. Setting forth a proposed timetable for initiating and completing the
work proposed. If phasing of a project is requested, setting forth the
time period for each phase.
F. Provision of a sample land lease or deed restriction limiting the use of
affordable housing for a period of 30 to 99 years. If a financial sponsor
has a different period, use this period and specify the source of the
pertinent regulation.
G. Identification of the entity that will monitor the long-term affordability
of these dwelling units. State the name, address, telephone number,
and responsible person at the monitoring agency.
H. Provision of a financial pro-forma for the proposed development.
I. Payment of the application fee required by the Town Council for
comprehensive permit applications.
A. Definition. "Minor projects" are those involving only minor land
development or subdivision, administrative subdivision, construction of
a single building of not more than four dwelling units, or rehabilitation
of existing structures to contain not more than four dwelling units.
B. The following shall be submitted with the application for minor projects
as defined in Subsection A above:37
(1) All items in § 63-4.
(2) A completed Master Plan Checklist as set forth in § A263-17 of the
Land Development and Subdivision Review Regulations, including:
(a) Subsection (a), Items 1 through 12, 14, 17, 18 and 23.
(b) Subsection (b), Items 3 and 9.
37.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 63-4 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 63-6
C:162
§ 63-7. Procedure for review of applications.
A. Definition. "Major projects" involve a major land development or a
major subdivision, or any other feature not qualifying as a minor
project.
B. The following shall be submitted with the application for major projects
as defined in Subsection A above:38
(1) All items in § 63-4.
(2) A completed Master Plan Checklist as set forth in § A263-17 of the
Land Development and Subdivision Review Regulations, including
all items.
A. The applicant must request a preapplication conference with the
administrative officer, Technical Review Committee, and any other
parties as determined by the Town Manager.
(1) The purpose of the preapplication conference is to notify
appropriate officials and agencies of the intent to file an application
for a comprehensive permit.
(2) The applicant must submit a short description of the proposed
development, the type and number of units to be constructed or
rehabilitated, and a location map with the request for a
preapplication conference.
(3) The preapplication conference must be held within 30 days of
receipt of the request and the materials in § 63-7A(2).
B. The administrative officer will issue notices upon the initial
determination of completeness or rejection of the application. A notice
of completeness or a notice of rejection will be issued to the applicant,
the local review board, all parties participating in the preapplication
conference, and to the Town Council, municipal departments, and
others as appropriate.
C. Upon receipt of a notice of completeness, the local review board will
give notice and conduct a public hearing on the preliminary plan.
(1) Notice of the hearing will be given to the applicant, to all
participants in the preapplication conference, and to all of those
receiving notice of completeness under § 63-7B.
(2) Public notice of the hearing will be given to all those required by
Chapter 260, Zoning, or the Land Development and Subdivision
Review Regulations39 to receive notice of any other action.
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
39.Editor's Note: See Ch. A263, Development and Subdivision Review Regulations.
§ 63-6 CHARTER § 63-7
C:163
§ 63-8. Final action by local review board.
(3) A public hearing on an application for a minor project must be held
within 95 days of issuance of the notice of completeness. A public
hearing is not required for construction of a single building or
rehabilitation of existing buildings unless required by Chapter 260,
Zoning.
(4) A public hearing on an application for a major project must be held
within 120 days of issuance of a notice of completeness.
(5) A public hearing may be continued by the local review board to a
stated future date, time and place.
A. The local review board may approve, approve with conditions, or deny
an application.
B. The local review board must make findings, supported by legally
competent evidence, on each of the following standard provisions that
are applicable to the application and the board's action thereon:
(1) Consistency with the Town of East Greenwich Comprehensive
Community Plan and specifically with the Affordable Housing Plan.
(2) Compliance with the applicable requirements of Chapter 260,
Zoning, and Land Development and Subdivision Review
Regulations and any waiver or modification of these requirements.
(3) Integration of the affordable dwelling units throughout the
development, and comparability of design, scale, architectural
style, building materials, and other factors of affordable and
market rate dwelling units.
(4) Mitigation of the effect of any negative environmental impacts.
(5) Protection of the health or safety of residents of all dwelling units.
(6) Access to a public street for all lots created by a subdivision.
(7) Permanent dedication of any lots created with physical constraints
to development to permanent open space or other nonresidential
purpose.
C. The local review board may limit the annual total number of dwelling
units proposed in comprehensive permit applications by for-profit
developers to an aggregate of not more than 1% of the total number of
year-round dwelling units in the Town as recognized in the Affordable
Housing Plan.
D. The local review board may deny an application for any of the following
reasons:
§ 63-7 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 63-8
C:164
§ 63-9. Applications remanded to local review board.
§ 63-10. Reporting.
The local review board shall report the status of implementation of the
Affordable Housing Plan section of the Comprehensive Community Plan to
the Housing Resources Commission as of the end of each fiscal year.
Chapter 72
COURTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Jurisdiction of District Court — See R.I.G.L.
§ 8-8-3.
Adjudication of traffic offenses — See R.I.G.L.
§ 31-41.1-1 et seq.
Housing Maintenance and Occupancy
Code — See R.I.G.L. § 45-24.3-1 et seq.
(1) Construction and rehabilitation of dwelling units is meeting the
needs set forth in the Affordable Housing Plan, and the application
is inconsistent with that plan.
(2) The application is not consistent with local needs.
(3) The application does not comply with the Comprehensive
Community Plan.
(4) The Town has met or has plans to meet the standard that 10% of
the total number of dwelling units will be affordable.
(5) Concerns for the environment or the health or safety of residents
are not adequately addressed.
E. All decisions of the local review board must be by a majority vote of the
entire membership of the board.
A. Any two or more applications remanded to the local review board by the
State Housing Appeals Board shall be heard in the order that they are
received.
B. The period of 30 days in which the public hearing on a remanded
application must be held begins on the date that such application is
received from the State Housing Appeals Board.
§ 63-8 CHARTER § 63-10
C:165

ARTICLE I
Probate Court
[Adopted 2-9-1993 by Ord. No. 590 (Secs. 2-280 to 2-285 of the
1993 Code)]
§ 72-1. Appointment and term.
The Town Council shall appoint a Judge of Probate to serve at the pleasure
of the Town Council and until a successor is appointed and qualified.
§ 72-2. Qualifications.
The Judge of Probate, or acting Judge of Probate, shall be an attorney at law
in good standing who has been admitted to the practice of law in this state
and is a practicing attorney. He need not be a resident of the Town.
§ 72-3. Acting Judge of Probate.
Whenever the Judge of Probate Court is a party or interested in any
proceeding about to be heard in his Court, or is absent or unable to
perform his duties, or there is a vacancy in such office, his duties shall be
temporarily performed by the Town Solicitor or any assistant Town Solicitor
or, in the event no such solicitor is qualified, by such person appointed
by the Town Council. The fact of any such interest, absence, inability or
vacancy shall be recorded in the records of said Court.
§ 72-4. Clerk.
The Town Clerk shall be the Clerk of the Probate Court.
§ 72-5. Fees.
All fees collected by the Clerk of the Probate Court shall inure to the benefit
of the Town and shall be paid over to the Town Treasurer unless otherwise
directed by the laws of the state.
§ 72-6. Compensation.
The Judge of Probate shall receive such compensation, either on a salary or
fee basis, as the Council may determine. The Judge of Probate need not be
required to devote full time to the duties of his office.
§ 72-1 CHARTER § 72-6
C:167

ARTICLE II
Municipal Court
[Adopted 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. 684 (Secs. 2-351 to 2-362 of the
1993 Code)]
§ 72-7. Appointment and qualifications of Judge.
§ 72-8. Witnesses; attendance; subpoenas.41
§ 72-9. Clerk of Court.
A. The Municipal Court shall be composed of one Judge, appointed by the
Town Council. Each Judge shall serve at the pleasure of the Town
Council and until his or her successor is duly appointed.40
B. The Judge shall be a lawyer admitted to practice before the Supreme
Court of the State of Rhode Island, in good standing, and shall have not
less than five years of experience in the active practice of law.
A. The Municipal Court may issue writs or subpoenas for witnesses,
compel their attendance and testimony and the production of relevant
documents, and punish contempt by a fine of up to $500. Such Court
shall also, upon continuance of any complaint or proceeding before it,
take recognizance to the state, with surety or sureties in such sum as
the Court thinks proper, with the condition to appear before such Court
and make further answer to such complaint or proceeding, and in the
meantime to keep the peace and be of good behavior, and in want
thereof, may impose a fine of up to $500.
B. In accordance with R.I.G.L. § 8-18-4, if a motorist fails to appear to
answer a summons before the Municipal Court, the Court may proceed
pursuant to R.I.G.L. § 31-41.1-5 to enter a default judgment and
determine whether the charges have been established. If the charges
are not established, an order dismissing the charges shall be entered.
Where a determination is made that a charge has been established, an
appropriate order shall be entered, and the motorist's license and
registration privileges may be ordered by the Municipal Court to be
suspended by the Division of Motor Vehicles as provided by law. Said
order shall be mailed to the person charged with the violation at his or
her last known address.
A. The Town Council shall appoint a Clerk of Court to report to and be
responsible to the Town Manager.
B. The Clerk of Court shall keep a regular docket of all cases disposed of;
shall record the judgments, orders and sentences of the Court; and
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 72-7 CHARTER § 72-9
C:169
§ 72-10. Seal; oaths.
§ 72-11. Sessions; time and place.
The Municipal Court shall be considered to be in session at such times and
at such place or places in the Town as the Municipal Court Judge holding
same shall appoint.
§ 72-12. Jurisdiction.
shall furnish certified copies thereof when required, for which copies
the Clerk shall charge the same fees as does the Town Clerk. The
Clerk's office shall be open to the public during such hours as the Town
Manager shall determine.
C. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit any Town employee from also
becoming the Clerk of Court.
A. The Municipal Court shall have a seal, which shall contain such words
and device as the Town Council shall adopt and approve.
B. The Judge and the Clerk of Court may administer oaths and
affirmations.
A. The Town Council hereby confers on the Municipal Court concurrent
jurisdiction to hear and determine causes involving violations of:
(1) Any ordinance of the Town;
(2) Minimum housing ordinances, including any violation of Title 45,
Chapter 24.3 of the General Laws of Rhode Island, entitled "The
Rhode Island Housing Maintenance and Occupancy Code."
However, any defendant found guilty of any offense, excluding
violations of the Minimum Housing Ordinance or said Chapter 24.3,
may, within seven days of such conviction, file an appeal from such
conviction to the Kent County Superior Court and be entitled in
said Superior Court to a trial de novo. Further, any defendant found
guilty of any violation of a Minimum Housing Ordinance or of
Chapter 24.3 may, within seven days of conviction, file an appeal of
said conviction to the District Court and be entitled to a trial de
novo in accordance with §§ 8-8-3(a)(4) and 8-8-3.2 of the General
Laws of Rhode Island; and
(3) Traffic and motor vehicle laws set out in the General Laws of Rhode
Island, § 8-18-4.
B. With respect to violations of either municipal ordinances dealing with
minimum housing or § 45-24.3-1 et seq. of the General Laws of Rhode
Island dealing with housing maintenance and occupancy, the Town
Council hereby confers upon the Municipal Court, in furtherance of the
jurisdiction mentioned in Subsection A hereof, the power to proceed
according to equity:
§ 72-9 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 72-12
C:170
§ 72-13. Maximum penalties.42
The Municipal Court may impose penalties as specified in Chapter 1, Article
III, of this Code.
§ 72-14. Complaints; warrants; writs.
The Judge of the Municipal Court may prescribe and vary the form of
all complaints, warrants, writs or other forms so as to make the same
consistent with the organization, style and jurisdiction of such Court. Such
complaints, warrants, writs and other forms shall have the same effect,
validity and extent, and shall be served, obeyed, enforced and returned in
the same manner and by the same officers, as if issued from the District
Courts, and they may be served by any Constable of the Town who is
authorized to serve process in civil or criminal cases.
§ 72-15. Costs.
§ 72-16. Compensation of Judge and Clerk.
§ 72-17. Acting Judge.
In the case of sickness, absence or other disability or ineligibility of the
Municipal Court Judge, the Town Council may, by resolution, appoint an
Acting Municipal Court Judge for the term of such sickness, absence,
disability or ineligibility at such salary as Council may determine. An Acting
(1) To restrain, prevent, enjoin, abate or correct a violation;
(2) To order the repair, vacation or demolition of any dwelling existing
in violation; or
(3) To otherwise compel compliance with all provisions of such
ordinances and statutes.
A. Costs taxed by the Municipal Court for traffic offenses shall be as set
forth in R.I.G.L. § 8-18-4. Costs for other offenses shall be the same as
those taxed by a Rhode Island District Court for misdemeanor violations
under the General Laws of Rhode Island. The payment of such costs
shall be a part of the sentence to the extent it would be in said District
Courts.
B. All payments shall be deposited to the Town of East Greenwich in the
general fund.
A. The compensation of the Judge (and Clerk) of the Municipal Court shall
be set by the Town Council as prescribed by the Town Charter.
B. The compensation of the Judge (and Clerk) may be changed by Council.
42.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 72-12 CHARTER § 72-17
C:171
Judge shall perform all duties of the Municipal Court Judge, and in the
performance of such duties shall have the same authority as the Municipal
Court Judge.
§ 72-18. Administration by Town Manager.
The Municipal Court shall be administered by the Town Manager. All
matters of administration shall be the sole responsibility and in the sole
jurisdiction of the Town Manager.
§ 72-17 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 72-18
C:172
Chapter 78
DEPARTMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, committees and commissions — See
Ch. 34.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 159.
Police Department — See Ch. 179.
§ 72-18 CHARTER § 72-18
C:173

ARTICLE I
Department of Planning
[Adopted 10-25-1990 by Ord. No. 554 (Secs. 2-211 to 2-216 of the
1993 Code)]
§ 78-1. Creation.
In conformance with the power and authority vested in the Town Council by
the provisions of the Charter for the Town and the laws of the state made
and provided, a department to be known as the "Department of Planning" is
hereby created.
§ 78-2. Office of Town Planner established.
Under the power and authority vested in the Town Council by the Charter,
the office of Town Planner is hereby established.
§ 78-3. Qualifications of Town Planner.
The Town Planner shall possess education, experience and interest in
municipal community planning.
§ 78-4. Appointment of Town Planner.
The Town Planner shall be appointed by the Town Manager with the
approval of the Town Council. The Town Planner shall be responsible to and
under the direction of the Town Manager and shall hold the title of Director
of Planning.
§ 78-5. Salary of Town Planner.
The salary of the Town Planner shall be as prescribed by the Town Council
and shall be in full compensation for all services rendered by him as Town
Planner.
§ 78-6. Powers and duties of Town Planner.43
The Town Planner shall plan and direct the Town's Planning Department
according to community planning practices, capital budgeting principles
and general policy directives and shall administer the Town's planning
functions according to planning laws and zoning and subdivision
regulations.
43.Editor's Note: See Ch. 260, Zoning, and Ch. A263, Development and Subdivision Review
Regulations.
§ 78-1 CHARTER § 78-6
C:175

ARTICLE II
Department of Parks and Recreation
[Adopted 5-10-1994 by Ord. No. 611 (Secs. 2-256 to 2-261 of the
1993 Code)]
§ 78-7. Creation.
In conformance with the power and authority vested in the Town Council by
the provisions of the Charter and the laws of the state made and provided,
a department to be known as the "Department of Parks and Recreation" is
hereby created.
§ 78-8. Office of Director established.
Under the power and authority vested in the Town Council by the Charter,
the office of the Director of Parks and Recreation is hereby established.
§ 78-9. Qualifications of Director.
The Director of Parks and Recreation shall possess an interest in or
experience in public parks and recreation.
§ 78-10. Appointment of Director.
The Director of Parks and Recreation shall be appointed by the Town
Manager with the approval of the Town Council. The Director of Parks and
Recreation shall be responsible to and under the direction of the Town
Manager.
§ 78-11. Salary of Director.
The salary of the Director of Parks and Recreation shall be prescribed by
the Town Council and shall be in full compensation of all services rendered
by said person as Director of Parks and Recreation.
§ 78-12. Powers and duties of Director.
The Director of Parks and Recreation shall have all the powers as may be
necessary to carry out the duties imposed by this office and shall originate,
maintain and direct a public parks and recreation program for the Town;
duties shall be as described in the personnel manual.
§ 78-7 CHARTER § 78-12
C:177

ARTICLE III
Department of Senior and Human Services
[Adopted 4-9-2007 by Ord. No. 784]
§ 78-13. Creation.
In conformance with the power and authority vested in the Town Council by
the provisions of the Charter and the laws of the state made and provided,
a department to be known as the “Department of Senior and Human
Services” is hereby created.
§ 78-14. Office of Director established.
Under the power and authority vested in the Town Council by the Charter,
the office of the Director of Senior and Human Services is hereby
established.
§ 78-15. Qualifications of Director.
The Director of Senior and Human Services shall possess such qualifications
as adopted by the Town Council.
§ 78-16. Appointment of Director.
The Director of Senior and Human Services shall be appointed by the Town
Manager with the approval of the Town Council. The Director of Senior and
Human Services shall be responsible to and under the direction of the Town
Manager.
§ 78-17. Powers and duties of Director.44
The Director of Senior and Human Services shall, in addition to providing
a senior activities program and meal site, exercise the duties prescribed by
the Town Council, which shall be in accordance with all applicable statutes.
44.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 78-13 CHARTER § 78-17
C:179

ARTICLE IV
Department of Information Technology
[Adopted 3-24-2014 by Ord. No. 833]
§ 78-18. Creation.
In conformance with the power and authority vested in the Town Council by
the provisions of the Charter and the laws of the state made and provided,
a department to be known as the "Department of Information Technology"
is hereby created.
§ 78-19. Office of Director established.
Under the power and authority vested in the Town Council by the Charter,
the office of Director of Information Technology is hereby established.
§ 78-20. Qualifications of Director.
The Director of Information Technology shall possess such qualifications as
adopted by the Town Council.
§ 78-21. Appointment of Director.
The Director of Information Technology shall be appointed by the Town
Manager with the approval of the Town Council. The Director of Information
Technology shall be responsible to and under the direction of the Town
Manager.
§ 78-22. Salary of Director.
The salary of the Director of Information Technology shall be as prescribed
by the Town Council and shall be in full compensation for all services
rendered by him/her as Director of Information Technology.
§ 78-23. Powers and duties of Director.
The Director of Information Technology shall plan and direct the Town's
Information Technology Department according to general policy directives
and capital budgeting principles and shall administer the Town's
information technology functions in accordance with all applicable state
statutes. The Director of Information Technology shall maintain regular
communication with School District information technology personnel and
use reasonable efforts, when appropriate, to pursue technology
consolidation opportunities between the Town and the School District.
§ 78-18 CHARTER § 78-23
C:181
Chapter 85
EARTH REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Fees — See Ch. 93.
Gravel banks — See Ch. 122.
Soil erosion and sedimentation control — See
Ch. 207.
§ 85-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
BUILDING INSPECTOR — That person charged by the Town with the
issuance of building permits.
EARTH REMOVAL — The extraction or removal of any sand, gravel, loam,
topsoil, stone, clay or shale from deposits on any tract of land; excluding,
however, operations of a sand and gravel plant in operation on November
6, 1973, and the immediately surrounding 20 acres of industrial-zoned land
upon which the sand and gravel plant is located; and excluding also earth
removal involved in the process of grading land for the construction of a
building for which a building permit has been issued, for the construction
of a roadway, or for a subdivision in accordance with a plat plan or plans
approved by the platting and subdivision board of the Town.
RESIDENTIAL USE — Any zone in which dwellings, including multifamily
dwellings, are permitted or existing.
SAND AND GRAVEL PLANT — The primary mechanical equipment used for
processing, screening or washing of earth materials.
ZONING BOARD OF REVIEW — The Zoning Board of Review established by
the Town.
§ 85-2. Purpose.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by the provisions
of Chapter 161 of the Public Laws of 1973 for the purpose of promoting
the health, safety and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Town by
effecting uniform regulations of earth removal.
§ 85-3. Residential use area regulations.
Upon any land located within a residential use area or within 50 feet of such
residential district:
§ 78-23 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 85-3
C:182
§ 85-4. Regulations for removal in areas other than residential.
Within any district or area other than a residential use district:
§ 85-5. License required; application; issuance.
A. Hours, days when removal prohibited. Earth removal operations shall
not be conducted during the period from 6:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. of any
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday or Saturday, nor shall
such operations be conducted on any Sunday or legal holiday. Earth
removal operations during the prohibited times or days may be
authorized by issuance of a special exception by the Building Inspector.
B. Setbacks. No earth removal shall be conducted within a distance of the
greater of 25 feet of the boundary of any tract of land upon which earth
removal is to be carried on adjacent to residential use property or 150
feet of any dwelling.
C. Fencing. The boundary of any tract of land upon which earth removal is
being conducted adjacent to developed residential property shall be
fenced. Such fencing shall be five feet in height; shall be so constructed
as not to have openings, holes or gaps larger than four inches in any
dimension, except for doors and gates; and shall be of heavy
construction.
D. Dust control. Calcium chloride or oil shall be applied to all non-hardsurfaced
roads used for vehicular ingress or egress to any tract of land
upon which earth removal is conducted, and to the regularly traveled
roads within any such tract of land. Such applications shall be made at
intervals and in amounts sufficient to prevent observable dust from
rising from the road surface.
E. Drainage. Upon any tract of land upon which earth removal is being
conducted, adequate drainage shall be provided to prevent the
permanent collection and stagnation of surface or underground waters,
and the flooding or erosion of surrounding property.
A. Dust control. Calcium chloride or oil shall be applied to all non-hardsurfaced
roads used for vehicular ingress or egress to any tract of land
upon which earth removal is conducted and to the regularly traveled
roads within any such tract of land.
B. Drainage. When earth removal operations cease, all slopes on any tract
of land upon which earth removal has been conducted shall remain at
the natural angle of repose, so that stagnant water will not permanently
collect and the tract will not be subject to erosion by wind or water.
A. Required. Earth removal shall not be conducted without a license for
earth removal having first been issued by the Building Inspector.
§ 85-3 CHARTER § 85-5
C:183
§ 85-6. Revision of removal plan.
A licensee under this chapter may apply for the revision of the plan
contained in an approved application. Such application for revision shall
be limited in scope to the area of land covered in the previously approved
B. Application. As a condition precedent to the issuance of a license, an
application for the license shall be made to the Building Inspector. Such
application shall contain:
(1) A plan prepared by a registered engineer setting forth the existing
contours of the portion of the tract of land upon which earth
removal is to be conducted and, based upon classifications of
preliminary samples of the material to be removed, the final
contours of such portion of the tract of land upon completion of
earth removal operations, and the type of ground cover to be
planted or applied upon completion of earth removal operations to
effectively control wind and water erosion; provided, however, that
if suitable fertile ground cover existed at the beginning of earth
removal, then such plan shall show that enough of such ground
cover is to be held in reserve and reapplied for a minimum
thickness of three inches.
(2) The opinion by a registered engineer that upon completion of earth
removal operations all slopes on the portion of the tract as set forth
in the plan shall remain at the natural angle of repose.
(3) The time, not to exceed three years, within which earth removal
shall cease and the plan complied with.
(4) A bond not to exceed $100 for each acre of such portion of the tract
of land to ensure compliance with the plan as filed.
C. Issuance. Upon the submission of a license application which meets the
requirements of this chapter, the Building Inspector shall consider the
application and, upon his approval thereof and the payment of the
current fee,45 shall issue a license for earth removal on the portion of
the tract of land specified in such approved application. Such approval
by the Building Inspector shall be based upon his finding that the
application as presented is in proper order and that adherence to the
required plan contained therein will, upon completion of earth removal
operations on such portion of the tract of land, provide the following:
(1) That all slopes shall remain at the natural angle of repose.
(2) That the portion of the tract will not permanently collect stagnant
water.
(3) Ground cover of a type and thickness sufficient to effectively
control wind and water erosion shall be provided.
45.Editor's Note: See Ch. 93, Fees.
§ 85-5 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 85-6
C:184
application, shall meet the requirements of an original plan as specified in
this chapter, shall contain a statement indicating the applicant's reason for
seeking a revision, and shall specify the time within which earth removal
shall cease and the revised plan complied with. Such time shall not exceed
the then-unexpired portion of the time specified therefor in the original,
approved application. Such revised plan may be approved by the Building
Inspector upon his finding that the revised plan meets the requirements
of § 85-5 for the approval of an original application and that the revision
is not sought to alleviate a hardship created by the licensee's failure to
conduct earth removal operations in such a way as to reasonably anticipate
the needs of, and provide for the implementation of, the plan contained in
the original application.
§ 85-7. Public notice of license issuance or approval of revised plan.
Notice of the issuance of an earth removal license or the approval of a
revised plan under an issued license shall be given by publication of notice
to that effect in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town, which
notice shall be published within seven days of such issuance or approval.
§ 85-8. Failure of licensee to complete plan; lien.
If a licensee under this chapter shall fail to complete the plan contained in
the approved application within the time specified therein, then, in addition
to action against the licensee's bond, the Director of Public Works, after 30
days' written notice to the licensee, is authorized to undertake and complete
the plan. In the event of such undertaking by the Director of Public Works,
the owner of the land specified in the application shall reimburse the Town
for its necessary expenses in connection therewith, and such expenses shall
constitute a lien upon the entire tract of land of which any portion has been
specified in an approved application.
§ 85-9. License revocation.
The Zoning Board of Review, upon petition or on its own motion, may revoke
any earth removal license issued pursuant to this chapter for violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter. Prior to any action of the Zoning Board
of Review, it shall hold a hearing thereon and give the licensee seven days'
notice of the hearing.
§ 85-10. Restraining orders.
Suit may be brought in the Superior Court in the name of the Town to
restrain any violation of, or compel compliance with, the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 85-11. Special exceptions.
Upon special application, and after a showing that the literal enforcement
of this chapter will work a hardship, the Zoning Board of Review may grant
§ 85-6 CHARTER § 85-11
C:185
an exception to any terms of this chapter upon a finding that such exception
will not result in a substantial depreciation of surrounding property.
§ 85-12. Appeals to Zoning Board of Review.
Appeals from the decisions of the Building Inspector to the Zoning Board
of Review shall be taken within a reasonable time as provided by the rules
of the board after publication of the notice of such decision as provided in
§ 85-7. Such appeals shall be taken in the same manner as other appeals to
the Zoning Board, and the procedure as to notice and hearings shall be the
same insofar as consistent herewith.
§ 85-13. Effect on existing earth removal project.
A. The provisions of the article shall not apply to earth removal being
conducted on February 28, 1974, until 60 days thereafter, except that
application for a license may be made and a license issued as provided
by this chapter during the sixty-day period following February 28, 1974;
provided, however, that the plan required in such application need not
set forth existing contours for that portion of the tract of land on which
earth removal has been completed on February 28, 1974. Upon
submission to the Director of Public Works of the plan and material as
aforesaid, the Director of Public Works shall forthwith issue an earth
removal license for the continuance of earth removal on such land.
B. Real property acquired or leased prior to November 6, 1973, for the
purpose of earth removal and held for such purpose on February 28,
1974, shall be considered in use for earth removal whether or not
extraction has then actually commenced. To qualify under this
subsection, the following conditions shall be considered as conclusive
evidence that such real property was acquired or leased and held for
the purpose of later mineral extraction:
(1) Such real property was acquired or leased prior to November 6,
1973;
(2) Such real property was acquired or leased by an individual,
corporation or otherwise, engaged at the time of acquisition in the
business of mineral extraction;
(3) Such real property, or the substantial portion of such property, has
not been permanently developed for any residential, commercial
(other than farm or agricultural) or industrial purpose;
(4) Such real property contains mineral deposits of a demonstrable
economic value; and
(5) That on or before December 31, 1973, the owner or lessee of such
tract of land shall file in the office of the Town Clerk of the Town a
statement setting forth his intention to engage in earth removal on
the tract of land and describing such earth removal.
§ 85-11 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 85-13
C:186
§ 85-14. Violations and penalties.46
Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be punished in accordance with Chapter 1, Article III, of this Code.
Chapter 93
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III. Affordable Housing Commission — See Ch.
34, Art. VIII.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Taxation of farm, forest and open space
land — R.I.G.L. § 44-27-1 et seq.
C. The provisions of Subsection B of this section shall not apply to any
tract of land for which the statement of intention provided for in
Subsection B(5) of this section is not filed as provided therein, and any
such tract of land shall not be considered as acquired, leased or held for
the purpose of earth removal.
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 85-13 CHARTER § 85-14
C:187

ARTICLE I
Fee Schedule
[Adopted 6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 595 as Sec. 10-1 of the 1993 Code]
§ 93-1. Schedule of fees and charges. [Amended 8-13-1991 by Ord.
No. 566; 9-8-1992 by Ord. No. 579; 4-12-1994 by Ord. No. 605;
12-8-2003 by Ord. No. 739; 9-27-2004 by Ord. No. 748; 9-26-2005 by
Ord. No. 759; 9-25-2006 by Ord. No. 774; 11-6-2006 by Ord. No.
781; 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 786.3; 2-11-2008 by Ord. No. 788;
9-26-2011 by Ord. No. 818; 3-14-2016 by Ord. No. 849; 6-13-2016 by
Ord. No. 855]
A. The schedule of fees and charges set forth in this section shall become
part of the Code of the Town and shall apply with regard to all valid
ordinances establishing a fee and/or charge. Except as to the amount of
the fee and/or charge established, no ordinance presently in effect shall
be amended in any way by this section.
(1) Alcoholic beverage license fees, annual:
(a) Class A (package store): $1,000.
(b) Class B (limited): $350.
(c) Class B-V (victualer): $1,250.
(d) Class B-T (tavern): $1,250.
(e) Class C: $700. [Amended 4-24-2017 by Ord. No. 868]
(f) Class D (club, full privilege): $800.
(g) Class E (druggist): $10.
(h) Class F (19 hours, beer/wine): $15.
(i) Class F-1 (19 hours, alcoholic beverages): $35.
(j) Class T (theater): $200. [Added 4-24-2017 by Ord. No. 868]
(k) Transfer application: $215. [Added 4-24-2017 by Ord. No.
868]
(l) Application for outdoor sidewalk liquor service: $150.
[Amended 10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 861]
(2) Amusement license fees:
(a) Bingo and beano: $5.
(b) Jukeboxes and mechanical amusement devices, per machine,
per year: $50.
§ 93-1 CHARTER § 93-1
C:189
(c) Billiard table, bagatelle table, pool table, scippio table, etc.,
each table per year: $50.
(d) Entertainment license fee, per year: $60.
(3) Animals and fowl licensing fees:
(a) Dog license, per year: $8.
(b) Amount of dog license fee set aside for enforcement of laws
pertaining to animals: $2.
(c) Kennel license, per year: $25.
(d) Impoundment fees, per day: $10.
(e) License to keep swine, per swine: $0.50.
(f) License to keep swine, minimum, per year: $5.
(g) Amount of dog license fee set aside to fund a spay/neuter
program: $1.
(4) Building permit fee schedules: § 38-4 of the Code of the Town of
East Greenwich is incorporated in this section as though set forth
in full.
(5) Carnival food sale permits: See Subsection A(31), Permits, general.
(6) Detectives: See Subsection A(34), Private detective, license fees.
(7) Door-to-door solicitation:
(a) Per day: $5.
(b) Per year: $100.
(8) Drainlayer licensing fee, per year: $50.
(9) Earth removal:
(a) License fee: $100.
(b) Plus, per acre: $25.
(10) Electrical permits: See Subsection A(4), Building permit fee
schedules.
(11) Excavation permit: See Subsection A(9), Earth removal.
(12) Fishing license fees, annual:
(a) Resident: $18.
(b) Nonresident: $35.
(c) Tourist (three days): $16.
§ 93-1 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 93-1
C:190
(d) Combination fishing, hunting (resident): $33.
(e) Permanent fishing (65 and over): no fee.
(f) Permanent combination (65 and over): no fee.
(13) Firearms, pistols and revolvers:
(a) Sales license, per year: $5.
(14) Flea market (fee includes authorized food vendors on premises):
(a) Main operator's license, per day: $100.
(15) Flower vendor's permit: $100.
(16) Food sale permits: See Subsection A(31), Permits, general.
(17) Game rooms: See Subsection A(2), Amusement license fees.
(18) Garbage and municipal waste disposal area fees:
(a) Per load in excess of 12 loads per year: $2.
(19) Gravel banks:
(a) Application fee: $25.
(b) Annual permit: $100.
(c) Plus, per acre: $25.
(20) Hawkers and peddlers, all permits:
(a) Per day: $10.
(b) Per week: $50.
(c) Special event (per day): $1.
(d) Maximum per year: $200.
(21) Hunting license, annual:
(a) Resident: $9.50.
(b) Nonresident: $20.50.
(c) Junior: $9.50.
(d) Tourist: $10.50.
(22) Jukeboxes: See Subsection A(2), Amusement license fees.
(23) Junk, secondhand, and junk dealers:
(a) Application fee: $10.
§ 93-1 CHARTER § 93-1
C:191
(b) License fees:
[1] Shop: $25.
[2] Foundryman: $5.
[3] Gatherer: $5.
[4] Auto junkyard: $100.
(24) Laundry license: $10.
(25) Marriage license: $24.
(26) Mechanical, electric and plumbing permit fees: See Subsection
A(4), Building permit fee schedules.
(27) Mooring registration fee:
(a) Resident: $175. [Amended 4-24-2017 by Ord. No. 860]
(b) Nonresident: $350. [Amended 4-24-2017 by Ord. No. 860]
(c) Commercial recreational: $300.
(d) Commercial: $300.
(e) Educational/nonprofit: $225.
(28) Oyster houses: See Subsection A(45), Tavernkeeper, cook shops
and oyster houses.
(29) Parades, vendors at: See Subsection A(20), Hawkers and peddlers,
all permits.
(30) Peddlers' licenses and permits: See Subsection A(20), Hawkers and
peddlers, all permits.
(31) Permits, general:
(a) Sale of food:
[1] Per day, per vendor: $5.
[2] Maximum per year: $25.
(b) Sale of holiday greens, etc.: $5.
(32) Plumbing: See Subsection A(4), Building permit fee schedules.
(33) Pool tables: See Subsection A(2), Amusement license fees.
(34) Private detective, license fees:
(a) Per year: $150.
§ 93-1 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 93-1
C:192
(35) Residential development permits: See Subsection A(43),
Subdivisions, residential and nonresidential.
(36) Restaurants: See Subsection A(49), Victualing license.
(37) Sewer permits:
(a) Connection fees:
[1] Residential: $50.
[2] Commercial: $100.
[3] Plus, inspection fee, per day: $100.
(b) Sewer use fees: § 197-24 is incorporated in this article as
though set forth in full.
(c) Industrial pretreatment permit fee: $500.
(38) Shows and exhibitions: See Subsection A(40), Special events,
shows and exhibitions.
(39) Sign permit:
(a) Application fee: $10.
(40) Special events, shows and exhibitions, operator's license (shows,
exhibitions, carnivals, circus, fairs, etc.):
(a) Fee, per day (includes authorized food vendors on premises):
$100.
(41) Soil erosion and sedimentation control. NOTE: Plan review fees
and inspection fees for residential site plans are required for
proposed subdivisions. Once a subdivision is approved, individual
residential lots may be subject to additional review and inspection
fees.
(a) Plan review fees:
[1] Residential lots within an approved subdivision:
Number of Lots Fee
1 $104
2 to 4 $172
5 to 9 $345
10 to 15 $516
16 to 25 $688
26 to 50 $895
51 to 100 $1,100
Over 100, per each lot $1,100, plus $28 per lot
§ 93-1 CHARTER § 93-1
C:193
[2] Site plans: residential site plans for proposed subdivisions,
commercial, industrial (square footage and acreage based
on area of land disturbance only):
Area of Land Disturbance Fee
Up to 30,000 square feet $172
30,000 square feet to 1.9
acres
$241
2 acres to 5 acres $345
6 acres to 10 acres $516
11 acres to 20 acres $688
21 acres to 50 acres $895
51 acres to 75 acres $1,170
Over 75 acres, per acre for
each acre or portion thereof
over
$1,170, plus $28 per acre
75
(b) Inspection fees:
[1] Residential lots within an approved subdivision:
Number of Lots Fee
1 $55
2 to 4 $104
5 to 9 $138
10 to 15 $172
16 to 25 $207
26 to 50 $275
51 to 100 $413
Over 100 $550
[2] Site plans: residential site plans for proposed subdivisions,
commercial, industrial (square footage and acreage based
on area of land disturbance only):
Area of Land Disturbance Fee
Up to 30,000 square feet $70
30,000 square feet to 1.9
acres
$104
2 acres to 5 acres $138
6 acres to 10 acres $172
11 acres to 20 acres $241
21 acres to 50 acres $345
§ 93-1 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 93-1
C:194
Area of Land Disturbance Fee
51 acres to 75 acres $482
Over 75 acres $550
(c) Reinspection fees, per lot: $17.
(42) Streets:
(a) Excavation permit fee: $5, plus 1% of estimated cost of street
restoration in excess of $500.
(43) Subdivisions, residential and nonresidential: review fees, as
established in Chapter A263 of the Code of the Town of East
Greenwich.
(44) Holiday sales permits:
(a) License fee, per year: $25.
(45) Tavernkeeper, cook shops and oyster houses:
(a) License, per year: $25.
(b) Transfer of license: $10.
(46) Theaters, license fee:
(a) Per weekday: $1.
(b) Per Sunday: $2.
(47) Trailers, charges:
(a) Parking license fee, every 90 days: $5.
(b) Trailer park operators, per year for each trailer space: $1.
(c) Storage trailers, per year: $25.
(48) Vehicles and traffic:
(a) Residential overnight parking permit: $25 per year, payable
with submission of application.
(49) Victualing license:
(a) Fee, per year: $75.
(b) Transfer fee: $35.
(50)Weights and measures: fees as provided by state law, including all
amendments thereto.
(51) Zoning regulations:
§ 93-1 CHARTER § 93-1
C:195
(a) Application to Zoning Board of Review: as established by
Zoning Board of Review pursuant to § 260-84 et seq.
(b) Application for change of zone: stenographic, advertising,
notice preparation and postage costs.
(52) Bed-and-breakfast homes, per year: $50.
(53) Zoning certificate fee: $55.
§ 93-1 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 93-1
C:196
ARTICLE II
Development Impact Fees
[Adopted 4-9-2012 by Ord. No. 820]
§ 93-2. Legislative findings.
The Town Council of the Town of East Greenwich finds, determines and
declares that, in accordance with R.I.G.L. § 45-22.4-1 et seq., the Town has
conducted a needs assessment (Tischler, 2001) and a "Review of Impact
Fees," dated October 18, 2008. Further review in Winter 2011-2012
resulted in use of an updated annual capital improvements program (CIP)
to identify those capital investments required to meet the needs created by
growth in population, housing and business establishments going forward
into the future.
§ 93-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING — Residential housing that has a sales price or
rental amount that is within the means of a household that is moderate
income or less. In the case of dwelling units for sale, housing that is
affordable means housing in which principal, interest, taxes (which may be
adjusted by state or local programs for tax relief) and insurance constitute
no more than 30% of the gross household income for a household with
less than 120% of the area median income, adjusted for family size. In the
case of dwelling units for rent, housing that is affordable means housing for
which rent, heat and utilities other than telephone constitute no more than
30% of the gross annual household income for a household with 80% or
less of area median income, adjusted for family size. To meet the definition
of "affordable," housing must carry a deed restriction guaranteeing that
affordability for a period of not less than 30 years.
BEDROOM — A room located within a dwelling or dwelling unit intended to
be used for sleeping purposes.
Such room(s) shall consist of the following:
A minimum of 70 square feet with no horizontal dimension less
than seven feet;
(1)
A minimum finished ceiling height of seven feet six inches for not
less than 50% of the required room area;
(2)
At least one window meeting the definition of "emergency escape
and rescue window" per the Rhode Island State Building Code (R1
SBC-2) or an exterior door which leads directly to the outside; and
(3)
(4) An operable interior door which provides privacy to the room.
A.
§ 93-2 CHARTER § 93-3
C:197
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM — That component of the municipal
budget that sets out the need for public facility and equipment capital
improvements, the cost of the improvements, and proposed funding
sources. A capital improvement program must cover at least a five-year
period and should be reviewed at least every five years.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS — Improvements with a useful life of 10 years
or more which increase or improve the service capacity of a public facility.
DEVELOPER — A person or legal entity undertaking development.
FEE PAYER — A person obtaining a building permit for an activity requiring
payment of an impact fee pursuant to § 93-4 of this article and any
successor in interest of such person.
IMPACT FEE — The charge imposed upon new development to fund all or a
portion of the capital improvements affected by the new development from
which it is collected.
PROPORTIONATE SHARE — That portion of the cost of system
improvements which reasonably relates to the service demands and needs
of the project.
PUBLIC FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT —
TOWN — The Town of East Greenwich.
§ 93-4. Imposition of impact fee.
In such cases where a dwelling or dwelling unit contains additional
rooms meeting the minimum criteria for a bedroom, but are identified
by the owner or applicant for other purposes (i.e., bonus room, office,
study, etc.), the Building Official shall determine the total number of
rooms defined as bedrooms and may rely on the Rhode Island State
Building Code and/or Rhode Island Department of Environmental
Management (RI DEM) guidelines to edify the interpretation.
B.
A. Parks and recreation land and facilities;
B. Open space;
Municipal buildings and equipment, including those for public works,
sewer treatment and public safety;
C.
D. Public schools; and
Roadway system improvements consistent with the Town's capital
improvement program.
E.
A. Any developer who, on or after passage of this article, seeks to develop
land within the Town of East Greenwich by applying for a building or
alteration permit is hereby required to pay impact fees in the manner
and amount set forth in this article, unless exempted by § 93-9 hereof.
§ 93-3 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 93-4
C:198
§ 93-5. Payment of fees.
§ 93-6. Use of funds.
B. Alteration of existing development requiring a permit that increases the
number of bedrooms, as defined in § 93-3 above, shall pay impact fees
on the additional bedrooms or floor area.
C. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any development which
was constructed or altered pursuant to a building or alteration permit
issued on or after passage of this article until all impact fees required
by this article, calculated as of the date of issuance of the building
permit, have been paid in full.
A. The fee payer shall pay the impact fees required by this article to the
Town Manager or his/her designee prior to the issuance of a certificate
of occupancy.
B. All funds collected shall be promptly transferred for deposit into a
special proprietary fund to be held and used solely for the purposes
specified in this article. Said funds shall be invested with all interest
accruing to the trust fund.
A. Within eight years of the date of collection, capital improvements
impact fees shall be expended or encumbered for the construction of
public facilities or acquisition of equipment of reasonable benefit to the
development paying the fees and that are consistent with the capital
improvement program.
B. Where the expenditure or encumbrance of fees is not feasible within
eight years, the Town Council may retain impact fees for a longer
period of time if there are compelling reasons for the longer period. In
no case shall impact fees be retained longer than 12 years.
C. In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are issued for
advance provision of capital facilities or equipment for which impact
fees may be expended, impact fees may be used to pay debt service on
such bonds or similar debt instruments.
D. At least once each fiscal year, the Town Manager shall present to the
Town Council a proposed impact fee fund utilization plan for eligible
facilities and equipment. This plan shall recommend expenditure of
impact fee funds, including any accrued interest, for specific projects
and related expenses. Monies, including any accrued interest, not
assigned in any fiscal year shall be retained in an impact fee fund until
the next fiscal year, except as provided by the refund provisions of this
article.
E. Funds may be used to provide refunds as described in § 93-8 hereof.
§ 93-4 CHARTER § 93-7
C:199
§ 93-7. Recouping costs.
The Town may recoup costs of excess capacity in existing capital facilities,
where the excess capacity has been provided in anticipation of the needs of
new development, by requiring impact fees for that portion of the facilities
constructed for future users. The need to recoup costs for excess capacity
must have been documented by a preconstruction or pre-acquisition
assessment that demonstrated the need for the excess capacity. The fees
imposed to recoup the costs to provide the excess capacity must be based
on the Town's actual cost of acquiring, constructing, or upgrading the
facility and must be no more than a proportionate share of the costs
to provide the excess capacity. That portion of an impact fee deemed
recoupment is exempted from the provisions of § 93-6A hereof.
§ 93-8. Refund of impact fees.
§ 93-9. Exemptions and credits.
A. If impact fees are not expended or encumbered within the period
established in § 93-6, the Town shall refund to the fee payer or his or
her successors the amount of the fee paid and accrued interest. The
Town shall send the refund to the fee payer at the last known address by
certified mail within one year of the date on which the right to claim the
refund arises. All refunds due and not claimed within one year shall be
retained by the Town.
B. If the Town seeks to terminate any or all impact fee requirements, all
unexpended or unencumbered funds shall be refunded as provided
above. Upon the finding that any or all fee requirements are to be
terminated, the Town shall place a notice of termination and availability
of refunds in a newspaper of general circulation in the community at
least two times. All funds available for refund shall be retained for a
period of one year. At the end of one year, any remaining funds may be
transferred to the general fund and used for any public purpose. The
Town is released from this notice requirement if there are no
unexpended or unencumbered balances within a fund or funds being
terminated.
A. Exemptions. The following shall be exempted from payment of an
impact fee:
(1) Remodeling, rehabilitation or other improvements to an existing
structure or rebuilding a damaged structure, unless there is an
increase in the number of bedrooms, as defined in § 93-3, for which
an impact fee is collected. Impact fees shall be imposed when
property which is owned or controlled by federal, state or Town
government is converted to private ownership or control.
(2) The construction of accessory buildings or structures to a
residential use which do not increase the number of bedrooms, as
defined in § 93-3.
§ 93-7 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 93-9
C:200
(3) A transfer of a parcel of real estate without consideration between
the following immediate family members: parent to child;
grandparent to grandchild; child to parent, if the parcel is taxed
under the Farm, Forest and Open Space Act.47
(4) The construction of housing units that will meet the definition
herein of "affordable housing" shall be exempt from payment of an
impact fee.
B. Credits.
(1) Land and/or capital improvements may be offered by the fee payer
as total or partial payment of the required impact fee. The need for
the dedication or construction must be clearly documented in the
Town's capital improvement program or Comprehensive
Community Plan. The land proposed for dedication or the facilities
to be constructed will not be accepted unless the Town Manager
determines them to be appropriate for the proposed purpose. The
offer must specifically request or provide for an impact fee credit. If
the Town Manager accepts such an offer, the credit shall be
determined and provided in the following manner:
(a) Credit for the dedication of land shall be valued at 100% of the
most recent assessed value by the Town Tax Assessor or by fair
market value established by a private appraiser acceptable to
the Town Manager. Credit for the dedication of land shall be
provided when the property has been accepted by the Town
Council and conveyed at no charge to the Town.
(b) Applicants for credit for construction of improvements shall
submit acceptable engineering drawings and specifications
and construction cost estimates to the Town Manager, who
shall determine the credit for construction based upon either
these cost estimates or upon alternative engineering criteria
and construction cost estimates if the Town Manager
determines that such estimates submitted by the applicant are
either unreliable or inaccurate. The Town Manager shall
provide the applicant with a letter or certificate setting forth
the dollar amount of the credit, the reason for the credit, and
the legal description or other adequate description of the
project or development to which the credit may be applied. The
applicant must sign and date a duplicate copy of such letter or
certificate indicating his or her agreement to the terms of the
letter or certificate and return such signed document to the
Town Manager before credit will be given. The failure of the
applicant to sign, date and return such document within 60
days shall nullify the credit.
47.Editor's Note: See R.I.G.L. § 44-27-1 et seq.
§ 93-9 CHARTER § 93-9
C:201
§ 93-10. Impact fee schedule.
§ 93-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-14-2016 by Ord. No.
849]
A violation of this article shall be prosecuted in accordance with Chapter
1, Article III, General Penalty, of the East Greenwich Code; however, in
addition to or in lieu of any criminal prosecution, the Town shall have the
power to commence suit in any court of competent jurisdiction to seek
damages and/or equitable relief to enforce the provisions of this article.48
(c) Credit against impact fees otherwise due will not be provided
until the construction is completed and accepted by the Town
or a suitable maintenance and warranty bond is received and
approved by the Town Manager, when applicable.
(d) Any claim for credit must be made no later than the time of
application for a building permit unless an extension of time is
granted by the Town Manager for good cause shown.
A. The impact fee schedule shall be as follows:
(1) Residential:
(a) Per bedroom, as defined in § 93-3: $1,790.
(b) Per bedroom in the PD and MUPD Zones: $1,600.
B. This fee schedule shall be adjusted annually on the anniversary date of
passage of this article by the same percentage as the annual change in
construction costs reflected in the index published by the Engineering
News Record.
48.Editor’s Note: Former Article III, Affordable Housing Development Fees, adopted
11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 778, which immediately followed, was repealed 10-26-2015 by Ord.
No. 845.
§ 93-9 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 93-11
C:202
Chapter 99
FIREARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Discharge of firearms without landowner's
permission — See R.I.G.L. § 11-47-50.
§ 99-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIREARM — Any instrument which discharges or is designed to discharge
any projectile or missile and which is used or is designed to be used as a
weapon or for target practice or competition, including but not limited to
any pistol, rifle, cannon, shotgun, bow, slingshot, dart gun or blowgun.
§ 99-2. Discharge prohibited; exceptions.
No person shall discharge any firearm within the Town, except:
A. A law enforcement officer or member of the military service while in the
performance of his duties in accordance with law;
B. A person firing blank ammunition during or in preparation or practice
for a legally sanctioned parade or celebration;
C. A person discharging a firearm in defense or protection of life and
property in accordance with law;
D. A person discharging a pistol or rifle to destroy an injured or maimed
animal in accordance with law;
E. A person discharging a firearm at a firing range or shooting gallery
permitted by Chapter 260, Zoning, provided that such person shall
possess a permit therefor issued by the Town Council;
F. A person discharging a blunt projectile from a slingshot or discharging
a target arrow from a bow classified as not more than 40 pounds pull,
during inanimate target practice or competition;
G. In the geographic area west of RI Route 2, so-called, discharge of a
shotgun:
§ 93-11 CHARTER § 99-2
C:203
§ 99-3. Violations and penalties.49
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, of the Code of the Town of East Greenwich.
Chapter 100
FIRE PREVENTION, INSPECTION AND INVESTIGATION
(1) By a person against a rodent or other varmint in order to protect
crops, gardens, domestic animals or other property; or
(2) While hunting, by an owner on his land, a resident on land where he
resides, or any person with the written permission of or in the
company of an owner on such owner's land or a resident on land
where he resides, provided that in no event shall such shotgun be
discharged within 500 feet of any building or any public highway.
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 99-2 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 99-3
C:204
ARTICLE I
Fire Marshal
[Adopted 6-4-2018 by Ord. No. 876]
§ 100-1. Fire prevention, inspection and investigation division (Fire
Marshal).
A. Summary.
(1) Under the authority of the Rhode Island State Fire Marshal, there
shall be a Fire Marshal who shall enforce and perform the duties
required by the Comprehensive Fire Safety Act, and all other
provisions of the general and public laws insofar as such powers
and duties relate to fires, fire prevention, fire protection, fire
inspection, fire investigation, fire training and public education
programs. The Fire Marshal also serves as the fire department
representative at all Technical Review Committee meetings to
ensure early development input. The mission of the Fire Marshal is
the comprehensive, professional, and consistent enforcement of
the Fire Safety Code to ensure that the minimum requirements
necessary for fire and life safety are met. This requires the Fire
Marshal to perform the roles of code enforcement official, fire
investigator and educator.
(2) Fire prevention activities that are provided by the Town are part of
a comprehensive plan to protect life and property from fire and
other hazards. Code enforcement, preconstruction plan review,
public fire education and the investigation of fires are all
components of the prevention plan. The Fire Marshal, or his or her
qualified designee, are responsible for implementing and managing
activities under this section. The Office of State Fire Marshal
certifies staff serving in these positions.
(3) Inspections of commercial occupancies are conducted to monitor
and rectify conditions that may cause fire situations or the spread
of fire. The primary objective of these inspections is to ensure the
safe egress of occupants or employees who may be endangered by
fire or its byproducts. The Fire Marshal, or his or her qualified
designee, shall work in cooperation with building, planning and
zoning, and potential commercial and residential property owners
to facilitate proper certifications for occupancy. It is also the
responsibility of the Fire Marshal, or his or her qualified designee,
to enforce all aspects of local, state and federal regulations/codes
pertaining to fire and life safety compliance.
B. Plan review.
(1) Any person, including any partnership, corporation or association,
undertaking the erection, extension, alteration, repair, or moving of
a structure, or undertaking any changes that may affect the fire
safety or fire alarm system of a building or any portion thereof,
§ 100-1 CHARTER § 100-1
C:205
shall be required to make application for plan review to the Fire
Marshal, or his or her qualified designee. Said application shall be
made prior to the start of any construction or work and shall be
accompanied by the proper fee or fees as described in Subsection
B(2) hereof. All rough and final inspections, as necessary, shall be
considered as part of the plan review fee and will not be charged
separately. No construction or work shall be started until the
required application has been approved by the Fire Marshal, or his
or her qualified designee.
(2) A plan review application must be submitted along with the initial
plans. When filling out this application, be sure to fill out all
sections completely before submitting. In his code enforcement
role, the Fire Marshal, or his or her qualified designee, conducts a
review of all submitted plans to determine the adequacy of the
plans before starting a formal review. If the plans submitted are
complete and satisfactory, they will be accepted, and the formal
review process will begin. All fees for such reviews shall be in
accordance with RIGL 23-28.2-26, Plan review fees.
(3) In all matters relating to plan review, the interpretations and
decisions of the Town's Fire Marshal, or his or her qualified
designee, shall be binding. If the applicant disagrees with the
decision of the Fire Marshal, or his or her qualified designee, the
applicant may request a variance or seek appeal to the Rhode
Island Fire Safety Code Board of Appeal and Review.
(4) The Fire Marshal, or his or her qualified designee, shall perform
smoke and carbon monoxide detector inspections in all residential
occupancies and shall, at the time of inspection, be allowed to
charge a fee of $30 for the inspection of any residential occupancy.
The responsibility of this charged fee will be borne by the seller on
each occurrence before title to the property is transferred. A fee of
$30 will be allowed for any subsequent reinspection of the same
residential occupancy due to improper installation, wrong location,
improper wiring method, or the seller's failure to maintain a
mutually agreed-upon appointment with the Fire Marshal. The fees
collected by the Fire Marshal, or his or her qualified designee, shall
be used for fire prevention purposes.
(5) The following residential/commercial/businesses are inspected by
the East Greenwich Fire Marshal, or his or her qualified designee:
(a) All elementary, secondary and high schools (K-12).
(b) Private colleges.
(c) Retail gas stations and service stations.
(d) Apartment houses.
(e) Theaters.
§ 100-1 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 100-1
C:206
(f) Hotels and motels.
(g) Bed-and-breakfast buildings.
(h) Lodging or rooming houses.
(i) All industrial occupancies.
(j) All private business occupancies.
(k) All private mercantile occupancies.
(l) All private storage occupancies.
(m) All Town-licensed and -registered businesses per Town
ordinance.
(n) Rough and final commercial and residential inspections from
plan review.
(o) Complaints related to code violations.
C. Investigations.
(1) The Fire Marshal, or his or her qualified designee, is authorized by
statute to respond to any fire or apparently attempted fire and
investigate the cause or origin of the fire. The Fire Marshal, or his
or her qualified designee, will also request that the State Fire
Marshal respond to every fire of suspicious origin and any fire that
results in a fatality. The Fire Marshal, or his or her qualified
designee, responds to all building fires as well as when requested
by the responding fire officer. All investigators follow industry
guidelines to establish the cause and determine whether the fire
will be classified as accidental, incendiary, natural, or
undetermined. Due to the complex nature of fire investigation, the
Fire Marshal, or his or her qualified designee, often works closely
with other local, state, and federal agencies.
(2) The investigations of all fires arc conducted to determine cause and
origin of ignition. This information is required to prevent the
occurrence of future fires or, at the least, reduce the severity of
such incidents. If a fire is determined to be of suspicious origin, a
thorough investigation is intended to prosecute the guilty party. In
this case, the investigation becomes a deterrent to the crime of
arson. When necessary, the Fire Marshal, or his or her qualified
designee, may utilize the expertise of mutual aid fire investigators,
members of the Rhode Island State Fire Marshal's Office or agents
from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms or Federal
Bureau of Investigation.
§ 100-1 CHARTER § 100-1
C:207

ARTICLE II
Connection of fire alarms to municipal systems.
[Adopted 8-26-2019 by Ord. No. 887]
§ 100-2. Rules and regulations.
A. Private property owners within the Town shall be allowed to connect
private auxiliary fire alarm systems, using a local energy master fire
alarm box, on their property to the East Greenwich municipal fire alarm
system; provided that, prior to the commencement of installation:
(1) They obtain a permit from the Fire Chief or his designee of the East
Greenwich Fire Department;
(2) Purchase an approved radio fire alarm box; and install per direction
of the Fire Chief or his designee. Any and all existing connected
systems must be transferred from wired connections to radio boxes
by June 30, 2025;
(3) Pay a connection fee of $500. This fee is to cover programming and
acceptance testing to connect the private system at a location to be
approved by the Fire Chief or his designee;
(4) Agree in writing that the Town shall incur no liability by reason of
such connection to the municipal system.
B. The fee above required shall be paid to the Town Treasurer prior to
connections and will cover all expenses incurred by the Town in making
said installations.
C. The Fire Chief or his designee, with the approval of the Town Council,
may make any other reasonable rules and regulations regarding
connections and maintenance of the fire alarm services as they deem
necessary.
§ 100-2 CHARTER § 100-2
C:209
Chapter 109
FLEA MARKETS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III. Fees — See Ch. 93, Art. I.
§ 109-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
FLEA MARKET — Any structure or use for the sale of food or goods at
retail, which sale is conducted periodically and not daily, involving multiple
vendors who are charged a fee to participate, and whether within an open
area or enclosed structure.
VENDOR — Any person who engages in selling food or goods at retail.
§ 109-2. License required.
Any person owning, operating or controlling a flea market shall be required
to obtain a flea market license from the Town upon payment of a license fee.
§ 109-3. Certain sales excluded.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be intended to require a flea market
license for those sales which are known as "yard sales" or "tag sales" as
those terms are commonly understood.
§ 109-4. Application for license.
A. Application for a flea market license shall be made to the Town Council
upon a form to be supplied by the Town Clerk for that purpose and shall
contain the following information:
(1) Name, address and date of birth of applicant.
(2) Prior arrests and convictions of applicant, if any.
(3) Place where flea market is to be held.
(4) Dates when flea market is to be held, as well as hours of operation.
(5) Other such information as is stipulated by the Town Clerk.
B. No license shall be issued to any applicant unless he shall be over 18
years of age. The granting of or refusal to grant any license shall be
discretionary with the Town Council.
§ 100-2 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 109-5
C:210
§ 109-5. License fees.
Every applicant, upon application for a flea market license, shall pay an
annual license fee to own, operate or control a flea market, as defined in
this chapter, which fee shall be in accordance with Chapter 93, Fees. Such
license shall be valid only for those dates and hours of operation included in
the application and approved by the Town Council. Any additional dates will
require a new license. Each license shall expire September 1 of each year.
Such fee shall be payable in full, whether or not such license is issued for a
full year.
§ 109-6. Revocation of license; hearing.
Every flea market license issued under this chapter is subject to the right,
which is hereby expressly reserved, to revoke the license should the
licensee, directly or indirectly, permit the operation of any flea market
contrary to the provision of this chapter, the ordinances of the Town or the
laws of the state. The license may be revoked by the Town Council after
written notice to the licensee, which notice shall specify the ordinance or
law violations with which the licensee is charged, if after a hearing the
licensee is found to be guilty of such violations. Ten days' notice of the
hearing shall be given the licensee. At such hearing the licensee and his
attorney may present and submit evidence or witnesses in his defense.
§ 109-7. Violations and penalties.50
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, in addition to
the revocation of his or its license, shall be punished in accordance with
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
Chapter 113
FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Building construction — See Ch. 38.
Earth removal — See Ch. 85.
Soil erosion and sedimentation control — See
Ch. 207.
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
Development and subdivision review
regulations — See Ch. A263.
§ 113-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure public safety, minimize hazards
to persons and property from flooding, to protect watercourses from
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 109-5 CHARTER § 113-1
C:211
encroachment, and to maintain the capability of floodplains to retain and
carry off floodwaters. The Town of East Greenwich elects to comply with the
requirements of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as
amended).
§ 113-2. Establishment of special flood hazard areas; administration
and enforcement.
A. Special flood hazard areas (b, c, d, e communities with modifications).
For communities adopting specific panel numbers with countywide
FIRMs and FIS: The special flood hazard areas are herein established
as a floodplain overlay district. The district includes all special flood
hazard areas within the Town of East Greenwich designated as Zone A,
AE, AH, AO, A99, V, or VE on the Kent County Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) and Digital FIRM issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) for the administration of the National
Flood Insurance Program. The map panels of the Kent County FIRM
that are wholly or partially within the Town of East Greenwich are panel
numbers: 44003C0116H, 44003C0117H, 44003C0118G,
44003C0119G, 44003C0136G, 44003C0138G, 44003C0231G,
44003C0232G, 44003C0251G dated December 3, 2010, and
44003C0137H, 44003C0139H dated September 18, 2013. The exact
boundaries of the district may be defined by the one-hundred-year base
flood elevations shown on the FIRM and further defined by the Kent
County Flood Insurance Study (FIS) report dated October 2, 2015. The
office of the Building Official is responsible for floodplain management.
The FIRM and FIS report, and any revisions thereto, are incorporated
herein by reference and are on file with the Building Official, Town
Clerk and the Planning Department. [Amended 9-8-2015 by Ord. No.
844]
B. Administrative provisions.
(1) Building permit. All proposed construction or other development
within a special flood hazard area shall require a permit.
(a) The National Flood Insurance Program special flood hazard
area requires permits for all projects that meet the definition of
"development," not just building projects. Development
projects include any filling, grading, excavation, mining,
drilling, storage of materials, temporary stream crossings. If
the construction or other development within a special flood
hazard area is not covered by a building permit, all other
nonstructural activities shall be permitted by either the Rhode
Island Coastal Resources Management Council and/or the
Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management, as
applicable. Therefore, if another state agency issues a permit,
the local Building Official must have the opportunity for input
and keep a copy of the respective permit in his files.
§ 113-1 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 113-2
C:212
§ 113-3. Notification of watercourse alteration (b, c, d, e
communities).
(b) Prior to the issuance of a building or development permit, the
applicant shall submit evidence that all necessary permits and
approvals have been received from all government agencies
from which approval is required by federal or state law. A
permit fee (based on the cost of the construction) may be
required to be paid to the Town of East Greenwich, and a copy
of a receipt for the same shall accompany the application. An
additional fee may be charged if the Code Enforcement Officer
and/or Board of Appeals needs the assistance of a professional
engineer.
(2) Disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by
this chapter is considered reasonable but does not imply total flood
protection.
(3) Severability. If any section, provision or portion of this chapter is
adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court, the remainder of
the chapter shall not be affected.
(4) Abrogation and greater restrictions. This chapter shall not in any
way impair/remove the necessity of compliance with any other
applicable laws, ordinances, regulations, etc. Where this chapter
imposes a greater restriction, the provisions of this chapter shall
control.
(5) Enforcement. The Building Official shall enforce all provisions as
applicable in reference to R.I.G.L. § 23-27.3-108.1.
(6) Penalties. Every person who shall violate any provision of this code
(the State Building Code) shall be subject to penalties put forth in
R.I.G.L. § 23-27.3-122.3.
A. In a riverine situation, the Building Official shall notify the following of
any alteration or relocation of a watercourse:
Adjacent communities
Bordering states (optional)
NFIP State Coordinator
Rhode Island Emergency Management Agency
645 New London Avenue
Cranston, RI 02920
§ 113-2 CHARTER § 113-3
C:213
§ 113-4. Use regulations.
Risk Analysis Branch
Federal Emergency Management Agency, Region I
99 High Street, 6th Floor
Boston, MA 02110
B. The carrying capacity of the altered or relocated watercourse shall be
maintained.
A. Reference to existing regulations (b, c, d, e communities).
(1) The special flood hazard areas are established as a floodplain
overlay district. All development in the district, including structural
and nonstructural activities, whether permitted by right or by
special permit, must be in compliance with the following:
(a) Rhode Island State Building Code (as established under
R.I.G.L. § 23-27.3).
(b) Coastal Resources Management Act, Rhode Island Coastal
Resources Management Council (R.I.G.L. § 46-23).
(c) Endangered Species Act, Rhode Island Department of
Environmental Management (R.I.G.L. § 20-1-2).
(d) Fresh Water Wetlands Act, Rhode Island Department of
Environmental Management (R.I.G.L. § 2-1-18).
(e) Minimum standards related to individual sewage disposal
systems, Rhode Island Department of Environmental
Management (R.I.G.L. §§ 5-56, 5-56.1, 23-19.15, 23-19.5,
23-24.3, 42-17.1, and 46-13.2).
(f) Water quality regulations, Rhode Island Department of
Environmental Management (R.I.G.L. §§ 42-17.1 and 42-17.6
and 46-12).
(2) Any variances from the provisions and requirements of the abovereferenced
state regulations may only be granted in accordance
with the required variance procedures of these state regulations.
B. Other use regulations.
(1) Within Zones AH and AO on the FIRM, adequate drainage paths
must be provided around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters
around and away from proposed structures (c, d, e communities,
if AH or AO appear).
(2) Within Zones AO on the FIRM, new and substantially improved
residential structures shall have the top of the lowest floor at least
§ 113-3 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 113-4
C:214
as high as the FIRM's depth number above the highest adjacent
grade, and nonresidential structures shall be elevated or
floodproofed above the highest adjacent grade to at least as high as
the depth number on the FIRM. On FIRMs without a depth number
for the AO Zone, structures shall be elevated or floodproofed to
at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade (c, d, e
communities, if AO appear).
(3) In Zones A1-30 and AE, along watercourses that have a regulatory
floodway designated on the Kent County FIRM, encroachments are
prohibited in the regulatory floodway which would result in any
increase in flood levels within the community during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge (d, e communities).
(4) All subdivision proposals must be designed to assure that:
(a) Such proposals minimize flood damage;
(b) All public utilities and facilities are located and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage; and
(c) Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards (b, c, d, e communities).
(5) Detached accessory structures in Zones A, AE, A1-30, AO and AH
(i.e., garages, sheds) do not have to meet the elevation or dry
floodproofing requirement if the following standards are met:
(a) The structure has a value less than $1,000.
(b) The structure has unfinished interiors and must not be used for
human habitation. An apartment, office or other finished space
over a detached garage is considered human habitation and
would require the structure to be elevated.
(c) The structure is not in the floodway.
(d) The structure is not used for storage of hazardous materials.
(e) The structure is used solely for parking of vehicles and/or
limited storage.
(f) The accessory must be wet floodproofed and designed to allow
for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater.
(g) The accessory structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
(h) Service facilities such as electrical, mechanical and heating
equipment must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the
base flood elevation.
(i) The structure must not increase the flood levels in the
floodway.
§ 113-4 CHARTER § 113-4
C:215
§ 113-5. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
pertain to floodplain management and have the same meanings as they have
in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
(6) Existing contour intervals of site and elevations of existing
structures must be included on plan proposal (optional for b, c, d,
e communities).
(7) No person shall change from business/commercial to residential
use of any structure or property located in the floodway of a special
flood hazard area so as to result in a use or expansion that could
increase the risk to the occupants.
(8) The space below the lowest floor shall be:
(a) Free of obstructions as described in FEMA Technical Bulletin
5, "Free of Obstruction Requirements for Buildings Located in
Coastal High Hazard Area in Accordance with the National
Flood Insurance Program"; or
(b) Constructed with open wood latticework or insect screening
intended to collapse under wind and water without causing
collapse, displacement or other structural damage to the
elevated portion of the building or supporting piles or columns;
or
(c) Designed with an enclosed area less than 300 square feet that
is constructed with nonsupporting breakaway walls that have a
design safe loading resistance of not less than 10 nor more
than 20 pounds per square foot.
C. Base flood elevation and floodway data.
(1) Floodway data. In Zones A, A1-30 and AE, along watercourses that
have not had a regulatory floodway designated, the best available
federal, state, local or other floodway data shall be used to prohibit
encroachments in floodways which would result in any increase in
flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
(2) Base flood elevation data. Base flood elevation data is required for
subdivision proposals or other developments greater than 50 lots
or five acres, whichever is the lesser, within unnumbered A Zones.
(3) Base flood elevations in A Zones. In the absence of FEMA BFE data
and floodway data, the best available federal, state, local or other
BFE or floodway data shall be used as the basis for elevating
residential and nonresidential structures to or above the base flood
level and for floodproofing nonresidential structures to or above
the base flood level.
§ 113-4 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 113-5
C:216
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure which is on the same parcel of
property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING (for a community with AO or AH Zones
only) — A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO Zone on a community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percent or greater annual
chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet, where a clearly
defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable,
and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by
ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — See definition for "special flood
hazard area."
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation of the crest of the base
flood or one-hundred-year flood; the height, as established in relation to
the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum where
specified), in relation to mean sea level expected to be reached by the
waters of the base flood at pertinent points in the floodplains of coastal and
riverine areas.
BASEMENT — Any area of a building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING — See definition for "structure."
COASTAL A ZONE — Area within a special flood hazard area, landward
of a V Zone or landward of an open coast without mapped V Zones. The
principal source of flooding must be astronomical tides, storm surges,
seiches or tsunamis, not riverine flooding. During the base flood conditions,
the potential for breaking wave heights shall be greater than or equal to 1.5
feet.
COST — As related to substantial improvements, the cost of any
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, alteration, repair or other
improvement of a structure shall be established by a detailed written
contractor's estimate. The estimate shall include, but not be limited to, the
cost of materials (interior finishing elements, structural elements, utility
and service equipment); sales tax on materials, building equipment and
fixtures, including heating and air conditioning and utility meters; labor;
built-in appliances; demolition and site preparation; repairs made to
damaged parts of the building worked on at the same time; contractor's
overhead; contractor's profit; and grand total. Items to be excluded include
cost of plans and specifications, survey costs, permit fees, costs to correct
code violations subsequent to a violation notice, outside improvements such
as septic systems, water supply wells, landscaping, sidewalks, fences, yard
lights, irrigation systems, and detached structures such as garages, sheds
and gazebos.
§ 113-5 CHARTER § 113-5
C:217
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction of buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations or storage of equipment or materials.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — A manufactured home park or manufactured home
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured home are to be affixed (including, as a minimum,
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective
date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION — The preparation of
additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation
of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) — The federal
agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map of a community
on which the Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the
special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community. A FIRM that has been made available digitally is called a Digital
Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM).
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official study of a community in
which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has conducted
a technical engineering evaluation and determination of local flood hazards,
flood profiles and water surface elevations. The Flood Insurance Rate Maps
(FIRM), which accompany the FIS, provide both flood insurance rate zones
and base flood elevations and may provide the regulatory floodway limits.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from either the overflow of
inland or tidal waters, or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of
surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
a designated height. For the purposes of these regulations, the term
"regulatory floodway" is synonymous in meaning with the term "floodway."
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to
§ 113-5 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 113-5
C:218
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and
floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE OR FACILITY — A use that cannot
perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close
proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities
that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers,
and ship building and ship repair facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG) — The highest natural elevation of
the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LIMIT OF MODERATE WAVE ACTION (LIMWA) — An advisory line
indicating the limit of the one-and-one-half-foot wave height during the base
flood.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
contributing to the historic significance of a registered historic district
or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a
registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 113-5 CHARTER § 113-5
C:219
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— A parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MARKET VALUE — The price of a structure that a willing buyer and seller
agree upon. This can be determined by an independent appraisal by a
professional appraiser; the property's tax assessment, minus land value; the
replacement cost minus depreciation of the structure; the structure's actual
cash value.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after
December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes,
"new construction" means structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management
regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — A manufactured home park or manufactured home
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum,
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the
effective date of floodplain regulations adopted by the community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — See definition for "floodway."
SHEET FLOW AREA (for community with AO, AH or VO Zones only) — See
definition for "area of shallow flooding."
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — The land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding
in any given year. After detailed ratemaking has been completed in
preparation for publication of the Flood Insurance Rate Map, Zone A usually
is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/
AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, or V1-30, VE or V. For purposes of these regulations,
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
C.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal
use.
D.
§ 113-5 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 113-5
C:220
the term "special flood hazard area" is synonymous in meaning with the
phrase "area of special flood hazard."
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building
permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, substantial improvement
or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The "actual
start" means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation
of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers,
or foundations or the erections of temporary forms, nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
For a substantial improvement, the "actual start of construction" means
the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building.
STRUCTURE — For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed
building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above
ground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure,
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition or other improvements to a structure, the cost of which equals
For insurance purposes, means:
A building with two or more outside rigid walls and a fully secured
roof that is affixed to a permanent site;
(1)
A manufactured home (a manufactured home, also known as a
"mobile home," is a structure, built on a permanent chassis,
transported to its site in one or more sections, and affixed to a
permanent foundation); or
(2)
A travel trailer without wheels, built on a chassis and affixed to
a permanent foundation, that is regulated under the community's
floodplain management and building ordinances or laws.
(3)
A.
For the latter purpose, "structure" does not mean recreational vehicle
or a park trailer or other similar vehicle, except as described in
Subsection A(3) of this definition, or a gas or liquid storage tank.
B.
§ 113-5 CHARTER § 113-5
C:221
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by a community from the terms of the
floodplain management ordinance that allows construction in a manner
otherwise prohibited and where specific enforcement would result in
unnecessary hardship.
VIOLATION — Failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management ordinance.
Construction or other development without required permits, lowest floor
elevation documentation, floodproofing certificates or required floodway
encroachment calculations is presumed to be in violation until such time as
that documentation is provided.
Chapter 122
GRAVEL BANKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Earth removal — See Ch. 85.
Fees — See Ch. 93, Art. I.
Soil erosion and sedimentation control — See
Ch. 207.
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
§ 122-1. Permit required.
No person shall open or operate a gravel bank without first obtaining a
permit therefor from the Town Council. Prior to any permit being issued,
the Building Official shall inspect the premises where the gravel bank is
operating or is proposed and shall report his findings to the Town Council.
§ 122-2. Definitions.
In addition to definitions otherwise herein set forth, the following terms
shall have the meanings in this section:
BUILDING OFFICIAL — The individual charged by the Town with the
issuance of building permits.
Any project to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the
local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary
to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of the historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
§ 113-5 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 122-2
C:222
GRAVEL BANK — A lot or parcel of land or portion thereof which is used for
the primary or principal purpose of extracting stone, sand, gravel, loam or
other earth materials.
§ 122-3. Application for permit.
The permit required by § 122-1 shall not be issued until application therefor
is made to the Town Council. Such application shall be accompanied by:
A. Four maps and plans prepared by a professional engineer or registered
land surveyor, drawn to a scale of one inch equals 40 feet and showing
accurately the following:
(1) The entire premises owned and the limits of the area for which a
permit is requested.
(2) Existing and proposed land contours at a vertical contour level of
not more than one foot within the permit area and the area within
200 feet in all directions therefrom.
(3) Existing and proposed drainage, rivers, streams, watercourses and
swamps on and within 200 feet of the premises.
(4) Proposed ingress and egress to the permit area, and all fences and
gates.
(5) A permanent point or bench mark in a location safe from
disturbance for the duration of the permit, with a designation of its
elevation.
(6) The storage area in which the applicant will stockpile sufficient
topsoil, as calculated by a professional engineer, soil conservation
commission or land surveyor, to cover the area to an average depth
of no less than four inches.
(7) Any other information as requested by the Town Council which
shall be pertinent to the existing or proposed gravel bank.
B. The number and type of equipment to be used in the operation of the
gravel bank and its location if it is to be permanently located within the
gravel bank for the duration of the gravel bank operations.
C. A statement indicating whether the applicant has made application for
and/or secured all necessary permits required under any other federal
or state law or Town ordinance, including a list of such permits sought
and/or secured.
D. A fee as established by the Town Council.51
51.Editor's Note: See Ch. 93, Fees.
§ 122-2 CHARTER § 122-4
C:223
§ 122-4. Conditions of permit.
In connection with the application for a permit, the Town Council may grant
or deny any application filed pursuant to this chapter in whole or in part,
and in so acting shall take into account public health, safety and welfare,
including the possibility of dust, noise, unsightly waste, soil erosion,
drainage problems and protection of property values, together with such
other factors as it shall deem appropriate, and may impose conditions
which, in its discretion and judgment in each particular case, are designed
to prevent personal injury, to promote the health and welfare of the Town's
residents and to safeguard the surrounding area and the Town against
permanent and temporary injury to property values either during operation
of the gravel bank, including the handling and transportation of earth
materials, or after operations are completed. However, all permits shall
require:
A. Buffer areas.
(1) The following buffer areas be left in their natural state during the
life of the permit:
(a) Three hundred feet of any street line.
(b) Two hundred feet of any other boundary line.
(c) Six hundred feet of any occupied dwelling.
(2) Reduction in the width of buffer areas may be allowed by the Town
Council upon application therefor and upon appropriate conditions,
provided that written consent of the affected abutters and/or
occupants and recommendation of the conservation commission
are first obtained and filed with the application.
B. In earth material removal areas, ledge shall not be left exposed above
the approved grade, and all cleared trees, stumps and brush shall be
removed or completely buried. If buried, a plan showing the location of
all such buried trees, stumps or other material subject to subsequent
compacting by decay shall be filed with the Building Official. However,
no trees, stumps or other material subject to decay shall be buried at an
elevation below the maximum water table.
C. All final bankings shall be graded to a slope no steeper than one foot
vertical to two feet horizontal.
D. Following earth material removal, topsoil shall be spread to a minimum
depth of four inches. Seeding of the area shall be done per the
requirements of the Town Council.
E. No excavation shall produce standing water.
F. Earth material shall not be removed to an elevation less than six feet
above the maximum water table elevation.
§ 122-4 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 122-4
C:224
§ 122-5. Duration of permit.
The Town Council shall issue such permits for a period not to exceed one
year. All permits shall specify the commencement date and shall expire on
the succeeding first day of January.
§ 122-6. Permit fee.
There shall be a fee as established by the Town Council for any permit
issued under this chapter. No reduction in this fee shall be provided any
application for a permit of less than one year's duration.
§ 122-7. Renewal of permit.
Any permit holder may renew his permit by filing an application therefor
in compliance with § 122-3. However, any application for renewal may
incorporate by reference any document filed with the original application.
G. In earth removal operations involving two or more acres, a bond shall
be posted with the Town Clerk with penal sum and surety satisfactory to
the said Town Council, conditioned upon the faithful performance by
the applicant of the conditions of the permit. Such bond shall not be less
than $2,000 per acre of working area; i.e., any area in condition other
than its natural or reconditioned state.
H. Adequate measures shall be taken to prevent erosion or depositing of
sediment upon surrounding lands and streets or into any waterway,
pond or swamp.
I. All work shall take place between the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.,
Monday through Friday, and 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon on Saturday. No
work shall take place on legal holidays.
J. A fence of not less than six feet in height, with gates as required, shall
be erected around the permit area.
K. Access roads to the site and within the permitted area shall be treated
to minimize dust conditions.
L. No machinery for the screening, washing, crushing or other like uses
shall be permitted on the property, with the exception of existing gravel
banks where such machinery is located at the time of adoption of this
chapter.
M. Earth removal operations shall be limited to five acres at any given
time. Each additional five acres, or a part thereof, shall require a new
permit.
N. All land excavated must be rehabilitated within one year of completion
of the excavation. Rehabilitation of the area shall be in conformance
with the United States Department of Agriculture Guidelines for
Developing and Restoring Gravel Pits.
§ 122-4 CHARTER § 122-7
C:225
All applications for renewal shall be filed with the Town Council prior to the
first day of December in each year.
§ 122-8. Permit not to run with land.
Any permit granted under the provisions of this chapter shall not run with
the land. Any conveyance of the premises containing the gravel bank or
a portion thereof shall require an application for a new permit by the
succeeding owner if gravel bank operations are to be continued upon those
premises or a portion thereof.
§ 122-9. Permit revocation.
Any person who, after receiving a permit in accordance with this chapter,
violates the conditions set forth in said permit or this chapter shall be
subject to having such permit revoked. No revocation shall be made without
first giving notification of the violation to the permit holder and a public
hearing of a judicial nature held.
§ 122-10. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Building Official.
§ 122-11. Scope.
Any person, prior to the passage of this chapter, who shall have owned or
operated any gravel bank and who continues to own or operate a gravel
bank after the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter derives
shall, within 30 days after the date of passage hereof, file an application for
permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 122-12. Violations and penalties.52
Any person found guilty of violating this chapter shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty, for each day
such person shall be in violation hereof.
Chapter 128
HARBOR MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Cove Management Commission — See Ch. 34,
Art. II.
Mooring fees — See § 93-1A(27).
52.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 122-7 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 122-12
C:226
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Harbors and harbor lines — See R.I.G.L.
§ 46-4-1 et seq.
Appointment of Harbormaster — See R.I.G.L.
§ 46-4-6.14.
§ 128-1. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter and any rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto shall be applicable to, and shall govern the use of, the
cove, lands, waters and facilities under the jurisdiction of the East
Greenwich Cove Management Commission. This chapter shall be
subordinate to all existing federal and state statutes and regulations
affecting the Town and is not intended to preempt any other valid law.
§ 128-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ABODE — The principal, non-water-dependent use of a structure or vessel
as a dwelling or home.
ANCHORING — To secure a vessel temporarily to the bottom of a water
body by dropping an anchor or other ground tackle from a vessel.
CHANNEL — Any water areas reserved for unobstructed movement of
vessels.
COVE MANAGEMENT COMMISSION — The local commission established
under and carrying out the responsibilities authorized by Article II of
Chapter 34, Boards, Committees and Commissions.
COMMERCIAL MOORING — The rental or lease of a mooring or the use of
a mooring to conduct business by a registered commercial marine business.
FAIRWAY — Any locally designated and/or maintained water areas reserved
for unobstructed movement of vessels.
GREENWICH COVE — Those portions of East Greenwich water delineated
as such on the official chart which is on file in the Town Clerk's office.
HARBORMASTER — Refers to that person appointed by the Town Manager
with the approval of the Town Council.
LAUNCHING RAMP — Any man-made or natural facility used for the
launching and retrieval of boats (Section 300.4 Rhode Island Coastal
Resources Management Program).
MARINA — Includes any dock, pier, wharf, float, floating businesses, or
combination of such facilities that service five or more recreational boats as
a commercial enterprise or in association with a club (Section 300.4 Rhode
Island Coastal Resources Management Program).
§ 122-12 CHARTER § 128-2
C:227
MOOR — To permanently secure a vessel to the bottom of a water body by
the use of mooring tackle.
MOORING — Refers to that location duly permitted by the Town and
registered to the applicant.
MOORING TACKLE — The hardware used to secure a vessel at a mooring
and which is kept in place seasonally.
NONRESIDENT — Any individual, business or corporation which does not
meet the definition of "resident."
QUALIFIED MOORING INSPECTOR — An individual or company who, to
the satisfaction of the Harbormaster, is qualified to inspect mooring tackle
as to condition and size.
RECREATIONAL BOATING FACILITY — Includes marinas, launching
ramps, residential boating facilities, recreational wharves, piers and slips,
floats or floating docks, and recreational mooring areas (Section 300.4
Rhode Island Coastal Resources Management Program).
RESIDENT — Persons who are legal residents of East Greenwich or persons
who own real estate in East Greenwich. For purposes of this section, simply
having a post office box in East Greenwich does not qualify as an East
Greenwich resident.
RESTRICTED AREA — Those portions of East Greenwich Cove which shall
be designated as restricted from mooring or anchoring on the mooring
chart.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — An easement or right to pass and repass across a parcel.
VESSEL — Every description of watercraft, other than a seaplane on water,
used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water.
Specifically excluded by this definition are floating homes.
§ 128-3. Authority of Harbormaster.
The Harbormaster, under the direction of the Town Manager, shall have
the authority to carry out harbor management directives and enforce all
provisions of the harbor management plan, including this chapter. The
Harbormaster may cite any alleged violations of this chapter.
§ 128-4. Duties of Harbormaster.
A. The Harbormaster may assume the following duties:
(1) Act as a staff resource as needed by the Cove Management
Commission.
(2) Be responsible for administration of any designated mooring areas.
(3) Keep records of the location of all moorings, users and vessels
within the designated harbor areas and other Town waters.
§ 128-2 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 128-4
C:228
§ 128-5. Harbor regulations.
(4) Consult with the Parks and Recreation Director on the mooring
waiting list.
(5) Inspect marine sanitation devices and/or any other overboard
discharges to ensure conformance with the United States Coast
Guard standards.53
(6) Enforce any ordinance or provision of the harbor management
plan, ordinance or any state boating laws, as applicable.
B. The Harbormaster shall work at the direction of the Town Manager.
A. Liability. Persons using the public facilities and areas within the limits
of Greenwich Cove shall assume all risk of personal injury and damage
or loss to their property. The Town assumes no risk on account of
accident, fire, theft, vandalism or acts of God.
B. Vessel speed. The operation of any vessel within Greenwich Cove shall
proceed in a manner which protects all persons and property from
wake. Operators of boats within Greenwich Cove shall comply with the
state regulations on wake and boat speed, which establish a maximum
speed for boats at five miles per hour, no wake.
C. Obstruction of channels, fairways and berthing spaces. No vessel shall
be moored or anchored so as to interfere with the free and
unobstructed use of the channels, fairways or berthing spaces within
the area designated in § 128-1.
D. Swimming. Swimming is prohibited in all designated channels and
fairways.
E. Fishing. Fishing from vessels and shell fishing is prohibited in all
designated channels and fairways. The placement of pot floats and fish
nets is prohibited in all channels and fairways.
F. Houseboats and floating businesses. Houseboats or floating businesses
are prohibited from mooring or anchoring unless within the boundaries
of a marina. Houseboats and floating businesses shall tie into marina or
port holding-tank pump-out facilities where available.54
G. Discharge of refuse. It shall be a violation of this chapter to willfully
discharge any refuse or waste matter, petroleum product or by-product,
paint, varnish, dead animals, fish, bait or debris into Greenwich Cove.
H. Marine toilets. No person shall operate a marine toilet at any time so as
to cause or permit to pass or to be discharged into the waters of East
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
54.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 128-4 CHARTER § 128-5
C:229
Greenwich Cove any untreated sewage or other waste matter or
contaminant of any kind. (Narragansett Bay is a no-discharge zone, per
Rhode Island's No-Discharge Compliance Program.)
I. Use of Town dock. [Amended 11-29-2018 by Ord. No 879]
(1) The Town dock shall not be used on a continual basis for more than
one hour.
(2) The Town dock shall be limited to vessels up to 35 feet in length
and up to six tons in weight. Any vessel that exceeds those length
and weight limits may only use the Town dock with the express
approval of the Harbormaster or his or her designee.
J. Abandoned vessels/harbor structures. No person shall deposit or
abandon a vessel or structure upon a beach, a public right-of-way or in
the waters of the Town. Any person violating this section shall be
subject to a fine in accordance with the provisions in § 128-7. When any
vessel or structure is deposited or abandoned in the waters of the Town,
the Harbormaster is authorized and empowered to remove such vehicle
or structure or cause such vehicle or structure to be removed.
(1) Notice of removal of vessel/harbor structures. If the person who
owns, has an interest in, or exercises any control over the vessel or
structure, or otherwise is known, the Harbormaster shall give
written notice by certified mail to such person to remove the vessel
or structure within a specified time.
(2) Removal of vessel/harbor structures. If the vessel or structure is
not removed within the time specified in the notice and in a manner
and to a place satisfactory to the Harbormaster, or if no such
person is known to the Harbormaster upon whom the notice can be
served, the Harbormaster may proceed to remove or cause the
vessel or structure to be removed in a manner and to a place the
Harbormaster shall deem best.
(3) Liability. The owner or such other person of a vessel or structure
removed by the Harbormaster in accordance with this chapter shall
be liable to pay the cost and expenses of the removal and storage or
to repay the cost and expenses when paid by the Town. The
expenses may be recovered in an action brought by the Town
Solicitor against the owner(s). If the owner(s) are unknown or the
vessel or structure is unclaimed within 90 days of the removal, the
Town may sell the vessel or structure. The proceeds from the sale
shall be used to defray the costs of the Town incurred in the
removal and storage of the vessel or structure and in the
administration of this chapter.
K. Towing. The Harbormaster has the authority to direct that a vessel be
towed pursuant to this chapter or any rules and regulations of the Town
Council.
§ 128-5 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 128-5
C:230
§ 128-6. Moorings.
L. Rafting. Rafting on a single mooring will only be allowed if it does not
interfere with adjacent single moorings or anchorages. Boats in a raft
shall be manned at all times.
A. Placement of private and commercial moorings.
(1) It shall be a violation of this chapter to place any mooring in the
waters of the Town without a permit from the Harbormaster. No
vessel moored or anchored within a mooring area shall extend
beyond the mooring area perimeter into any designated channels,
fairways, turning basins, or shoreside facilities.
(2) No moorings shall be placed within 50 feet of any shoreside
structure.
(3) All moorings shall be set back at least 25 feet from the fairway and
public rights-of-way.
(4) No moorings or anchorages are permitted in designated areas
adjacent to public rights-of-way.
(5) No private or commercial moorings are permitted in designated
federal navigation areas.
(6) No swimming or waterskiing activities shall be allowed in mooring
areas.
(7) All private moorings (excluding riparian moorings) that have been
permitted and placed outside the boundary of the Town's mooring
area shall be relocated within the mooring area whenever the
abandonment or removal of a mooring located within the mooring
area provides a vacancy for such relocation.
(8) Moorings are assigned by the East Greenwich Parks and
Recreation Director after consultation with the Harbormaster.
B. Mooring records.
(1) The East Greenwich Parks and Recreation Department shall keep a
detailed record of each mooring, its location, and the owner's
name, home address, and business and home telephone numbers,
date of application, name of boat, boat length, beam and draft, type
of boat and type of head and holding tank to be attached thereto.
The Parks and Recreation Department shall give a copy of the
information to the Harbormaster. The Harbormaster shall keep a
detailed record of each mooring and its physical location in the
Cove.
(2) The East Greenwich Parks and Recreation Department shall
maintain in a public place a waiting list for mooring space and a list
§ 128-5 CHARTER § 128-6
C:231
for assignment of mooring space, and both lists shall be updated
annually.
(3) Applications for all moorings shall be renewed annually.
C. Allocation of moorings.
(1) After March 1 of each year, the Parks and Recreation Director and
the Harbormaster shall determine the number of moorings
available for new mooring space as the sum of all authorized
mooring spaces for which acceptable applications for renewal were
not received. In accordance with Coastal Resources Management
Council (CRMC) Harbor Management Guidelines, moorings shall
be allocated in a ratio of no greater than three East Greenwich
residents to each nonresident. If at any time a mooring field is
established or relocated to within a federal navigation project, then
the mooring allocations shall meet the Army Corps of Engineers
requirement of "open to all on a fair and equitable basis."
(2) Only one mooring permit may be issued to a boat owner other than
a commercial user. In order to ensure an adequate number of
moorings to be available for individual permit applicants, no more
than a total of 35 commercial mooring permits may be issued.
(3) Consideration shall be given to water quality concerns, parking,
boating safety and public access when determining the total
number of mooring permits to be issued.
D. Original application for mooring permit. Application shall be made on
mooring application forms provided by the Parks and Recreation
Department and shall be filed with the Parks and Recreation
Department. No mooring shall be located or maintained unless the
owner has obtained a current mooring permit.
E. Mooring permit waiting list. A waiting list for mooring permits will be
established and maintained by the East Greenwich Parks and
Recreation Department. Chronological order of date of application will
determine the waiting list. Persons on the waiting list who do not apply
for a permit within 10 business days when notified that a mooring
location appropriate to their boat size is available will be removed from
the mooring waiting list.
F. Mooring permits valid for one year only. Mooring permits are valid for a
period not to exceed one year, unless renewed as referenced in this
chapter.
G. Application for mooring permits and renewals.
(1) Applications for new or abandoned moorings may be made at any
time.
(2) Applications for mooring renewals must be submitted no later than
March 1 of each succeeding year. No applications for renewals of
§ 128-6 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 128-6
C:232
mooring permits will be accepted after March 1. All valid permits,
if not renewed, shall expire March 1 of the next year.
(3) Failure to renew an existing mooring, properly permitted, by March
1 of any given year shall result in the registered owner's
abandonment of all rights and interest in said mooring.
(4) A new permittee will be granted a mooring permit without a boat
for no more than one boating season.
(5) A current permit holder must have a registered boat on file but may
renew the permit for no more than one consecutive boating season
without a registered boat.
(6) Commercial mooring holders must submit documentation with the
mooring application indicating that the business is a registered
commercial business and provide proof of insurance naming the
Town of East Greenwich as an additional insured.
H. Mooring registration fee. All applications shall be accompanied by the
registration fee established by the Town Council. Registration fees shall
not be refundable. Upon approval of a mooring permit, the full mooring
fee shall be paid to the Parks and Recreation Department within 10
days.
I. Mooring permits nontransferable.
(1) Permits issued under this chapter shall not be transferable.
(2) An assigned mooring shall be used only by the boat registered to it.
The boat using a residential or nonresidential mooring must be
registered to the mooring permit holder. This restriction shall not
apply to commercial moorings or recreational boating facilities/
marinas. Exceptions to this shall be made at the Harbormaster's
discretion.
J. Mooring location. All mooring locations will be approved and
designated by the Harbormaster through the Mooring Committee. If a
replacement vessel is significantly smaller, larger or of different draft or
type, the Harbormaster shall have the right to relocate the vessel to
another, more suitable mooring.
K. Transient moorings. Space for rental transient moorings is made
available through the East Greenwich Yacht Club.
L. Appeal of permit denial. Appeals of permit denial or no action must be
made to the Town Manager within 10 working days.
M. Illegal moorings/abandons.
(1) Any mooring on or maintained in Greenwich Cove which has not
been issued a permit and/or does not comply with each and every
specification set forth in this chapter shall be deemed an illegal
§ 128-6 CHARTER § 128-6
C:233
mooring and shall be removed at the owner's expense. All existing
moorings must be registered and approved and comply or they
shall be removed.
(2) Whenever any mooring is placed in or remains in Greenwich Cove
in violation of this chapter, the Harbormaster shall cause the
mooring to be removed.
(3) The permit holders or other such persons concerned with moorings
that have been removed by the Harbormaster shall be liable to pay
the cost and expenses of such removal, or to repay the cost and
expenses when paid out by the Town, and the cost and expenses
may be recovered in an action brought by the Town against such
persons.
N. Mooring tackle specifications. Utilization of proper mooring tackle is
necessary to moor vessels adequately at their moorings. This chapter
hereby establishes a minimum standard for tackle to moor vessels in
Greenwich Cove. The Town assumes no liability for personal injury or
property damage which results from the utilization of any tackle which
meets or exceeds these recommendations.
(1) Boat and/or mooring owners shall be liable for any damage caused
by faulty, inadequate or improperly placed moorings.
(2) It is the owner's responsibility to maintain the mooring and to have
the tackle inspected by a qualified mooring inspector at least every
three years. Certification of inspection will be kept on file with the
Harbormaster.
(3) Each mooring which has been approved as set forth shall be
assigned a registration number. Each mooring buoy or float must
be clearly visible and legibly marked with its assigned number. All
mooring buoys shall be marked with a clearly legible number
(three-inch minimum number height) assigned by the Parks and
Recreation Department.
(4) Mooring tackle should meet the following minimum standards:
East Greenwich Cove Mooring System
Registered
Boat
Length
(feet)
Mushroom
Anchor
(pounds)
Bottom
Chain
(inches)
Top Chain
(inches)
Nylon/
Dacron
Line
(inches)
Under 16 75 3/8 5/16 1/2
16 - 19 150 3/8 5/16 1/2
20 - 22 200 1/2 5/16 5/8
23 - 25 250 1/2 5/16 3/4
26 - 30 300 5/8 3/8 3/4
§ 128-6 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 128-6
C:234
East Greenwich Cove Mooring System
Registered
Boat
Length
(feet)
Mushroom
Anchor
(pounds)
Bottom
Chain
(inches)
Top Chain
(inches)
Nylon/
Dacron
Line
(inches)
31 - 35 400 5/8 3/8 3/4
36 - 40 500 3/4 1/2 7/8
41 - 50 600 3/4 1/2 1
51 - 65 750 1 1/2 1 1/4
(a) The maximum length of the pennant should be 2 1/2 times the
distance from the bow chock to the water, plus the distance
from the bow chock to the mooring cleat or post.
(b) All pennant lines running through a chock or any other object
where chafing may occur should have adequate chafe guards.
(c) The total scope of the chain should be 2 1/2 times the depth of
the water at high tide. The bottom and top chain should each
consist of approximately 50% of the scope.
(d) All shackles, swivels and other hardware used in the mooring
hookup should be proportional in size to the chain used.
(e) All shackles should be properly sized.
(f) It is recommended that the pennant be spliced or shackled into
the bitter end of the top chain below the buoy so the strain is
not carried by the buoy. The use of a second pennant and
anchor in heavy weather is encouraged.
(g) Only mushroom anchors will be acceptable on permanent
moorings.
(h) The minimum distance between any two moored vessels should
be 1 1/4 times the total mooring scope, plus the length of the
larger vessel.
(i) The Harbormaster may approve installation of other types of
moorings if they are deemed sufficient for the area in which
they are located.
(j) Winter mooring stakes shall be readily visible in a vertical
position above the water at all times and shall be removed not
later than June 1 of the next succeeding year. Winter stakes
shall not be set until on or after October 1 of each calendar
year.
§ 128-6 CHARTER § 128-7
C:235
§ 128-7. Violations and penalties.55
The violator of any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
punished in accordance with Chapter 1, Article III, of the Code of the Town
of East Greenwich.
Chapter 134
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 197.
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 128-7 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 128-7
C:236
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 134-1. Purpose and policy.
A. This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for indirect industrial
wastewater discharges in the Town and enables the Town to comply
with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean Water
Act of 1977 and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR Part
403).
B. The objectives of this chapter are:
(1) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the
system or contaminate the resulting sludge;
(2) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system which will pass through the system,
inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere, or
otherwise be incompatible with the system;
(3) To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and
sludges from the system; and
(4) To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the municipal
wastewater system.
C. This chapter provides for the regulation of direct and indirect
contributors to the municipal wastewater system through the issuance
of permits to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of
general requirements for other users, authorizes monitoring and
enforcement activities, requires user reporting, assumes that existing
customer's capacity will not be preempted, and provides for the setting
of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program
established in this chapter.
D. This chapter shall apply to the Town and to persons outside the Town
who are, by contract or agreement with the Town, users of the Town
POTW. This chapter is a supplement to the existing rules and
regulations controlling the installation and connection of building
sewers and the discharge of waters and wastes into the public sewer
system in the Town, and the requirements and stipulations of this
chapter are in addition to those of the rules and regulations. Except as
otherwise provided in this chapter, the Director of Public Works of the
Town POTW shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 134-1 CHARTER § 134-2
C:237
§ 134-2. Definitions and abbreviations.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
A. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the "Clean Water Act," as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The Administrator of the United States
Environmental Protection Agency or his authorized representative.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER — An
authorized representative of an industrial user may be:
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure, five days at 20° C., expressed in terms of weight
and concentration [milligrams per liter (mg/l)].
BUILDING SEWER — A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises
of a user to the POTW.
CATEGORICAL STANDARDS — See "National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard or pretreatment standard."
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant
added is heat.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — The approval authority as defined in this
section or the Town, where the Town has an approved pretreatment
program under the provisions of the Act.
DIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or untreated
wastewater directly to the waters of the State of Rhode Island.
DIRECTOR — The Director of Public Works, Town of East Greenwich,
or his authorized representative, designated by the Town to supervise
the operation of the publicly owned treatment works.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA — The United
States Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the
A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice president,
if the industrial user is a corporation;
(1)
A general partner or proprietor, if the industrial user is a
partnership or proprietorship, respectively;
(2)
A duly authorized representative of the individual designated in
Subsections (1) and (2) of this definition, if such representative is
responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the
indirect discharge originates.
(3)
§ 134-2 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 134-2
C:238
term may also be used as a designation for the Administrator or other
duly authorized official of such agency.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream on
a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and
without consideration of time.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any waste from holding tanks such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum
pump tank trucks.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge or the introduction of
nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under Section
307(b) or (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317), into the POTW (including
holding tank waste discharged into the system).
INDUSTRIAL USER — A source of wastewater discharge into the POTW
which constitutes an indirect discharge.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a
discharge from other sources, both:
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or
PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section
307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which applies to a specific
category of industrial users.
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM or
NPDES PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act
(33 U.S.C. § 1342).
NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE
DISCHARGE STANDARD — Any regulation developed under the
authority of Section 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR 403.5.
NEW SOURCE — Any building, structure, facility or installation from
which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction
of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment
Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operation,
or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
(1)
Therefore, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the
POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude
or duration of a violation) or the prevention of sewage sludge use
or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions
and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent
state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act; the
Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), including Title II more commonly
referred to as the "Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(RCRA)"; and including state regulations contained in any state
sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the
SWDA, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substance Control Act and the
Marine Protection Research and Sanctuaries Act.
(2)
§ 134-2 CHARTER § 134-2
C:239
standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable
to such sources if such standards are thereafter promulgated in
accordance with that section, provided that:
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of
the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in
conjunction with a discharge from other sources, is a cause of violation
of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase
in the magnitude or duration of a violation).
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include
the feminine; the singular shall include the plural where indicated by
the context.
pH — The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and
agricultural waste discharged into water.
POLLUTION — The man-made or man-induced alteration of the
chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of water.
PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature
of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior
to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants
into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical,
chemical or biological processes or process changes or other means,
except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d).
The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a
site at which no other source is located;
(1)
The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the
process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
(2)
The production or wastewater-generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining
whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the
extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant
and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same
general type of activity as the existing source should be considered.
(3)
§ 134-2 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 134-2
C:240
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national
pretreatment standard imposed on an industrial user.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — A treatment
works, as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292), which is
owned in this instance by the Town. This definition includes any sewers
that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, but does not
include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility
providing treatment. For the purposes of this chapter, "POTW" shall
also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from
persons outside the Town who are, by contract or agreement with the
Town, users of the Town's POTW.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT — That portion of the POTW designed to
provide treatment to wastewater.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER — Any industrial user of the Town's
wastewater disposal system who: a) has a discharge flow of 25,000
gallons or more per average workday; b) has a flow greater than 5%
of the flow in the Town's wastewater treatment system; or c) has in
his wastes toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to Section 307 of the
Act or statutes of the State of Rhode Island, by ordinances of the
Town, by regulations as may be promulgated from time to time by
the Director, or by the United States Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with
other contributing industries, on the wastewater treatment system,
the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality, or air emissions
generated by the system.56
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget,
1972.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and
which is removable by laboratory filtering.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed
as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the
Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of CWA Section
307(a) or other acts.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the
contribution of wastewater into the Town's POTW.
WASTEWATER — The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic
wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and
56.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 134-2 CHARTER § 134-2
C:241
§ 134-3. Fees.
institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and
stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which
is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW.
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — As set forth in § 134-19.
WATERS OF THE STATE — All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of
water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private,
which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or
any portion thereof.
B. Abbreviations. The following abbreviations shall have the designated
meanings:
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
COD Chemical oxygen demand
EPA Environmental Protection Agency
l Liter
mg Milligrams
mg/l Milligrams per liter
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
POTW Publicly owned treatment works (owned and operated by
the Town of East Greenwich)
SIC Standard industrial classification
SWDA Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.
USC United States Code
TSS Total suspended solids
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the recovery of
costs from users of the Town's wastewater disposal system for the
implementation of the program established in this chapter. The
applicable charges or fees shall be set forth in the Town's schedule of
charges and fees.
B. Charges and fees authorized. The Town may adopt charges and fees
which may include:
(1) Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures;
(2) Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and
construction;
(3) Fees for permit applications;
§ 134-2 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 134-3
C:242
§ 134-4. Suspension of service or permit.
§ 134-5. Revocation of permit.
Any user who violates the following conditions of this chapter or applicable
state and federal regulations is subject to having his wastewater discharge
permit revoked in accordance with the procedures of §§ 134-4 through
134-8:
(4) Charges to cover the cost of consultants' services required to carry
out the review of specific applications for industrial wastewater
discharges. Prior to undertaking such reviews, the Town shall
submit to the applicant an estimate of the scope and cost of the
required services;
(5) Fees for consistent removal (at the POTW) of pollutants, otherwise
subject to federal pretreatment standards;
(6) Other fees as the Town may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained in this chapter.
C. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this chapter and are
separate from all other fees chargeable by the Town.
A. The Town may suspend the wastewater treatment service and a
wastewater discharge permit when such suspension is necessary, in the
opinion of the Director, in order to stop an actual or threatened
discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, to the environment,
causes interference to the POTW or causes the Town to violate any
condition of its NPDES permit.
B. Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment
service and/or the wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop
or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person to
comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Town shall take such
steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or
endangerment to any individuals. The Town shall reinstate the
wastewater discharge permit or the wastewater treatment service upon
proof to the satisfaction of the Director of the elimination of the
noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the
user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the
measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to
the Town within 15 days of the date of occurrence.
A. Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of his discharge;
B. Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations or
wastewater constituents and characteristics;
§ 134-3 CHARTER § 134-5
C:243
§ 134-6. Notification of violation.
Whenever the Town finds that any user has violated or is violating this
chapter, the wastewater discharge permit or any prohibition, limitation of
requirements contained in this chapter, the Town may serve upon such
person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within 30 days of
the date of the notice, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be
submitted to the Town by the user.
§ 134-7. Show cause hearing.
C. Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of
inspection or monitoring; or
D. Violation of conditions of the permit.
A. The Town may order any user who causes or allows an unauthorized
discharge to enter the POTW to show cause before the Town Council
why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice
shall be served on the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to
be held by the Town Council regarding the violation, the reasons why
the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and
directing the user to show cause before the Town Council why the
proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the
hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail
(return receipt requested) at least 10 days before the hearing. Service
may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation.
B. The Town Council may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence
or may designate any of its members or any officer or employee of the
Department of Public Works to:
(1) Issue in the name of the Town Council notices of hearings
requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the
production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such
hearings;
(2) Take the evidence; and
(3) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to
the Town Council for action thereon.
C. At any hearing held pursuant to this chapter, testimony taken must be
under oath and recorded stenographically or by tape. The transcript, so
recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or any
party to the hearing upon payment of usual charges.
D. After the Town Council has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order
to the user responsible for the discharge, directing that, following a
specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless
adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances
§ 134-5 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 134-7
C:244
§ 134-8. Legal action.
§ 134-9. Violations and penalties.
Any user who is found to have violated an order of the Town Council or who
willfully or negligently fails to comply with any provision of this chapter or
an order, rule, regulation or permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be
fined not more than $25,000 for each offense. Each day on which a violation
shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.
In addition to the penalties provided in this section, the Town may recover
damages as well as reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, court reporter's
fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the
person found to have violated this chapter or the order, rule, regulation or
permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
§ 134-10. Falsifying information.57
Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed
or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter or a wastewater
discharge permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders
inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter,
shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article III, of
this Code.
§ 134-11. Publication of significant noncompliance. [Amended
7-26-1994 by Ord. No. 615; 2-9-2009 by Ord. No. 800]
The Town shall publish annually, in a newspaper(s) of general circulation
that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdiction served by the
POTW, a list of industrial users which, at any time during the previous 12
months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment
requirements. For the purposes of this provision, a significant industrial
user (or any industrial user which violates Subsection C, D or H of this
shall have been installed on existing treatment facilities, devices or
other related appurtenances and are properly operated. Further orders
and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued.
A. If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into
the Town's wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of
this chapter, federal or state pretreatment requirements, or any order
of the Town, the Town Solicitor may commence an action for
appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the appropriate court.
B. Any such discharge made in violation of the provisions of this chapter,
federal or state pretreatment requirements or any related order of the
Town or Director shall constitute a public nuisance.
57.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 134-7 CHARTER § 134-11
C:245
section) is in significant noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of
the following criteria:
A. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those
in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken for the same
pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed (by any
magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including
instantaneous limits as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l);
B. Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of all the measurements taken for the same
pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed the product of
the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including
instantaneous limits as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l) multiplied by the
applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2
for all other pollutants except pH);
C. Any violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by
40 CFR 403.3(l) (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous
limit, or narrative standard) that the POTW determines has caused,
alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or passthrough
(including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the
general public);
D. Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to
the public or to the environment or has resulted in the Town's exercise
of its emergency authority under § 134-4 to halt or prevent such a
discharge;
E. Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction,
or attaining final compliance;
F. Failure to provide, within 45 days after the due date, required reports
such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports,
periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with
compliance schedules;
G. Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
H. Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a violation
of best management practices, which the POTW determines will
adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local
pretreatment program.
§ 134-11 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 134-11
C:246
ARTICLE II
Regulation of Discharges
§ 134-12. General discharge prohibitions. [Amended 7-26-1994 by
Ord. No. 614]
A. No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or
indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the
operation or performance of the POTW. These general prohibitions
apply to all such users of a POTW, whether or not the user is subject to
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or any other national,
state or local pretreatment standards or requirements. A user may not
contribute the following substances to any POTW:
(1) Any liquid, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or
quantity are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction with
other substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any
other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW, including,
but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of
less than 140° F. or 60° C. using the test measures specified in 40
CFR 261.21 or its successor section. At no time shall two
successive readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of
discharge into the system (or any point in the system) be more than
5% nor any single reading over 10% of the lower explosion limit
(LEL) of the meter. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited
to, gasoline, kerosene, petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil,
or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause
interference or pass-through, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylenes,
ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates,
bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides, and any other
substances which the Town, the state or the EPA has notified the
user is a fire hazard to the system.
(2) Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the
flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the
wastewater treatment facilities, such as but not limited to grease,
garbage with particles greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension,
animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or
fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand,
spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings,
grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood,
plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining, or
processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or
polishing wastes.
(3) Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or greater than 9.5, or
wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment and/or personnel of the
POTW.
§ 134-12 CHARTER § 134-12
C:247
(4) Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or
interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving
waters of the POTW, or exceed the limitation set forth in a
categorical pretreatment standard. A toxic pollutant shall include
but not be limited to any pollutant identified pursuant to Section
307(a) of the Act.
(5) Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which, either
singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a
public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry
into the sewers for maintenance and repair.
(6) Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other
product of the POTW, such as residues, sludges or scums, to be
unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the
reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the
POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or
disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under
Section 405 of the Act or any criteria, guidelines or regulations
affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid
Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control
Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method
being used.
(7) Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES
and/or state disposal system permit or the receiving water quality
standards.
(8) Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the
treatment process, such as but not limited to dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions.
(9) Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but
in no case a wastewater discharge which causes the wastewater
temperature at the point of introduction to the POTW treatment
plant to exceed 29° C. (85° F.) at any time.
(10) Any pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which a user
knows or has reason to know will cause interference to the POTW.
In no case shall a slug load have a flow rate or contain
concentration or qualities of pollutants that exceed for any time
period longer than 15 minutes more than 5 times the average
twenty-four-hour concentration, quantities or flow during normal
operation.
(11) Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of
such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by
§ 134-12 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 134-12
C:248
§ 134-13. Specific pollutant limitations. [Amended 2-10-2003 by
Ord. No. 730]
the Director in compliance with applicable state or federal
regulations.
(12)No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or
indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will pass through the
POTW into the waters of Greenwich Cove.
(13) Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a
public nuisance.
B. When the Director determines that a user is contributing to the POTW
any of the enumerated substances in this section in such amounts as to
interfere with the operation of the POTW or otherwise inhibit the
achievement of the objectives of this chapter the Director shall:
(1) Advise the user of the impact of the contribution on the POTW; and
(2) Develop effluent limitations for such user to correct the
interference with the POTW.
A. In accordance with and consistent with the objectives of this chapter,
the Director may establish specific limitations on pollutant discharges
to the Town's POTW. The Director shall limit any specific pollutant
discharges where such limitation is considered in the best interests of
the Town in properly maintaining and operating the POTW.
B. No user shall discharge process wastewater into the facilities of the
Town's wastewater treatment facilities in concentrations exceeding the
following limitations:
Parameter
Daily Maximum Limitation
(mg/l)
Cadmium 0.024
Chromium 0.719
Copper 0.95
Lead 0.22
Silver 0.159
Zinc 1.21
Nickel 0.137
Cyanide 0.112
Total Fluoride 28.45
Mercury 0.0173
Arsenic 0.0178
TTO1* 1.5
§ 134-12 CHARTER § 134-13
C:249
Parameter
Daily Maximum Limitation
(mg/l)
TPH 40
pH 5.5-9.5
BOD2 300
TSS2 375
Total oil and grease 100
NOTES:
1 Total toxic organics, daily maximum value.
2 BOD and TSS concentrations are to remain limits as surcharge
levels rather than enforcement limits. These are set to trigger an
operation and maintenance surcharge. Concentrations are based
on average daily concentration expressed in mg/l.
* Total toxic organics (TTO) shall mean the summation of all
quantifiable values greater than 0.01 milligrams per liter (mg/l) for
the following compounds listed in Subsection C.
C. List of compounds.
1,2,4 trichlorobenzene chloroform
1,2 dichlorobenzene
1,3 dichlorobenzene
1,4 dichlorobenzene ethylbenzene
1,1,1 trichloroethane methylene chloride napthalene
tetrachloroethylene toluene trichloroethylene
2-chlorophenol
2,4-dichlorophenol
4-nitrophenol pentachlorophenol di-n-butyl phthalate anthracine
1,2-diphenylhydrazine isophorone butyl benzyl phthalate
1,1-dichloroethylene
2,4,6-trichlorophenol carbon tetrachloride
1,2-dichloroethane
1,1,2-trichloroethane dichlorobromomethane
Acenaphthene
Acrolein
Acrylonitrile
Benzene
Benzidine
§ 134-13 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 134-13
C:250
Carbon tetrachloride (detrachloromethane)
Chlorobenzene
1,2,4-trichlorobenzene
Hexachlorobenzene
1,2-dichloroethane
1,1,1-trichloroethane
Hexachloroethane
1,1-dichloroethane
1,2,2-trichloroethane
Chloroethane
Bis (2-chloroethyl) ether
2-chloroethyl vinyl ether (mixed)
2-chloronapthalene
2,4,6-trichlorophenol
Parachlorometa cresol
Chloroform (trichloromethane)
2-chlorophenol
1,2-dichlorobenzene
1,3-dichlorobenzene
1,4-dichlorobenzene
3,3-dichlorobenzidine
1,1-dichloroethylene
1,2-dichloropropane (1.3-dichloropropene)
2,4-dimythylphenol
2,4-dinitrotoluene
2,6-dinitrotoluene
1,2-diphenylhydrazine
Ethylbenzene
Fluoranthene
4-chlorophenyl phenyl ether
4-bromophenyl phenyl ether
Bis (2-chloroisopropyl) ether
Bis (2-chloroethoxy) methane
Methylene chloride (dichloromethane)
Methyl chloride (chloromethane)
Methyl bromide (bromomethane)
Bromoform (tribromomethane)
§ 134-13 CHARTER § 134-13
C:251
Chlorodibromomethane
Hexachlorobutadiene
Hexachlorocyclopentadiene
Isophorone
Naphthalene
Nitrobenzene
2-nitrophenol
4-nitrophenol
2,4-dinitrophenol
4,6-dinitro-o-cresol
N-nitrosodimethylamine
N-nitrosodiphenylamine
N-nitrosodi-n-propylamine
Pentachlorophenol
Phenol
Bis (2-ethylhexyl) phthalate
Butyl benzyl phthalate
Di-n-butyl phthalate
Di-n-octyl phthalate
Diethyl phthalate
Dimethyl phthalate
1,2-benzonthracene (benzo(a)anthracene)
Benzo (a) pyrene (3,4-benzopyrene)
3,4-benzofluoiranthene (benzo(b)fluoranthene)
11,12-benzofluoranthene (benzo(k)fluoranthene)
Chrysene
Acenaphthylene
Anthracene
1,12-benzoperylene (beno(ghi)perylene)
Fluorene
Phenanthrene
1,2,4,6-dibenzanthracene (dibenzo(a,h)anthracene)
Indeno (1,2,3,-cd) pyrene (2,3-0-phenlene pyrene)
Pyrene
Tetrachloroethylene
Toluene
Trichloroethylene
§ 134-13 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 134-13
C:252
§ 134-14. Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
Vinyl chloride (chloroethylene)
Aldrin
Dieldrin
Chlordane (technical mixture and metabolites)
4,4-DDT
4,4-DDE (p,p-DDX)
4,4-DDD (p,p-TDE)
Alpha-endosulfan
Beta-endosulfan
Endosulfan sulfate
Endrin
Endrin aldehyde
Heptachlor
Heptachlor epoxide (BHC-hexachlorocyclohexane)
Alpha-BHC
Beta-BHC
Gamma-BHC
Delta-BHC (PCB-polychlorinated biphenyls)
PCB-1242 (arochlor 1242)
PCB-1254 (arochlor 1254)
PCB-1221 (arochlor 1221)
PCB-1232 (arochlor 1232)
PCB-1248 (arochlor 1248)
PCB-1260 (arochlor 1260)
PCB-1016 (arochlor 1016)
Toxaphene
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD)
A. Upon the promulgation of the Federal Categorical Pretreatment
Standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard,
if more stringent than limitations imposed under this chapter for
sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the
limitations imposed under this chapter. The Director shall notify all
affected users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR
403.12.
B. Where the Town's wastewater treatment system achieves consistent
removal of pollutants limited by federal pretreatment standards, the
Town may apply to the approval authority for modification of specific
§ 134-13 CHARTER § 134-14
C:253
§ 134-15. State requirements.
State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case
where they are more stringent than federal standards or those in this
chapter.
§ 134-16. Town's right of revision.
The Town reserves the right to establish by ordinance more stringent
limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal
system if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in
§ 134-1.
§ 134-17. Excessive discharge.
No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt
to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the
Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards or in any other pollutantspecific
limitation developed by the Town or state. Dilution through the
combination of waste streams may be an acceptable means of complying
with some of the prohibitions set forth in § 134-12, e.g., the pH prohibition.
§ 134-18. Accidental discharges.
limits in the federal pretreatment standards. "Consistent removal" shall
mean reduction in the amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature
of the pollutant by the wastewater treatment system to a less toxic
or harmless state in the effluent which is achieved by the system in
95% of the samples taken when measured according to the procedures
set forth in Section 403.7(c)(2) of Title 40 of the Code of Federal
Regulations, Part 403, "General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing
and New Sources of Pollution," promulgated pursuant to the Act. The
Town may then modify pollutant discharge limits in the federal
pretreatment standards if the requirements contained in 40 CFR, Part
403, Section 403.7, are fulfilled and prior approval from the approval
authority is obtained.
A. Protection required. Each user shall provide protection from accidental
discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this
chapter. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited
materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own
cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating
procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the Town for
review and shall be approved by the Town before construction of the
facility. All existing users shall complete such a plan within 180 days of
the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived.
No user who commences contribution to the POTW after the effective
date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be
permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental
§ 134-14 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 134-18
C:254
discharge procedures have been approved by the Town. Review and
approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the
industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as
necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter. In the case of an
accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately
telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. The notification shall
include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume,
and corrective actions.
B. Written notice. Within five days following an accidental discharge, the
user shall submit to the Director a detailed written report describing
the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to
prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve
the user of any expense loss damage or other liability which may be
incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other
damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the
user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed
by this chapter or other applicable law.
C. Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's
bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to
call in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that
all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to
occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
§ 134-18 CHARTER § 134-18
C:255

ARTICLE III
Permits
§ 134-19. Permit required for certain users.
§ 134-20. Discharge permit application.
A. It shall be unlawful to discharge, without notice to the Town and
without obtaining an NPDES permit, to any natural outlet within the
Town or in any area under the jurisdiction of the Town and/or to the
POTW any wastewater, except as authorized by the Director in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. All industrial users proposing to connect to or to contribute to the
POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit before connecting to
or contributing to the POTW. Also, all existing industrial users
connected to or contributing to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater
discharge permit. Existing industrial users shall file a permit
application as required under § 134-20. Such application and related
information shall be satisfactory to provide for the issuance of such
permit within 180 days after the effective date of the ordinance from
which this chapter is derived.
A. Users required to obtain a wastewater contribution discharge permit
shall complete and file with the Town an application in the form
prescribed by the Town and accompanied by a fee as stipulated in the
fee schedule. Existing users shall apply for a wastewater discharge
permit within 60 days after the effective date of the ordinance from
which this chapter is derived, and proposed new users shall apply at
least 90 days prior to the intended date of connecting to or contributing
to the POTW. A separate permit for connecting a building sewer to the
POTW is required under other Town regulations controlling sewer use.
In support of the application, the user shall submit, in units and terms
appropriate for evaluation, the following information:
(1) Name, address and location (if different from the address).
(2) SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended.
(3) Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including but not
limited to those mentioned in §§ 134-12 through 134-18, as
determined by a reliable analytical laboratory; sampling and
analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures
established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act and
contained in 40 CFR Part 136, as amended.
(4) Time and duration of contribution.
(5) Average daily and three-minute peak wastewater flow rates,
including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any.
§ 134-19 CHARTER § 134-20
C:257
(6) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details
to show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances by the
size, location and elevation.
(7) Description of activities, facilities, materials and plant processes on
the premises which are or could be sources of wastewater
discharges.
(8) Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the
discharge which are limited by any Town, state or federal
pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding whether or not
the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis
and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance and/or
additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable
pretreatment standards.
(9) If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance will
be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest
schedule by which the user will provide such additional
pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be
later than the compliance date established for the applicable
pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply to this
schedule:
(a) The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form
of dates for the commencement and completion of major
events leading to the construction and operation of additional
pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable
pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing
preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract
for major components, commencing construction, completing
construction, etc.).
(b) No increment referred to in Subsection A(9)(a). of this section
shall exceed nine months.
(c) Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and
the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress
report to the Director, including, as a minimum, whether or not
it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such
date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with
this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps
being taken by the user to return the construction to the
schedule established. In no event shall more than nine months
elapse between such progress reports to the Director.
(10) Hours of plant operation, shift activity and proposed or actual
hours of operation of pretreatment system.
(11) Any other information as may be deemed by the Town to be
necessary to evaluate the permit application.
§ 134-20 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 134-20
C:258
§ 134-21. Permit modifications.
Within nine months of the promulgation of a national categorical
pretreatment standard, the wastewater discharge permit of users subject to
such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard
within the time frame prescribed by such standard. In addition, the user
with an existing wastewater discharge permit shall submit to the Director
within 180 days after the promulgation of an applicable federal categorical
pretreatment standard the information required by § 134-20A(8) and (9).
Further, when a user proposes to modify an existing discharge occurring
in compliance with a wastewater discharge permit, such that the volume
and/or concentration of the discharge will be increased or the constituents
modified, the user shall request a permit modification. Such application
shall meet the requirements of § 134-20 and shall include the information
required by Subsection A(8) and (9) of that section.
§ 134-22. Permit conditions.
Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions
of this chapter and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees
established by the Town. Permits may contain the following:
B. The Town will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require
additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data
furnished, the Town may issue a wastewater discharge permit subject
to terms and conditions provided herein in this chapter.
A. The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer.
B. Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics.
C. Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulations and equalization.
D. Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities.
E. Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling
locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests
and reporting schedule.
F. Compliance schedules.
G. Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports.
H. Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to
wastewater discharge as specified by the Town, and affording Town
access thereto.
I. Requirements for notification of the Town of any new introduction of
wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or
§ 134-20 CHARTER § 134-22
C:259
§ 134-23. Permit duration.
Wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a specified time period,
not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year
or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for permit
reissuance a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the user's
existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject
to modification by the Town during the term of the permit as limitations
or requirements as identified in §§ 134-12 through 134-18 are modified or
other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes
in his permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any
changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time
schedule for compliance.
§ 134-24. Permit transfer.
Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific
operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned,
transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new
or changed operation without the prior written approval of the Director. Any
succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions
of the existing permit.
§ 134-25. Reporting requirements for permittee.
character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the
wastewater treatment system.
J. Requirements for notification of slug discharges as per § 134-5.
K. Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Town to ensure
compliance with this chapter.
A. Compliance date report. Within 90 days following the date for final
compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a
new source, following commencement of the introduction of
wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to pretreatment standards
and requirements shall submit to the Director a report indicating the
nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the
regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards and
requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for these
process units in the user facility which are limited by such pretreatment
standards or requirements. The report shall state whether the
applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a
consistent basis and, if not, what additional operations and
maintenance and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into
compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized
representative of the industrial user and certified to by a qualified
professional.
§ 134-22 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 134-25
C:260
§ 134-26. Monitoring facilities.
B. Periodic compliance reports.
(1) Any user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the compliance
date of such pretreatment standard or, in the case of a new source,
after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall submit
to the Director during the months of June and December, unless
required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the
Director, a report indicating the nature and concentration of
pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such pretreatment
standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of all daily
flows which during the reporting period exceeded the average daily
flow reported in § 134-20A(5). At the discretion of the Director and
in consideration of such factors as local high- or low-flow rates,
holidays, budget cycles, etc., the Director may agree to alter the
months during which the reports described in this section are to be
submitted.
(2) The Director may impose mass limitations on users which may be
using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements or in other cases where the imposition of mass
limitations are appropriate. In such cases, the report required by
Subsection B(1) of this section shall indicate the mass of pollutants
regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user.
These reports shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of
the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration,
or production and mass where requested by the Director, of
pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable
pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be
prescribed in the applicable pretreatment standard. All analysis
shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by
the Administrator pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act and
contained in 40 CFR Part 136, and amendments thereto, or with
any other test procedures approved by the Administrator. Sampling
shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by
the Administrator. Where 40 CFR Part 136 does not include a
sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant in question,
sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the
procedures set forth in the EPA publication "Sampling and Analysis
Procedures for Screening of Industrial Effluents for Priority
Pollutants," April 1977, and amendments thereto, or with any other
sampling and analytical procedures approved by the Administrator.
A. The Town shall require to be provided and operated, at the user's own
expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling and flow
measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems.
The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's
premises, but the Town may, when such a location would be impractical
or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed
§ 134-25 CHARTER § 134-26
C:261
§ 134-27. Pretreatment to achieve compliance.
§ 134-28. Confidential information.
in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be
obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.
B. There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility
to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The
facility, sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all
times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the
user.
C. Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and
monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the Town's
requirements and all applicable local construction standards and
specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days
following written notification by the Town.
A. Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to
comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all Federal
Categorical Pretreatment Standards within the time limitations as
specified by the federal pretreatment regulations. Any facilities
required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the Director
shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense.
Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating
procedures shall be submitted to the Director for review and shall be
approved by the Director before construction of the facility. The review
of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user
from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce
an effluent acceptable to the Director under the provisions of this
chapter. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or
method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the
Director prior to the user's initiation of the changes.
B. The Town shall annually publish, in the Rhode Island Pendulum
newspaper, a notice as to the users which, during the previous 12
months, were significantly violating applicable pretreatment standards
or other pretreatment requirements. For the purposes of this
subsection, a significant violation is a violation which remains
uncorrected 45 days after notification; which is part of a pattern of
noncompliance over a twelve-month period; which involves a failure to
accurately report noncompliance; or which resulted in the Town
suspending a discharge permit or taking other emergency action under
this chapter.
C. All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be
made available to officials of the approval authority upon request.
A. Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires,
permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from
§ 134-26 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 134-28
C:262
inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental
agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is
able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Town that the release of
such information would divulge information, processes or methods of
production entitled to protection as a trade secret of the user.
B. When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a
report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not
be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made
available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses
related to this chapter, the national pollutant discharge elimination
system (NPDES) permit, the state disposal system permit and/or the
pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of a
report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in
judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person
furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will
not be recognized as confidential information.
C. Information accepted by the Town as confidential shall not be
transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public by the
Town until and unless a ten-day notification is given to the user.
§ 134-28 CHARTER § 134-28
C:263
Chapter 138
JUNKYARDS/SECONDHAND DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 93, Art. I. Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 244.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Junkyard Control Act — See R.I.G.L. § 24-14-1
et seq.
Automobile wrecking and salvage yards — See
R.I.G.L. § 42-14.2-1 et seq.
§ 138-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOMOBILE JUNKYARD — A place where one or more unserviceable,
discarded, worn-out or junked automobiles, or bodies, engines, tires, parts
or accessories thereof, are gathered together.
§ 138-2. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to keepers of shops for the purchase, sale or
barter of books, pamphlets or periodicals or household furniture.
§ 138-3. License required.
No person shall engage in the selling, purchasing, bartering or dealing in
junk, old metals, or any other secondhand articles, or establish, operate
or maintain an automobile junkyard in the Town without first obtaining a
junkyard license for such purpose from the Town Council.
§ 138-4. Application for license.
Every applicant for a junkyard license shall set forth with the full
particulars, upon a form to be furnished by the Town Clerk, answers to the
following questions:
§ 138-5. Notice; hearing on license application.
Before granting a license to keep a shop or storehouse for the reception of
any junk, old metals, or other secondhand articles or to establish, operate
A. Name and address, both of residence and of business, of the applicant.
B. Business or employment of the applicant during the five years next
preceding the application.
C. Age of applicant.
§ 134-28 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 138-5
C:264
or maintain any automobile junkyard in any location not lawfully occupied
for such purpose at the time of the application for such license, the Town
Council shall hold a public hearing, notice of which shall be posted at least
seven days but not more than 14 days prior to the hearing in not less than
two public places in the Town and in a newspaper of general circulation
in the Town; provided, however, that, before the Town Council shall post
or publish the notice of hearing, it shall collect from the applicant a fee
in accordance with the fee schedule in Chapter 93, Fees, plus the cost of
posting and publishing the notice.
§ 138-6. Filing of objections to siting.
No junkyard license required by this chapter shall be granted for any
location not lawfully occupied for such purpose at the time of the
application for the license where the owners or occupants of the greater
part of the land within 200 feet of such building or place shall file with
the Town Council their objection to the granting of such license; provided,
however, that this section shall not apply to any applicant who is the
licensed keeper of such a shop, storehouse or automobile junkyard within
the Town which is being acquired under eminent domain proceedings.
§ 138-7. License term; revocation; conditions.
Every junkyard license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be for a term
not exceeding one year, shall be revocable at the pleasure of the Town
Council, and shall be subject to the following conditions and restrictions:
A. Every such licensed person shall keep in a book a contemporaneous
record in ink and in the English language of the business done by him,
as follows:
(1) A description of every article purchased or sold by him, at the time
of such purchase or sale;
(2) The name and residence of the person from or to whom the same
was purchased or sold; and
(3) The day and hour of such purchase or sale.
B. The book of record and every shop, warehouse, bag, wagon, cart or
foundry, or place of business of any such licensed person shall be
subject to the inspection and examination of the Town Sergeant, Chief
of Police or any person authorized by either of them.
C. No keeper of any junkyard, junk shop or warehouse shall do or suffer to
be done any business therein between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. of the following day.
D. Every keeper of any junk shop or warehouse licensed pursuant to this
chapter shall display a sign over the principal entrance to the junk shop
or warehouse on which shall appear his name and "Licensed Junk
§ 138-5 CHARTER § 138-7
C:265
§ 138-8. License expiration date.
All junkyard licenses granted under the provisions of this chapter shall
expire on May 1 succeeding the date of such license, and no rebate shall be
made from the license fee for such license for any licensed term less than
one year.
§ 138-9. License fees.
The fees for junkyard licenses required by this chapter shall be as follows:
§ 138-10. Requirements for automobile junkyards; exceptions.
Dealer," and post in a conspicuous place within such shop or warehouse
the license last granted to him.
A. For the keeper of a shop or storehouse for the reception of any junk, old
metals, or other secondhand articles which is not an automobile
junkyard, a sum in accordance with Chapter 93, Fees.
B. For any foundryman or other person receiving junk for the purpose of
melting the junk or converting the junk into castings, a sum in
accordance with Chapter 93, Fees.
C. For any gatherer of junk in any bag, wagon or cart, a sum in accordance
with Chapter 93, Fees.
D. For any person establishing, operating or maintaining an automobile
junkyard, a sum in accordance with Chapter 93, Fees.
A. No license shall be granted for an automobile junkyard unless:
(1) It is to be operated and maintained entirely within a building;
(2) It is to be operated and maintained exclusively for the purpose of
salvaging the value as scrap of the material collected, as opposed
to reselling parts to be used for the purpose for which they were
originally manufactured, and it is to be located in a built-up
commercial or industrial area, or contiguous to a railroad siding, or
on or contiguous to docking facilities; and
(3) It is:58
(a) More than 1,000 feet from the nearest edge of any highway on
the interstate or primary system;
(b) More than 600 feet from any other state highway;
(c) More than 300 feet from any park, bathing beach, playground,
school, church or cemetery and is not within ordinary view
therefrom; and
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 138-7 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 138-10
C:266
§ 138-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
punished in accordance with R.I.G.L. § 24-14-9.
Chapter 143
LAND TRUST
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Open meetings — See R.I.G.L. § 42-46-1 et
seq.
Farmland Preservation Act — See R.I.G.L.
§ 42-82-1 et seq.
§ 143-1. Established.
There is hereby established the Town of East Greenwich Land Trust
(hereinafter called the "Trust"), a body corporate and politic and a public
instrumentality. The Trust shall have the authority to acquire, hold and
manage real property and interest therein including development rights
situated in the Town, consisting of open, residential, agricultural,
recreational, historical or littoral property, including existing and future
well fields and aquifer recharge areas, fresh and saltwater marshes and
adjoining uplands, wildlife habitats, land and buildings providing access to
or views of the ocean, Greenwich Cove and ponds, land or bicycling and
hiking paths and for future public recreation use, and land for agricultural
use or airspace thereof. With the exception of property acquired for public
historical preservation or recreational purposes, the Trust shall hold all
property or development rights solely as open space or for agricultural uses
or for water purposes or for public access or to prevent the accelerated
residential or commercial development thereof, as the Trustees may
determine.
§ 143-2. Trustees; term; qualifications.
(d) Screened from view either by natural objects or wellconstructed
and properly maintained fences at least six feet
high, acceptable to the Town and so specified on the license.
B. The mandatory conditions contained in Subsection A(1), (2), (3)(b) and
(c) of this section shall not apply to any automobile junkyard legally
established on May 6, 1966.
A. The Trust shall be administered by eight Trustees, seven of whom shall
be appointed by the Town Council for five-year terms. In addition to the
§ 138-10 CHARTER § 143-2
C:267
§ 143-3. Officers; records; meetings.
The Trustees, after appointment and each year thereafter, shall appoint a
Chairperson, Vice Chairperson, and Recording Secretary from among the
seven members appointed by the Town Council. Clerical help from the Town
work force shall be assigned by the Town Manager, or his/her designee,
to keep accurate records of every meeting. All meetings shall be held in
compliance with the Open Meeting Law, being R.I.G.L. § 42-46-1 et seq.
Meeting minutes shall be submitted to the Town Manager for distribution to
the Town Council and other interested persons.
§ 143-4. Rules and regulations; budget; release of funds.
§ 143-5. Powers.
The Trust shall have the power to:
seven Trustees appointed by the Town Council, the current Chairperson
or his/her designee, representing the Planning Board, shall be a
Trustee.
B. Trustees must be resident electors of the Town, and their term shall be
deemed expired at the end of the appointed period or if they cease to be
a resident of the Town. No elected officer of the Town or the state and
no person who has been employed by the Town may be appointed a
Trustee for at least one year after serving in elected office or one year
after leaving Town employment.
A. The Trustees shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations governing
the conduct of Trust affairs, including the acquisition and management
of its holdings, not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. All
rules and regulations of the Trust are subject to the approval of the
Town Council. Decisions of the Trustees shall be by a majority of those
present and voting, excepting in decisions on the acquisition of land,
easements, rights-of-way, and other uses referred to in § 143-1, which
must be by a majority vote of all Trustees. The Trustees shall prepare a
budget that must be sent to the Town Manager for review and, after his/
her review, be presented to the Town Council for final approval.
[Amended 6-12-2017 by Ord. No. 871]
B. The funds authorized in this budget will be paid by the Town Finance
Director in accordance with accepted accounting procedures that are in
place in the Town at that time.
C. All funds that are released for land acquisition can only be released
after a public hearing requiring three weeks of consecutive advertising
and by approval of a majority of the Trustees. All properties considered
for sale by the Land Trust can only be sold after a public hearing which
follows three weeks of consecutive advertising and by approval of a
majority of the Trustees.
§ 143-2 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 143-5
C:268
§ 143-6. Disposition of funds.
All funds received by the Trust as voluntary contributions, grants or loans,
funds appropriated to the Trust by vote of the annual municipal or special
appropriation process used by the Town, or proceeds from disposal of real
property or interests shall be deposited into a fund to be set up as a
revolving or sinking account by the Treasurer of the Town. All expenses
lawfully incurred by the Trust in carrying out the provisions of this chapter
shall be evidenced by proper vouchers and shall be paid by the Treasurer
of the Town only by submission of warrants duly approved by the Trust.
A. Purchase, receive by gift, or otherwise acquire fee simple or lesser
interests in real property, including development rights as defined in
R.I.G.L. § 42-82-2, or any interest in real property consistent with the
purposes of this chapter, including other development rights of any kind
whatsoever; provided, however that, in cases involving the expenditure
of Town funds, such acquisitions shall be in general conformance with
the Comprehensive Community Plan;
B. Accept gifts, grants or loans of funds or services from any source,
public or private, and comply, subject to the provisions of this chapter,
with any terms and conditions thereof;
C. Accept from state and/or federal agencies loans or grants for use in
carrying out the Trust's purposes and enter into agreements with such
agencies respecting such loans or grants;
D. Employ counsel, auditors, engineers, appraisers, private consultants,
advisors, secretaries or other personnel needed to perform its duties;
E. Administer and manage land and interests in land held by it in a manner
which allows public use and enjoyment consistent with the natural and
scenic resources thereof, including conveyance of any such land or
interests in land to, and contracts with, nonprofit organizations,
provided that such land shall continue to be used in a manner
consistent with the purposes of this chapter and with the terms of any
grant or devise by which such land was acquired by the Trust;
F. Incur debt only after authorization in each instance by vote of the
municipal budget or special appropriation process used by the Town;
G. Dispose by sale or otherwise of all or any portion of its real property or
interests therein held by it whenever in the opinion of the Trustees such
lands or properties have become unsuitable or have ceased to be used
for the purposes set forth in this chapter or unless the best interests of
the Trust shall be served by such sale or other disposition. Such
disposition or sale shall be made only by a vote of the Trustees in which
at least five members vote in favor of such a disposition or sale and
further only after having been approved by the Town Council; and
H. Otherwise do all things necessary for the performance of its duties, the
fulfillment of its obligations and the conduct of its business.
§ 143-5 CHARTER § 143-6
C:269
The Treasurer of the Town shall prudently invest available assets of the
funds, and all income thereon shall accrue to the fund. Upon termination or
dissolution of the Trust, the title of all funds and other properties owned by
the Trust which remain after payment or making provision for payment of
all bonds, notes and other obligations of the Trust shall vest in the Town.
Chapter 152
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 15.
Animal noise — See Ch. 23, Art. III.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 248.
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
§ 143-6 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 143-6
C:270
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 152-1. Statement of public policy.
The Town Council hereby finds and declares that:
§ 152-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
AMBIENT NOISE — The all-encompassing noise associated with a given
environment, exclusive of a particular noise being tested, being usually a
composite of sounds from many sources, near and far, exclusive of intruding
noises from isolated identifiable sources.
DECIBEL (db) — A unit of measure often used in describing the amplitude
of sound which denotes the ratio between two quantities which are
proportional to power; the number of decibels corresponding to the ratio of
two amounts of power is 10 times the logarithm to the base 10 of this ratio.
EMERGENCY WORK — Work made necessary to restore property to a safe
condition following a public calamity, or work required to protect persons or
property from an imminent exposure to danger, or work by private or public
utilities when restoring utility service.
MAXIMUM PERMITTED SOUND LEVEL — The maximum sound level that
may be lawfully made pursuant to this chapter, and any sound exceeding
this sound level is punishable pursuant to § 152-5.
A. Excessive noise is a serious hazard to public health and welfare and the
quality of life in the Town of East Greenwich.
B. A substantial body of science and technology exists by which excessive
noise can be substantially abated without serious inconvenience to the
public.
C. Certain of the noise-producing equipment in this community is essential
to the quality of life herein and should be allowed to continue at
reasonable levels with moderate regulation.
D. Each person has a right to an environment reasonably free from noise
which jeopardizes health or welfare or unnecessarily degrades the
quality of life.
E. It is the declared policy of the Town of East Greenwich to promote an
environment free from excessive noise (otherwise properly called noise
pollution), which unnecessarily jeopardizes the health and welfare and
degrades the quality of the lives of the residents of this Town without
unduly prohibiting, limiting or otherwise regulating the function of
certain noise-producing equipment which is not amenable to such
controls and yet is essential to the quality of life in the community.
§ 152-1 CHARTER § 152-2
C:271
MOTOR VEHICLES — Includes, but is not limited to, minibikes and go-carts.
SOUND LEVEL (also NOISE LEVEL), IN DECIBELS (db) — The sound
measured with the "A" or "C" weighting, as set forth herein and slow
response (one-second averaging) by a sound-level meter.
SOUND TRUCK — Any motor vehicle or any other vehicle regardless of
motive power, whether in motion or stationary, having mounted thereon or
attached thereto any sound-amplifying equipment.
SOUND-AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT — Any machine or device for the
amplification of the human voice, music or any other sound. Soundamplifying
equipment shall not include standard automobile radios when
used and heard only by the occupants of the vehicle in which the automobile
radio is installed. Sound-amplifying equipment as used in this chapter shall
not include warning devices on any vehicle used only for traffic safety
purposes.
SOUND-LEVEL METER — An instrument, including a microphone,
amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time averager, output or display
meter, and weighting networks, used to measure sound pressure levels,
which complies with ANSI Standard 1.4-1971, as the same may be revised.
TOWN — The Town of East Greenwich, Rhode Island.
§ 152-3. Sound level measurement criteria.
Any sound level measurement made pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall be measured with a sound-level meter using the "A"
weighting. For amplified musical material, sound level measurements shall
also be measured using the "C" weighting.
§ 152-4. Maximum permitted noise level.
A. The noise levels listed in this section shall be the maximum permitted
sound levels used for the purposes of this chapter, unless another
maximum permitted sound level is provided for in this chapter:
Zoning District Time
Sound Level
(dbA)
R-6, R-10, R-20, R-30 10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
55
R-6, R-10, R-20, R-30 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m.
60
F, F-1, F-2 10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
55
F, F-1, F-2 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m.
60
CD, CL, CH 10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
65
§ 152-2 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 152-4
C:272
Zoning District Time
Sound Level
(dbA)
CD, CL, CH 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m.
70
W 10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
65
W 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m.
70
M Any time 75
B. Irrespective of zoning district, these maximum permitted sound levels
and times shall apply to property located east of the railroad tracks,
north of Rocky Hollow Road, and bounded by the East Greenwich Cove
and the East Greenwich Town line (hereinafter referred to as the
"Waterfront Area"). As provided in § 152-5, sound in excess of these
stated limits shall constitute a violation of this chapter. Soundamplifying
equipment may only be operated out of doors in the
Waterfront Area during the dates and hours stated below. The
maximum permitted sound limits are as follows:
(1) From Friday of Memorial Day weekend to the end of Labor Day
weekend:
Day Time
Sound Level
(dbA)
Sound Level
(dbC)
Monday,
Tuesday,
Wednesday
6:00 p.m. to
10:00 p.m.
60 65
Thursday 8:00 p.m. to
12:00 midnight
60 65
Friday 5:30 p.m. to
12:30 a.m.
60 65
Saturday 2:00 p.m. to
12:30 a.m.
60 65
Sunday* 2:00 p.m. to
10:00 p.m.
60 65
Monday
holidays
2:00 p.m. to
10:00 p.m.
60 65
* Except on holiday weekends: 12:00 midnight
(2) Then, from the Labor Day weekend to the last weekend of
September:
§ 152-4 CHARTER § 152-4
C:273
§ 152-5. Violations and penalties.
§ 152-6. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
Sound Level
(dbA)
Sound Level
(dbC)
Thursday 7:00 p.m. to
12:00 midnight
60 65
Friday 7:00 p.m. to
12:00 midnight
60 65
Saturday 7:00 p.m. to
12:00 midnight
60 65
Sunday 4:00 p.m. to
8:00 p.m.
60 65
A. No person or entity shall make, continue or cause to be made or
continued, unless as herein permitted, any sound exceeding the
maximum permitted sound level at the property line of any adjoining
property, including a public street or, if a condominium or apartment
house, at the common wall of any adjoining dwelling unit.
B. Any person found in violation of any provision of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be punished by a fine of up to $500 for each offense.
Any holder of any Town-issued license may be summoned for a showcause
hearing as to why said license should not be suspended or
revoked, if found in violation of this chapter. Any entertainment license
holder suffering a suspension of said entertainment license shall have
such suspension carried over into a future year if the license is seasonal
in nature.
C. Any violation of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance and
shall also be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or
injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
A. The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the
existence of an emergency;
B. The emission of sound in the performance of emergency work;
C. Noncommercial public speaking and public assembly activities
conducted on any private property, public space or public right-of-way;
D. The emission of sound in the performance of governmental military
operations;
E. The emission of sound in the discharge of weapons or in fireworks
displays licensed by the Town;
§ 152-4 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 152-6
C:274
F. The emission of sound in the operation of snow removal equipment;
G. The emission of sound relative to permitted construction and
demolition activities, provided that such activities do not occur between
9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; and
H. The emission of sound by a train that is in motion through the Town.
§ 152-6 CHARTER § 152-6
C:275

ARTICLE II
Amplified Sound
§ 152-7. Findings and purpose.
The Town Council enacts this legislation for the sole purpose of securing
and promoting the public health, comfort, safety and welfare of its citizenry.
While recognizing inherent constitutional rights of freedom of speech and
assembly, the Council nevertheless finds that it is obligated to reasonably
regulate the use of sound-amplifying equipment in order to protect the
correlative constitutional rights of the citizens of this Town to privacy and
freedom from the public nuisance of loud noise.
§ 152-8. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than personnel of law enforcement
or governmental agencies, to install, use or operate within the Town soundamplifying
equipment out of doors in a fixed or movable position or mounted
upon any sound truck for any purpose without first obtaining a permit from
the Town Council if held by an entertainment license holder, and from the
Chief of Police or his designee if not by an entertainment license holder.
§ 152-9. Filing and approval or disapproval of permit.
A. Application for nonentertainment license holder. Every person not
holding an entertainment license and seeking to use sound-amplifying
equipment shall file a permit application with the Police Department. A
permit issued hereunder shall be valid for a maximum period of one
week; application shall be made at least 24 hours prior to issuance. The
application shall contain the following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the person to whom
the permit is to be issued;
(2) The license and motor number if a sound truck is to be used;
(3) A general description of the sound-amplifying equipment which is
to be used; and
(4) Whether the sound-amplifying equipment will be used for
commercial or noncommercial purposes.
B. Approval of nonentertainment license holder permit applications. The
Police Chief shall return to the applicant an approved certified copy of
the permit statement unless he or she finds that:
(1) The conditions of the motor vehicle movement are such that, in the
opinion of the Chief of Police, the use of the equipment would
constitute a detriment to traffic safety;
(2) The conditions of pedestrian movement are such that use of the
equipment would constitute a detriment to traffic safety; or
§ 152-7 CHARTER § 152-9
C:277
§ 152-10. Permit fees.
Prior to the issuance of the permit statement, the applicant shall pay the
Town a fee in the amount of $100 for a permit by an entertainment license
holder, or $10 for a permit for a nonentertainment holder if the loudspeaker
or sound-amplifying equipment is to be used for commercial purposes. No
fee shall be required for the operation of sound-amplifying equipment for
noncommercial purposes by a nonentertainment license holder.
§ 152-11. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by disapproval of a permit application by the Chief of
Police may appeal to the Town Council. There shall be no appeal within the
Town of disapproval of an entertainment license holder permit application.
§ 152-12. Prohibited acts.
The commercial and noncommercial use of sound-amplifying equipment
shall be subject to the following regulations:
(3) The permit statement would violate one or more of the provisions
set forth elsewhere in this chapter.
C. Disapproval of nonentertainment license holder permit. In the event the
permit application is disapproved, the Chief of Police shall endorse
thereupon his or her reasons for disapproval and return it forthwith to
the applicant.
D. Application for entertainment license holder. Every person holding an
entertainment license and seeking to use sound-amplifying equipment
shall file a permit application with the Town Clerk, with such
application to be developed by the Town Manager and Town Clerk. A
permit for use by an entertainment license holder shall be valid for a
period of up to one year.
E. Approval or disapproval of entertainment license holder applications.
The Town Council shall hold a public hearing on all such applications,
and may approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove of such
amplification permit, consistent with the purposes of this chapter,
A. The only sounds permitted shall be either music or human speech, or
both.
B. The operation of sound-amplifying equipment by holders of
entertainment licenses in the Waterfront Area shall only occur in the
hours set forth in § 152-4B, and outside of the Waterfront Area shall
only occur between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and the legal closing hour of
the establishment. The hours of operation may be further restricted by
the issuer of the permit.
C. The operation of all other sound-amplifying equipment shall only occur
between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. each day except
§ 152-9 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 152-12
C:278
Sundays and legal holidays. No operation of said other soundamplifying
equipment for commercial purposes shall be permitted on
Sundays or legal holidays. The operation of sound-amplifying
equipment for noncommercial purposes on Sundays and legal holidays
shall only occur between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. The
hours of operation may be further restricted by the issuer of the permit.
D. The sound level emanating from nonstationary sound-amplifying
equipment shall not exceed 10 dbA or 10 dbC above the maximum
permitted sound level, as set forth in § 152-4 hereof.
E. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary,
sound-amplifying equipment shall not be operated within 200 feet of
schools, hospitals or Town buildings.
§ 152-12 CHARTER § 152-12
C:279

ARTICLE III
Motor Vehicles and Equipment
§ 152-13. Violations and penalties relating to traffic.
Every person violating any of the provisions of any ordinance of the Town
relating to traffic shall be liable to pay a fine specified by the individual
ordinance or a fine of $20 for each such offense if no fine is specified,
except violators of the consecutive parking violation provisions as set forth
in §§ 248-35 and 248-46.
§ 152-14. Excessive vehicular noise.
A. Unnecessary, excessive or offensive vehicular noise. Any sound or noise
emanating from any vehicle(s) in motion, parked or standing on any
streets, land parcels or properties, public or private, within the Town of
East Greenwich, plainly audible to a person of reasonably sensitive
hearing at a distance of 200 feet from its source, shall be deemed a
prima facie violation of this article.
B. For the purposes of this section, "plainly audible" means any sound
which clearly can be heard by unimpaired auditory senses based on a
direct line of sight of 200 feet or more from the source of the sound and
which crosses a property boundary line or boundary between two
dwelling units; however, words or phrases need not be discernible, and
said sound shall include base reverberation.
C. Any operator of any vehicle violating the provisions of this chapter shall
be fined according to the following:
(1) First offense: $100.
(2) Second offense: $250.
(3) Third and subsequent offenses: $500.
D. Any and all emergency vehicles engaged in official business requiring
audible warning or public address shall be exempt from any provision of
this article.
§ 152-13 CHARTER § 152-14
C:281
Chapter 159
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 93.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Weights and measures — See R.I.G.L. § 47-2-1
et seq.
Fees and compensation of Sealer — See
R.I.G.L. § 47-2-7.
§ 152-14 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 152-14
C:282
ARTICLE I
Sealer of Weights and Measures
[Adopted 6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 595 as Sec. 23-1 to 23-5 of the 1993
Code]
§ 159-1. Sealer to give notice.
The Town Sealer of Weights and Measures, on or before September 1 in
each year, shall give notice by advertisement, stating the time and place
when and where he will attend to his duties as required by R.I.G.L. § 47-2-1
et seq.
§ 159-2. Sealer to keep record of persons in business.
The Town Sealer shall make and keep a true record of the names of
all persons in the Town selling goods, wares, merchandise, liquors or
provisions therein.
§ 159-3. Reporting violators to Chief of Police; prosecution.
The Town Sealer shall report in writing to the Chief of Police the name of
every person who violates the provisions of law, and the Chief of Police shall
commence prosecution against the person so violating within 20 days after
such report shall have been made to him.
§ 159-4. Annual sealing.
The Town Sealer of Weights and Measures, between October 1 and
December 1 following, shall visit the places of business of all persons
who are supposed by him to have weights, measures and balances of any
description which ought to be sealed and which have not been sealed since
January 1 next preceding such visit, and seal any weights, measures or
balances that may be presented to him or send the weights, measures or
balances to his office to be tried, proved and sealed.
§ 159-5. Fees.
The Town Sealer of Weights and Measures shall receive for every weight,
measurer, scale or balance which will weigh 50 pounds or less sealed by him
a fee in accordance with the fee schedule in Chapter 93, Fees, and for all
other services rendered by him the fees and expenses provided by law.
§ 159-1 CHARTER § 159-5
C:283

ARTICLE II
Town Solicitor
[Adopted 2-9-1993 by Ord. No. 591 (Secs. 2-270 to 2-274 of the
1993 Code)]
§ 159-6. Appointment and term; Assistant Solicitors; special
counsel.
There shall be a Town Solicitor, who shall be appointed by the Town Council
to serve at the pleasure of the Town Council. The Town Solicitor, with
approval of the Town Council, may appoint one or more Assistant Town
Solicitors. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Town Council from
retaining special counsel in such cases or for other matters as the Council
shall deem advisable.
§ 159-7. Qualifications.
The Town Solicitor and any Assistant Town Solicitor shall be an attorney at
law in good standing who has been admitted to the practice of law in this
state. He need not be a resident of the Town. The Town Solicitor and any
Assistant Town Solicitor shall not hold any other office in Town government,
except that of acting Judge of Probate when so necessary.
§ 159-8. Compensation.
The Solicitor or Assistant Solicitor shall receive such compensation, either
on a salary or fee basis, as the Council may determine. The Solicitor and
Assistant Town Solicitor need not be required to devote full time to the
duties of their office.
§ 159-9. Duties.
§ 159-10. Written opinions.
Legal opinions furnished to the Town Council and to all Town officers,
departments and agencies shall, if requested, be in writing and filed with
the Town Clerk as a public record, together with the resolution, letter
or other memorandum requesting the opinion. Legal opinions concerning
matters for which closed meetings may be held are excluded from this
requirement.
A. Notwithstanding any ordinance to the contrary, the Town Solicitor shall
serve as the chief legal advisor to the Town Council and Town Manager.
B. The Town Solicitor shall also perform such duties appropriate to his
office as the Town Council or Town Manager may require. The Town
Solicitor shall examine and render advice regarding the form of all
ordinances and resolutions, of all invitations to bid, contracts and other
legal documents issued by any department, commission, office or
agency of the Town, as required by the Town Council or Town Manager.
§ 159-6 CHARTER § 159-10
C:285
Chapter 166
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 15.
Firearms — See Ch. 99.
Land Trust — See Ch. 143.
§ 159-10 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 159-10
C:286
ARTICLE I
Frenchtown Park
[Adopted 6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 595 as Secs. 15-26 to 15-36 of the
1993 Code]
§ 166-1. Applicability.
This article shall apply to Frenchtown Park, owned by the Town and located
on the north side of Frenchtown Road.
§ 166-2. Hours and days of use.
Frenchtown Park shall be open to the public from sunrise to sunset seven
days per week.
§ 166-3. Fires.
No person shall light, build or make any fire in Frenchtown Park unless a
permit for such fire shall have first been issued pursuant to § 166-7.
§ 166-4. Motor vehicles prohibited.
No person shall operate any motorized vehicle in or upon any portion of
Frenchtown Park, and motorized vehicles are prohibited in Frenchtown
Park.
§ 166-5. Rubbish.
No person shall discard, dump or leave any paper, cans, bottles, rubbish or
debris of any kind in Frenchtown Park.
§ 166-6. Camping.
No person shall camp overnight in Frenchtown Park unless a permit for
overnight camping shall have first been issued pursuant to § 166-7.
§ 166-7. Permits.
Permits may be issued by the Town Council for the lighting, building or
making of fires in Frenchtown Park and for overnight camping in
Frenchtown Park, provided that the applicant is a member of a supervised
organization such as the Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts, Campfire Girls, or other
similar organization or group and the permit is issued for the activities of
such organization or group.
§ 166-8. Swimming.
No swimming will be allowed in the park.
§ 166-1 CHARTER § 166-9
C:287
§ 166-9. Destruction of property prohibited.
No person shall take, pluck, injure, destroy, cut, mark or deface any tree,
shrub, flower, plant, building, fence, wall, gate, monument, bridge or other
property in Frenchtown Park.
§ 166-10. Hunting and weapons prohibited.
No person shall hunt, shoot or have in his possession any rifle, gun, pistol,
air gun, spring gun, or other small arms; or any bow and arrow; or any
contrivance arranged to discharge shot, bullets, arrows, darts or other
missiles, in Frenchtown Park.59
§ 166-11. Sales and advertising prohibited.
No person shall post or otherwise affix any bill, notice, advertisement or
other paper upon any structure or thing within Frenchtown Park, nor upon
any of the gates or enclosures thereof. No person shall sell, expose for sale
or give away any goods, wares or circulars in Frenchtown Park, except by
special permission of the Town Council.
§ 166-12. Violations and penalties.60
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, of the Code of the Town of East Greenwich.
59.Editor's Note: See Ch. 99, Firearms.
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 166-9 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 166-12
C:288
ARTICLE II
Former Landfill Site Now Named "Scalloptown Park"
[Adopted 5-11-1995 by Ord. No. 622 (Secs. 15-40 to 15-47 of the
1993 Code)]
§ 166-13. Applicability.
This article shall apply to the landfill site which is owned by the Town and
which is designated as Tax Assessor's Plat 5, Lot 227.
§ 166-14. Hours and days of use.
The landfill site shall be open to the public for pedestrian use only from
sunrise to sunset seven days per week.
§ 166-15. Fires.
No person shall light, build or make any fire at the landfill site.
§ 166-16. Motor vehicles prohibited.
No person shall possess or operate any motorized vehicle, motorcycle,
bicycle or dirt bike in or upon any portion of the landfill site.
§ 166-17. Rubbish.
No person shall discard, dump or leave any paper, cans, bottles, rubbish or
debris of any kind in or upon the landfill site.
§ 166-18. Hunting and weapons prohibited.
No person shall hunt, shoot or have in his or her possession any rifle, gun,
pistol, air gun, spring gun, BB gun or other small arms; or any bow and
arrow; or any contrivance arranged to discharge shot, bullets, arrows, darts
or other projectiles, at the landfill site.61
§ 166-19. Alcoholic beverages.
No person shall possess or consume alcohol or any product containing
alcohol at the landfill site.
§ 166-20. Posting of notice.
The Town may, in its discretion, post notice of some or all of the
requirements of this article at the landfill site.
61.Editor's Note: See Ch. 99, Firearms.
§ 166-13 CHARTER § 166-21
C:289
§ 166-21. Violations and penalties.62
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, of the Code of the Town of East Greenwich.
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 166-21 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 166-21
C:290
ARTICLE III
Town, School, Park and Recreation Facilities and Land Trust
Properties
[Adopted 11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 811; amended in its entirety at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
§ 166-22. Applicability.
In accordance with the East Greenwich Home Rule Charter, this article
shall apply to all Town, school, park and recreation facilities and Land Trust
properties owned or leased by the Town, excluding Frenchtown Park and
the landfill site (now known as "Scalloptown Park"); see Articles I and II of
this chapter.
§ 166-23. Hours and days of use.
All Town, school, park and recreation facilities and Land Trust properties
owned or leased by the Town shall be open to the public from sunrise to
sunset seven days per week, unless the facility is equipped with field lights;
then the facility is open until the permitted scheduled event is concluded.
§ 166-24. Fires.
No person shall light, build or make any fire on any Town, school, park
and recreation facilities and Land Trust properties owned or leased by the
Town, unless a permit for such fire shall have first been issued pursuant to
§ 166-28.
§ 166-25. Motor vehicles prohibited.
No person shall possess or operate any motorized vehicle, off-road vehicle,
all-terrain vehicle, go-cart, motorcycle or dirt bike in or upon any portion
of any Town, school, park and recreation facility and Land Trust property
owned or leased by the Town, unless the vehicle is a registered Rhode
Island Department of Motorized Vehicles street or on-road vehicle in an
established parking area during the hours of use pursuant to § 166-23. It
is unlawful to leave a vehicle standing or parked in established parking
areas or elsewhere in the park and recreation or Land Trust areas during
hours when the site is closed. Any such vehicle shall be towed at the
expense of the owner. A patron of the municipal boat ramp and overlook
may park his/her vehicle after sunset. If a vehicle is to be left overnight at
the municipal boat ramp and overlook, then the operator must notify the
Police Department of such and provide a time frame that the vehicle will
be on site. Failure to notify the Police Department will result in the vehicle
being towed at the owner's expense.
§ 166-22 CHARTER § 166-26
C:291
§ 166-26. Rubbish.
No person shall discard, dump or leave any paper, cans, bottles, rubbish or
debris of any kind in any Town, school, park and recreation facility and Land
Trust property owned or leased by the Town.
§ 166-27. Camping.
No person shall camp overnight in any Town, school, park and recreation
facility and Land Trust property owned or leased by the Town without prior
approval of the Town Manager pursuant to § 166-28.
§ 166-28. Permits.
Permits may be issued by the Town Manager (only after approval by the Fire
Department) for the lighting, building or making of fires in all Town, school,
park and recreation facility and Land Trust property owned or leased by
the Town. And the Town Manager may issue an overnight camping permit,
provided the applicant is a member of a supervised organization such as
the Boys Scouts, Girls Scouts, Campfire Girls, or other similar organization
or group and the permit is issued for the activities of such organization
or group. Permits for the use of a facility will be issued by the Parks and
Recreation Director for league use of fields and court areas and for special
events such as charity games, fairs or any other recognized nonprofit
organization or group. Users will be required to provide documentation of
the required liability insurance for the intended use. All fees associated with
the permitted use will be the responsibility of the permittee.
§ 166-29. Swimming and ice skating.
Swimming and ice skating are prohibited on all natural bodies of water
within a park.
§ 166-30. Destruction of property prohibited.
No person shall take, pluck, injure, destroy, cut, mark or deface any tree,
shrub, flower, plant, building, fence, wall, gate, monument, bridge or other
property in any Town, school, park and recreation facility and Land Trust
property owned or leased by the Town.
§ 166-31. Hunting and weapons prohibited.
No person shall hunt, shoot or have in his possession any rifle, gun, pistol,
air gun, spring gun, BB gun, or other small arms; or any bow and arrow; or
any contrivance arranged to discharge shot, bullets, arrows, darts or other
projectiles, or any knife over three inches in length in any Town, school,
park and recreation facility and Land Trust property owned or leased by the
Town. Official starts, at authorized track and field events, are exempt from
this restriction.
§ 166-26 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 166-32
C:292
§ 166-32. Sales and advertising prohibited.
No person shall post or otherwise affix any bill, notice, advertisement or
other paper upon any structure or thing within any Town, school, park and
recreation facility and Land Trust property, owned or leased by the Town,
nor upon any of the gates or enclosures thereof. No person shall sell, expose
for sale or give away any goods, wares or circulars in any Town, school,
park and recreation facility and Land Trust property owned or leased by the
Town, except by special permission of the Town Manager.
§ 166-33. Alcoholic beverages.
No person shall have in his possession or consume any alcoholic beverages
on or in any Town, school, park and recreation facility and Land Trust
property owned or leased by the Town.
§ 166-34. Animals.
An owner shall keep his/her animal leashed at all times and shall not permit
such animal to be at large while on any Town, school, park and recreation
facility and Land Trust property owned or leased by the Town. It shall be
the duty of each person who owns, possesses or controls a dog to remove
and dispose of any feces left by his/her dog on any sidewalk, street, park or
other public area. No person who owns, possesses or controls such a dog
shall appear with such dog on any sidewalk, street, park or other public
area without means of removal of any feces left by such dog. This regulation
shall not apply to a licensed dog accompanying any handicapped person
who, by reason of his/her handicap, is physically unable to comply with the
requirements of this section.
§ 166-35. For-profit activities.
§ 166-36. Violations and penalties.
Violations of provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, of the Code of the Town of East Greenwich.
A. No person shall use, operate or offer any activity for profit on any Town,
school, park and recreation facility or Land Trust property owned or
leased by the Town, including but not limited to Town-owned tennis and
basketball courts, without first obtaining a permit issued by the Town
Manager pursuant to § 166-28.
B. This section shall not apply to programs and activities sponsored or
organized by the Town or the School Department for the benefit of
students or members of the general public, nor shall it apply to a Town
resident taking a private lesson from a private instructor on Townowned
tennis or basketball courts.
§ 166-32 CHARTER § 166-36
C:293

ARTICLE IV
Tobacco-Free Facilities
[Adopted 2-26-2018 by Ord. No. 875]
§ 166-37. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE — Any product containing or delivering
nicotine, lobelia, or any other substance intended for human consumption
that can be used by a person to simulate smoking in the delivery of nicotine
or any other substance through inhalation of aerosol or vapor from the
product. The term includes, but is not limited to, devices manufactured,
distributed, marketed or sold as e-cigarettes, e-cigars, e-pipes, vape pens,
or e-hookah.
RECREATIONAL AREAS — All facilities, parks, trails, open spaces, and
other property owned, leased, rented, contracted, used or controlled by
the Town of East Greenwich for parks and recreational purposes. The
term includes, but is not limited to, restrooms, spectator and concession
areas, playgrounds, athletic fields, courts, rinks, benches, fitness areas, and
parking lots.
SMOKE OR SMOKING — Inhaling or exhaling smoke from any lighted or
heated cigar, cigarette, pipe, or any other tobacco or plant product, or
inhaling or exhaling aerosol or vapor from any electronic delivery device.
Smoking includes being in possession of a lighted or heated cigar delivery
device that is turned on or otherwise activated.
TOBACCO or TOBACCO PRODUCT — Any product containing, made, or
delivered from tobacco that is intended for human consumption, whether
chewed, smoked, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested
by any other means, or any component, part or accessory of a tobacco
product, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars and other smoking
tobacco; snuff and other chewing tobacco; electronic delivery devices; and
any other kinds and forms of tobacco. The term excludes any product that
has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for
sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or
for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for such
an approved purpose.
TOBACCO USE — The act of smoking, the use of smokeless tobacco, or the
use of any other tobacco product in any form.
§ 166-38. Policy.
A. Tobacco use is prohibited at all times in or on all recreational areas.
B. It is not a violation of this policy to use tobacco in or on recreational
areas as part of a Native American spiritual or cultural ceremony.
Approval from the Town Manager or his/her designee must be
requested and received prior to the ceremony.
§ 166-37 CHARTER § 166-39
C:295
§ 166-39. Enforcement.
A. Signage will be posted at strategic locations to inform the community
and recreational area users about the policy.
B. Town of East Greenwich staff and volunteers, including all local youth
group organizations and field permit holders, will be notified about this
policy.
C. Any individual found violating this policy will be reminded and asked to
comply before being subject to ejection from the recreational area. Any
person violating Chapter 166, Article IV, § 166-38, of the Code of
Ordinances shall be deemed to be creating a public nuisance, and
violators will be subject to a fine as stated in Chapter 1, Article III, of
the Code of the Town of East Greenwich and/or prosecuted in
accordance with state statutes where applicable.
§ 166-39 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 166-39
C:296
Chapter 170
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Disorderly conduct — See R.I.G.L. § 11-45-1. Disorderly conduct at meetings — See R.I.G.L.
§ 45-3-19.
§ 170-1. (Reserved)63
§ 170-2. Damaging or defacing of notices.64
§ 170-3. Posting notices on trees and poles.
No person except duly authorized agents of the Town shall post or cause to
be posted any notice or sign upon any tree or utility pole standing in the
public streets or highways of this Town except by permission of the Town
Council.
§ 170-4. Playing ball in streets.65
No person shall play ball by throwing or striking a ball in any street,
highway or way used by the public as a highway of this Town.
§ 170-5. Coasting and sledding.66
No person shall coast or slide on a hand sled or any similar vehicle on any
of the streets of this Town.
§ 170-6. Residential picketing.
Picket lines and picketing shall be prohibited in front of, adjacent to, or with
respect to any property used for residential purposes, except where such
picketing relates to a use or activity being carried on within such property.
A. No person shall willfully tear, deface or otherwise injure any notice
posted by the Town Clerk or Probate Clerk of this Town in his official
capacity.
B. No person shall willfully tear, deface or otherwise injure any other than
above-specified notice or advertisement lawfully posted or exhibited.
63.Editor's Note: Former § 170-1, Drunkenness, as amended, was repealed 2-24-2020 by Ord.
No. 893.
64.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
65.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
66.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 166-39 CHARTER § 170-7
C:297
§ 170-7. Disorderly conduct. [Adopted 7-14-2008 by Ord. No. 792]
§ 170-8. Violations and penalties.68
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, of the Code of the Town of East Greenwich.
A. No person acting alone or in concert with others shall:
(1) Throw any stone or other missile or object upon or at any person,
vehicle, building, sign or other public or private property.
(2) Roughly or forcefully crowd, jostle or push any person in any public
place.
(3) Expectorate, urinate or defecate on any public street, alley or
sidewalk or the floor of any public place or public building or any
place or building where the public has the right to gather or to
which it has access or in view of the public on any private property.
(4) Willfully, knowingly, wantonly or recklessly make a false alarm or
cry of fire or a false request for the assistance of any firefighting
apparatus or personnel, or willfully, knowingly, wantonly or
recklessly make a false report or request for assistance of any
public or private rescue or assistance services or, similarly, make a
false cry, alarm or request for police assistance.
(5) Prowl or wander in or upon the private property of another or,
without good reason or without visible or lawful business with the
owner or occupant thereof, peek, peep or peer in any door or
window of any building or structure thereon.
(6) Yell, shout, hoot, whistle, sing or make or cause to be made any
other noise on the public streets between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. of the following day or of any other time or at any
place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any
person in any hospital, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence or
of any person in the vicinity.
B. The foregoing prohibitions shall be applicable to all persons, whether
acting alone or in concert with others.67
67.Editor's Note: Original § 170-8C of the 2005 Code, pertaining to penalties for disorderly
conduct, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV).
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 170-7 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 170-8
C:298
Chapter 174
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 93, Art. I.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Hawkers and peddlers — See R.I.G.L.
§ 5-11-1.1 et seq.
Door-to-door sales — See R.I.G.L. § 6-28-1 et
seq.
Solicitation by charitable organizations — See
R.I.G.L. § 5-53.1-1 et seq.
§ 174-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
following meanings, unless the context shall indicate another or different
meaning:
CHARITABLE — Includes the words "patriotic," "philanthropic," "social
service," "welfare," "benevolent," "educational," "civic" or "fraternal," either
actual or purported.
CONTRIBUTIONS — Includes the receipt of anything of value, including the
loan of money.
DESIGNATED AREA — In any application for a permit intended for use
during any special event(s) within those areas so listed in § 174-14.
PERSON — Includes any individual, firm or partnership, corporation,
company, association or joint-stock association, church, religious sect,
religious denomination, society, organization or league, and includes any
trustee, receiver, assignee or agent, or similar representative thereof.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Police Department of the Town.
RELIGIOUS or RELIGION — Shall have the meaning commonly accepted
thereof.
SOLICIT and SOLICITATION — The request, either directly or indirectly, for
money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value, any plea
or representation that such money, credit, property, financial assistance or
other thing of value will be used for charitable or religious or commercial
purposes. Such words shall also mean and include the following methods
of securing money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of
value:
A. Any oral or written request;
§ 170-8 CHARTER § 174-1
C:299
SPECIAL EVENT — Any parade, concert, carnival, festival or other event as
may be duly designated in § 174-13.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT — Any person, firm or corporation, whether as
owner, agent, assignee or employee, whether a resident of the Town or
not, and whether located in one place or traveling either by foot, wagon,
automobile, motor truck or any type of conveyance from place to place,
from house to house, from street to street, who is taking or attempting to
take orders for, or offering for sale, goods, wares, merchandise, personal
property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery or for services to be
furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has,
carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale, or whether
or not he is collecting advance payment on such sales. The definition shall
include hawkers and peddlers.
§ 174-2. Charitable solicitation; permit required; exemptions.
No person shall solicit contributions for any charitable or religious purpose
within the Town without having received a hawker's, peddler's and
solicitor's permit pursuant to the terms of this chapter; provided, however,
that the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any person organized
and operated exclusively for religious or charitable purposes and not
operated for the pecuniary profit of any such person, if the solicitations
by such established person are conducted among the members thereof by
other members or officers thereof voluntarily and without remuneration for
making such solicitations, or if the solicitations are in the form of collections
or contributions at the regular assembly or services of any such person;
provided further, however, that no person shall be deemed to be a member
if such person is a member solely by reason of having made a contribution
thereto.
§ 174-3. Transient merchants and hawkers and peddlers; permit
required.
It shall be unlawful for any transient merchant or hawker and peddler to
engage in such business within the Town without first obtaining a hawker's,
peddler's and solicitor's permit therefor in compliance with the provisions
of this chapter.
The sale of, or offer or attempt to sell, any advertising space, book,
card, chance, coupon, device, magazine, membership, merchandise,
subscription, ticket or other thing in connection with which any appeal
is made for any charitable or religious purpose, or where the names of
any charitable or religious person is used or referred to in such appeal
as an inducement or reason for the making of any such sale, or when
or where in connection with any such sale any statement is made that
the whole or any part of the proceeds of such sale will go or be donated
to any charitable or religious purpose. A solicitation shall be deemed
completed when made, whether or not the person making the same
receives any contribution or makes any sale.
B.
§ 174-1 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 174-4
C:300
§ 174-4. Application for permit.
A. An application for a hawker's, peddler's and solicitor's permit pursuant
to this chapter shall be made to the Police Department on a form
provided by the Police Department. Such application shall be sworn to
in duplicate and filed with the Police Department at least five days prior
to the time when the permit applied for shall become effective. The
application required in this chapter shall contain the following
information or, in lieu thereof, a detailed statement of the reason why
such information cannot be furnished.
B. In the case of a charitable solicitation permit:
(1) The name, address or headquarters of the person applying for the
permit.
(2) If the applicant is not an individual, the names and addresses of the
applicant's principal officers and managers.
(3) The purpose for which such solicitation is to be made, and the use
or disposition to be made of any receipts therefrom.
(4) The names and addresses of the person or persons in charge of
conducting the solicitation, and the names and addresses of any
persons who will conduct such solicitation, together with a
statement as to whether or not any such person has been convicted
of any crime involving moral turpitude, and if so, nature of the
offense, the date of such conviction and the sentence imposed, if
any.
(5) The dates upon which the permit is requested for use, indicating, if
applicable, the special event for which application is sought.
(6) The length of time for which the right to do business is desired and
whether the applicant seeks a daily, special event, or weekly
permit.
(7) The place and/or preferred designated area where the goods or
property proposed to be sold or orders taken for the sale thereof is
manufactured or produced, where such goods or products are
located at the time the application is filed, and the proposed
method of delivery.
(8) An outline as to the method to be used in conducting the
solicitation.
(9) The times when it is anticipated such solicitation will be made,
giving the dates for the beginning and ending of such solicitation
requested.
(10) The most recent copy of the annual report and/or registration form
filed with the Director of the Department of Business Regulation
pursuant to the provisions of R.I.G.L. § 5-53.1-1 et seq.
§ 174-4 CHARTER § 174-4
C:301
(11) If any representation is to be made in any solicitation that
contributions are deductible pursuant to the provisions of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as the code has been or may
hereafter be amended, a copy of the determination letter received
by the organization from the Internal Revenue Service indicating
that contributions made will be deductible as charitable
contributions pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code of 1954.
(12) Copy of charter received from state of incorporation, if any, and
tax-exempt number.
(13) A description of any cart, vehicle or other apparatus proposed for
use in conjunction with the sale of goods or service.
C. In the case of a transient merchant or hawker and peddler:
(1) The name and description of applicant.
(2) The permanent home address and full local address of applicant.
(3) A brief description of the nature of business and goods to be sold.
(4) If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
the credentials establishing the exact relationship.
(5) The length of time for which the right to do business is desired.
(6) The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold or
orders taken for the sale thereof is manufactured or produced,
where such goods or products are located at the time the
application is filed, and the proposed method of delivery.
(7) The length of time applicant has engaged in such business and the
dates and places he has been engaged therein during the preceding
five years.
(8) Statement as to whether or not the applicant holds a state license
for such sales.
(9) Statement setting forth the dates of licenses granted to the
applicant by the Town for the preceding five years.
(10) Statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of
any crime involving moral turpitude and, if so, the nature of the
offense, the date of such conviction, and the sentence imposed, if
any.
(11) Copy of sales tax certificate issued by the state and sales tax
number.
D. All such applications shall be accompanied by the fee established by the
Town Council. However, no fee shall be charged any hawker and
peddler who is exempt from payment by state law.
§ 174-4 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 174-4
C:302
§ 174-5. Issuance.
E. If while any application is pending or during the term of any permit
granted pursuant to this chapter there is any change in fact that would
alter the information given in the application, the applicant shall notify
the Police Department in writing within 24 hours of such change.
A. Charitable solicitations. Upon compliance with the provisions of
§ 174-4B, the Police Chief shall issue a hawker's, peddler's and
solicitor's permit to the applicant for the period requested, provided
that the period shall not exceed one year from the date of issuance.
B. Transient merchants and hawkers and peddlers. Upon compliance with
the provisions of § 174-4C, the Police Chief may issue a permit to the
applicant for the period requested, provided that the period shall not
exceed one year from the date of issuance. In making the determination
as to whether to grant the permit, or in the case of any special event, as
to the designated area to be assigned, the Chief of Police may consider
the likely effect of the particular application on traffic, both vehicular
and pedestrian, as well as the effect on public health, safety and
welfare. No permit shall be granted which would pose a likely
obstruction or hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic nor shall a
permit issue which would otherwise jeopardize the public health, safety
and welfare. If the applicant is denied a permit, the Chief of Police shall
provide the reason therefor.
C. Special events. Daily special event permits must be obtained for use
during any such event listed in § 174-13 hereof unless the applicant has
obtained a yearly permit as described in § 174-14. In all cases where an
applicant seeks a permit for use during a special event, the Police Chief
may, in addition to all other requisites and considerations, grant permit
applications for use only in a designated area as established in this
chapter. In so doing, only one permit shall be assigned to a given
designated area. The permittee shall be assigned to the designated area
of his preference on a first-come, first-served basis unless a particular
assignment to the requested designated area is determined by the Chief
of Police to have a likely adverse effect on vehicular or pedestrian traffic
or to pose a reasonable imminent threat to public health, safety and
welfare.
D. Display of special event permit. Such special event permittee shall
prominently display the special event permit issued pursuant to the
terms of this chapter. This permit shall reflect the date and event for
which the permit was issued, the duration of the permit, and the
designated area of operation. Sales or other substantially related
conduct by a permittee outside of the assigned designated area shall be
deemed a violation of the terms of this chapter and shall be punishable
as indicated in § 174-15.
§ 174-4 CHARTER § 174-6
C:303
§ 174-6. Contents of permit.
The hawker's, peddler's and solicitor's permit shall bear the name and
address of the person by whom the solicitation or sale is to be made, the
number of the permit, the date of issuance, the dates within which the
permit holder may solicit or sell, and in the case of a transient merchant, the
kind of goods to be sold pursuant to such permit, together with a statement
that the permit does not constitute an endorsement by the Town or any of its
departments, officers or employees of the purpose of the person conducting
the solicitation or sale.
§ 174-7. Permits not transferable.
Any hawker's, peddler's and solicitor's permit issued under this chapter
shall be nontransferable and shall be returned to the Police Department
within two days of its expiration, together with all facsimile copies thereof.
§ 174-8. Special provisions for flower vendors.
A. License requirements. Any person who intends to sell flowers at a
location other than his principal place of business and who engages in
the business of selling flowers on the streets or sidewalks of the Town
shall be duly licensed for such purpose by the Police Department in
accordance with the provisions of § 174-4. The preceding paragraph is
not intended to prohibit the sale of flowers grown on the premises of a
property owner.
B. Permit fee. The fee for a flower vendor's permit will be as provided in
Chapter 93, Fees.
C. Time for application. An application for a flower vendor's permit will be
sworn to in duplicate and shall be filed with the Police Department no
less than 21 days prior to the time when the permit applied for shall
become effective.
D. Designated areas. Flower vendor permits shall specify the location
where the flowers are intended to be sold. There shall be one permit
issued per location. No flower vendor permit shall be granted for a
location in the Town that is within 800 feet of a licensed retail florist or
greengrocer, nor within 300 feet of places of worship, or places of
worship 1/2 hour before, during or 1/2 hour after services or activities
within such places of worship. No flowers shall be sold within 300 feet
of the intersection of two or more arterial streets (those having a rightof-
way width of 60 feet or greater) or from any location from which the
activity would restrict or interfere with the ingress or egress of abutting
property owners, create a public nuisance, increase traffic congestion
or delay, constitute a hazard to life and property, or obstruct adequate
access to fire, police or safety vehicles.
E. Expiration of permit. Flower vendors' permits shall expire within five
days of the date of issuance.
§ 174-6 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 174-9
C:304
§ 174-9. Agents and solicitors for permit holders.
All persons to whom hawker's, peddler's and solicitor's permits have been
issued under this chapter shall furnish proper credentials to their agents
and solicitors. Such credentials shall include the name of the permit holder,
the date of issuance, a statement describing the holder's charitable or
business activity, the signature of the permit holder's chief executive officer,
and the name of the solicitor or agent as to whom such credentials are
issued, and the specific period of time during which the solicitor or agent
is authorized to solicit or offer to sell on behalf of the permit holder. A
copy of such credentials shall be filed with the Police Department at the
time the application for permit is filed and must be approved by the Police
Chief as conforming to the requirements of this section before such permit
is issued. The names and addresses of all persons who shall solicit or sell
on behalf of the permit holder shall be filed with the application. No person
shall solicit or sell under any permit granted under this chapter without the
credentials required by this section and a facsimile copy of the permit in his
possession. The credentials and facsimile copy of the permit shall be shown
upon request to all persons solicited or to any police officer of the Town.
§ 174-10. Written receipts required.
Any person receiving money or anything having a value of $1 or more from
any contributor or purchaser under a solicitation or sale made pursuant to
a hawker's, peddler's and solicitor's permit granted by this chapter shall
give the contributor or purchaser a written receipt signed by the solicitor
or agent showing plainly the name and permit number of the person under
whose permit the solicitation or sale is conducted, the date and amount
received, and the goods or services purchased, if any.
§ 174-11. Soliciting at residences where sign displayed prohibited.
Any person residing in the Town may affix to the entrance of his residence
a sign containing the legend "No Solicitation." Any person required to be
licensed under the provisions of this chapter who shall make or attempt to
make any solicitation or sale at a residence so marked shall be deemed to
have violated the provisions hereof.
§ 174-12. Solicitation time limitation.
No person shall engage in door-to-door solicitations before the hour of 9:00
a.m. nor after the hour of 7:00 p.m.
§ 174-13. Schedule of special events.
The following event is hereby declared to be a special event for the purposes
of special event permit applications:
A. East Greenwich Summer Festival.
§ 174-9 CHARTER § 174-14
C:305
§ 174-14. Selection of designated areas for special event permits.
The Chief of Police shall designate public streets, parts of streets, and other
areas as designated areas for the purpose of special event permits and shall
file with the Town Council such designation.
§ 174-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-24-2020 by Ord. No.
894]
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter or who files, or
causes to be filed, an application for a hawker's, peddler's or solicitor's
permit under this chapter containing false or fraudulent statements, or who
utilizes or employs fraudulent means in connection with any solicitation or
sale, shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $500. However, any
person who violates the provisions of this chapter by selling as a hawker,
vendor or peddler without a permit, or who violates the terms of any permit
issued, shall for each offense be fined $100.
Chapter 179
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Permanent Police Department — See Charter
§ C-105.
§ 174-14 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 174-15
C:306
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 179-1. Authority of Chief.
The Chief shall be the executive and administrative head of the Police
Department, and he is hereby authorized, subject to the approval of the
Town Council, to make rules and regulations not inconsistent with law
for the examination and qualification of applicants for appointment to the
Department; for the discipline, control and removal of the members; and
relating to reimbursement for expenses properly incurred in the
performance of their official duties.
§ 179-2. Disciplinary authority of Council and President.
§ 179-3. Request for charges in writing; hearing.
All reductions or removals by the Town Council shall be upon charges
made in writing, if requested by any such officer, and of which the officer
complained about shall have notice and opportunity at the time appointed
to be heard thereon.
§ 179-4. Temporary police; appointment; term.
The Town Council may appoint other police officers for occasional service
and for limited terms of less than one year, and the officers so appointed
shall not by such appointment become members of the permanent police
force of the Town.
§ 179-5. Authority of officers; failure to assist.
The Chief of Police and other police officers of the permanent police force
and the police officers appointed for occasional service and for limited
A. The Town Council or the President of the Town Council may at any time
suspend any member of the permanent police force until the next
regular meeting of the Town Council, at which time the President shall
report any and all suspensions with the reasons therefor, and the Town
Council may continue such suspensions until the next regular meeting
following.
B. Any member of the permanent police force, including the Chief of
Police, shall be subject to reduction in rank or to removal from office by
the Town Council at any regular meeting thereof for misconduct,
incapacity, neglect of duty or insubordination of such character as the
Town Council may deem a disqualification for the office.
C. The provisions of the preceding subsections of this section relating to
suspensions, reductions in rank and removal from office shall not apply
to any police officer or police constable other than members of the
permanent police force of the Town.
§ 179-1 CHARTER § 179-5
C:307
terms shall have the power and authority conferred by law upon police
constables but shall not be required to give bond and shall not be authorized
to serve process in civil actions. Every such officer in the due execution of
his office may command all necessary aid and assistance in the execution of
such office, and every person who, when so required, shall refuse or neglect
to give such aid and assistance shall be fined not exceeding $20.
§ 179-6. Solicitor to represent Department.
The Town Solicitor shall act as the legal advisor to the members of the
Department in all matters pertaining to their official duties, shall prosecute
all suits and proceedings which they may be authorized to commence, and
shall appear for and defend members of the Department in all suits and
proceedings which may be brought against any one of them in his official
capacity.
§ 179-7. Police constables.
§ 179-8. Retirement of members of permanent force. [Amended
7-14-2008 by Ord. No. 793]
The Town of East Greenwich will provide the twenty-year retirement
program as provided in accordance with Rhode Island General Laws
§ 45-21.2-22.
§ 179-9. Police Manual; foreword.
A. The Town Council shall, from time to time, determine the number of
police constables to be appointed and may, from time to time, detail one
of the number so appointed as night police, patrol or watchman, to
serve upon such terms as shall be prescribed by the Council.
B. All police constables hereafter appointed shall be numbered, as shall be
prescribed by the Council, at the time of their appointment, and number
one shall be Chief of such police constables, and as such shall have full
power and authority to direct the same in the discharge of their duties,
and to require reports of their doings from time to time.
A. The rules and regulations of the Police Department of the Town provide
a guide for the proper performance of the duties imposed on police
officers of all ranks and grades.
B. The good name and reputation of East Greenwich rests frequently on
the way we on the Department perform our duty. Therefore, it behooves
all of us in the Department to act in a thoughtful and courteous manner.
C. It is the natural desire of all members to rise to higher positions. Such
advancement can only be made by superior police work, intelligence
and good conduct. As in all large groups, whether industrial, military,
commercial or police work, the great majority must be in the ranks at
any given time. The members of the Department can see that all
§ 179-5 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 179-9
C:308
positions above them have been filled from the ranks, and the same
opportunity is theirs if they but apply themselves studiously to the
performance of their police duties.
D. Being a police officer is honorable work. We are entrusted with the
protection of life and property. We shall have the respect of the people
of East Greenwich if we perform our duty in accordance with the
highest standards of police work.
Law Enforcement Code of Ethics
As a law enforcement officer, my fundamental duty is to serve
mankind; to safeguard lives and property; to protect the innocent
against deception, the weak against oppression or intimidation, and
the peaceful against violence and disorder; and to respect the
constitutional rights of all men to liberty, equality, and justice.
I will keep my private life unsullied as an example to all; maintain
courageous calm in the face of danger, scorn or ridicule; develop selfrestraint;
and be constantly mindful of the welfare of others and honest
in thought and deed in both my personal and official life. I will be
exemplary in obeying the laws of the land and the regulations of my
Department. Whatever I see or hear of a confidential nature or that is
confided in me in my official capacity will be kept ever secret unless
revelation is necessary in the performance of my duty.
I will never act officiously or permit personal feelings, prejudices,
animosities or friendships to influence my decisions. With no
compromise for crime and with relentless prosecution of criminals, I
will enforce the law courageously and appropriately without fear or
favor, malice or ill will, never employing unnecessary force or violence,
and never accepting gratuities.
I recognize the badge of my office as a symbol of public faith, and I
accept it as a public trust to be held so long as I am true to the ethics
of the police service. I will constantly strive to achieve those objectives
and ideals, dedicating myself before God to my chosen profession—law
enforcement.
§ 179-9 CHARTER § 179-9
C:309

ARTICLE II
Rules and Regulations
§ 179-10. Introduction.
§ 179-11. Severability.
If any part of these regulations is rendered inoperable or declared illegal
by any court or tribunal of competent jurisdiction, the balance of the entire
manual will remain in full force and effect.
§ 179-12. Gender of words.
Every word importing the masculine gender only shall be construed to
extend to and to include females as well as males.
A. The regulations in the Town's Police Manual are adopted as a guide for
the discipline and government of the Police Department. It cannot be
expected that any set of regulations will cover all situations or
emergencies which arise. In a role as complex as that of a police officer,
intelligence and discretion will often be the only available guidelines.
B. There is a need for standards of conduct and general rules in any
organization, especially one in an area as important as law
enforcement. These regulations are formulated to meet that need and
shall consist of Sections I, II and III of the Town's Police Manual.
Section I of the manual is entitled "Rules and Regulations" and defines
the minimal expectations of all members and employees of the Police
Department. Section II contains job descriptions and is called "Duties
by Rank and Assignment." Section III contains "Policies and
Procedures." These are the policies of the Department for a variety of
situations which may arise during an officer's tour of duty. Procedures
for implementing each policy are also listed.69
C. Department members and employees are required to read and be
familiar with the contents of the Police Manual. The purpose of this
manual is not to provide the Chief or appointing authority with a tool for
punishing officers. Rather it is an attempt at improving the
effectiveness of the Police Department by making clear to all officers
and employees what is expected of them and what they can expect of
fellow officers and employees.
D. It is anticipated that from time to time this manual will need revision.
Times, attitudes and policies change. This manual was printed in looseleaf
form so that revisions can be made more easily. New pages will be
printed and inserted whenever changes are made.
69.Editor's Note: Sections I and II of the Town Police Manual appear in this chapter as
Articles II and III. Section III is on file in the Clerk's office.
§ 179-10 CHARTER § 179-13
C:311
§ 179-13. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BEAT — An area assigned for patrol purposes.
BUREAU — A subdivision of a division of the Police Department having a
specific purpose.
CHAIN OF COMMAND — The unbroken line of authority extending from the
Chief of Police and through a single subordinate at each level of command
down to the level of execution.
COMMANDING OFFICER — A superior officer or, in his absence, the most
senior officer assigned to exercise command over a division, bureau or unit.
DEPORTMENT — The manner in which an individual behaves and conducts
himself.
DETAIL — A police assignment.
DISCIPLINE — A standard of orderly conduct based on obedience and
conformity to a set of rules or regulations.
DIVISION — A major part of the police organization which encompasses a
group of bureaus or units.
DUTY — A sworn obligation to perform a police action or service.
EQUIPMENT — Comprises nonexpendable items such as revolvers, other
firearms, batons, handcuffs, black jacks, desks, typewriters, etc.
GENERAL ORDER — A directive published by order of the Chief of Police
applying to all members and civilian employees which has the force of a
regulation.
HEADQUARTERS — A center from which orders are issued or plans
formulated. In police work, includes the office and staff of the head of the
Department.
INCOMPETENCE — Incapable of the satisfactory performance of police
duties.
INFORMANT — A person who gives the police certain information to assist
in their work.
INSUBORDINATION — The willful disobedience of any order lawfully
issued by a superior officer, or any disrespectful, mutinous, insolent or
abusive language toward a superior officer.
MANUAL — An instructional publication which describes the most
acceptable way of performing specified tasks.
MATRON — A female civilian employee having supervision of the women's
detention quarters.
MAY — Indicates permissive action.
§ 179-13 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 179-13
C:312
MEMBER — Sworn policemen and policewomen, whether or not
probationary, unless stated otherwise.
MEMORANDUM — An informal record of any proceeding or informal
communication of any kind.
MISSION — Goal, objective or specified work.
NEGLECT OF DUTY — Failure to give suitable attention to the performance
of duty.
OFFICER — A sworn member of the police force who has arrest powers; the
term is applied without regard to sex, rank, division or duty.
OFFICER, PROBATIONARY — Prior to an officer's permanent appointment,
he shall serve a period of not less than 12 months.
OFFICER IN CHARGE — Any officer who shall be in command of any
organic unit or situation at any given time.
OFFICIAL CHANNELS — Through the hands of the superior officer in the
chain of command.
ORGANIZATION — The organic structure of the Department's separate
parts.
OUT OF SERVICE — Whenever a member is not in service or involved in a
police activity.
POLICE POWER — The sovereign power of the state to regulate the safety,
morals and general welfare of the public.
POST — A fixed point, location or area to which a member or employee is
assigned for duty.
PROCEDURE — A manner of taking police action.
PROMULGATION — The act of making known officially.
PROPER AUTHORITY — The right or power to decide and command, when
such right is specifically delegated.
RANK — Each class level of members of the police force.
RANKING OFFICER — The officer having the highest rank.
REGULATION — A mandate promulgated by the Chief of Police, applicable
to all members and employees, and having the force of law.
RELIEF — A working shift or duty period.
SHALL — Indicates mandatory action.
SPECIAL OFFICERS — Upon recommendation of the Chief of Police and the
Town Manager, with the approval of the Town Council, constables may be
appointed and they will adhere to the rules and regulations set forth by the
Police Department.
SPECIAL ORDER — A directive published by order of the Chief of Police
applying to particular members and employees.
§ 179-13 CHARTER § 179-13
C:313
SUPERIOR OFFICER — A member above the rank of patrolman.
SUPPLIES — Property used by or expended in daily use, such as paper
towels, typewriter ribbons, pencils, pads, etc.
TOUR OF DUTY — An established work period.
UNIFORM OF THE DAY — The police uniform specifically designated by the
Chief of Police to be worn by uniformed members or employees of the Police
Department at any given time.
VERBAL ORDER — An oral directive by a superior officer to a subordinate.
WEAPON — Firearms, blackjack, baton, etc.
§ 179-14. Police officers; appointment generally.
A. Appointment and tenure. All police officers on the permanent police
force below the rank of Chief of Police shall be appointed or promoted,
as the case may be, by the Town Manager with the approval of the Town
Council and upon the recommendation of the Chief of Police, provided
they shall have satisfactorily passed such qualifying tests as the Town
Council shall have established. They shall hold their respective offices,
during good behavior, until vacated by death, resignation or retirement,
or until they shall be removed in the manner set forth in this chapter;
provided, nevertheless, that all members of the force shall, at the time
of their permanent appointment, have served for a period of not less
than 12 months in a probationary status, during which probationary
period they may be removed at any time by the Town Manager with the
approval of the Town Council and upon recommendation of the Chief of
Police, with or without cause.
B. Qualifications for appointment and promotion. The Town Council shall
provide standards for qualifications for appointment as a member of the
permanent police force and for promotion to the various ranks by it
specified and, for this purpose, shall require appropriate tests.
C. Decrease in number of permanent police force. The Town Council shall
have the right to decrease the number of police officers on the
permanent police force upon the recommendation of the Town Manager
for the purpose of complying with and remaining within appropriations
currently available for the payment of compensation within the Police
Department, and for this purpose shall, without making any charges
and without cause, have the right to remove a police officer or officers
who are members of the permanent police force. In any such case, the
Town Council shall order the removal of the officer having the lowest
rank and seniority in service. Any officers so removed shall have
precedence in the order of their seniority over all other candidates for
future appointments to the permanent police force.
D. Oath of office on appointment. All police officers, including the Chief of
Police, upon their appointment to the permanent police force shall
swear the following oath of office prior to assuming any duties:
§ 179-13 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 179-14
C:314
§ 179-15. Professional responsibilities.
Police officers are professionals and, as such, are expected to maintain
exceptionally high standards in the performance of their duties. Effective
and efficient performance of his duty requires that a police officer maintain
the respect and cooperation of his community. This requirement dictates
that the conduct of all police officers be above reproach in all matters both
within and outside the Department. General professional responsibilities
include taking appropriate action to:
"I, __________, do solemnly swear (affirm) that I will support the
Constitution and obey the laws of the United States of America and
of the State of Rhode Island; that I will, in all respects, observe the
provisions of the Home Rule Charter and ordinances of the Town of
East Greenwich, and will faithfully discharge the duties of the office of
__________ in the Police Department of the Town of East Greenwich, so
help me God. This affirmation I make and give upon pain of the penalty
of perjury."
E. Appointment of probationary patrolmen.
(1) Upon appointment as a probationary patrolman, every appointee
shall swear the following oath:
"I solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support the Constitution
and obey the laws of the United States of America and of the State
of Rhode Island; that I will, in all respects, observe the provisions
of the Charter and ordinances of the Town of East Greenwich, and
will faithfully discharge the duties of the office of probationary
patrolman."
(2) Probationary patrolmen may be separated from the force at any
time during the probationary period of one year without trial or
hearing when the Chief of Police deems such separation to be for
the good of the force.
F. Appointment to third grade patrolman. After successful completion of
the probationary period, the Chief of Police may recommend to the
Town Manager to appoint probationary patrolmen to permanent status
in the Department. Each appointee shall reswear the oath described in
Subsection E of this section. The Town Manager may approve the
appointment to third grade patrolman, may extend for a period not
exceeding one year the probationary period, or may terminate the
individual subject to these rules and the Town Charter.
A. Protect life and property;
B. Preserve the peace;
C. Prevent crime;
D. Detect and arrest violators of the law;
§ 179-14 CHARTER § 179-15
C:315
§ 179-16. Conflict of interest.
Since the position of a police officer is a public trust, it is important to
avoid all situations involving conflicts of interest whether in fact or only in
appearance.
E. Enforce all laws coming within departmental jurisdiction;
F. Supervise public functions (such as parades or dances) where public
order requires police presence;
G. Respond to all public emergencies;
H. Endeavor to maintain good community relations;
I. Perform any other duties as assigned by proper authorities; and
J. Obey all statutes and ordinances as necessary.
A. Membership in organizations. A member or employee of this
Department shall not affiliate with or become a member of any
organization if such affiliation or membership would in any way
interfere with or prevent him from performing his duty.
B. Outside employment. Prior to accepting any outside employment, a
member or employee must receive written approval of the Chief. No
member of the Department shall accept other employment which could
impair his independence of judgment in the exercise of official duties.
C. Membership in military organizations. A member of the force is
prohibited from voluntarily joining any federal or state military
organization without the permission of the Chief of Police. Nothing
contained in this subsection is intended to interfere with or affect the
discharge of a member's compulsory military obligation.
D. Political activities.
(1) Participation in political activities while in uniform or on duty is
prohibited. All actions which could even give the impression that an
officer is using his official position to influence the electoral
process are to be avoided. Members and employees who become
candidates for salaried elective office shall take a leave of absence
without pay. Such leave shall encompass both the campaign and
the tenure of office if elected.
(2) A member of the force shall not engage in political activity in behalf
of, or against, any candidate or political question. While in uniform,
a civilian employee of the Department shall not engage in political
activity or discussion on behalf of, or against, any candidate or
political question. Nothing contained in these regulations shall be
construed to mean that a member or employee of the Department is
prohibited from exercising his legal voting rights.
§ 179-15 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 179-16
C:316
E. Gifts and gratuities. Members and employees shall not under any
circumstances solicit or accept any gift, gratuity, loan, reward or fee
where there is any direct or indirect connection between the
solicitation and their departmental membership or employment, except
as may be specifically authorized by the Chief. Members and employees
must pay for all meals and beverages.
F. Seeking gifts. No member or employee of the Department shall seek,
directly or indirectly, any gift, present or gratuity from any person, firm,
group of persons, or relatives, friends or employees of the same, on the
basis of his membership in the Department.
G. Accepting gifts. No member or employee of the Department shall
accept, directly or indirectly, any gift, present or gratuity from any
person, firm, group of persons, or relatives, friends or employees of the
same, who might conceivably come to expect or seek preferential
treatment, whether in the nature of extra police services or exemption
from police enforcement measures.
H. Gifts from certain classes of citizens. No member or employee of the
Department shall accept under any circumstances, directly or
indirectly, any gift, present or gratuity from any person, firm, group of
persons, or relatives, friends or employees of such persons who may be
engaged in or in any way interested in the operation of a tavern, saloon
or any establishment engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages; from
any gambler, person of bad character or ill repute; any professional
bondsman; or any friend, relative or employee of such persons.
I. Rewards. No member or employee of the Department shall seek or
accept any money, gift, gratuity, reward or compensation for any
service rendered or expense incurred in the line of duty without the
written consent of the Chief of Police.
J. Testimonials and presents. No member or employee of the Department
shall collect or receive any money or other thing of value from any
source whatever for the purpose of making a present or giving a
testimonial for any member or employee of the Department, unless
specific permission is granted by the Chief of Police. No member or
employee of the Department shall seek or accept such present or
testimonial without the permission of the Chief of Police.
K. Unauthorized transactions. Members and employees are prohibited
from entering into any transactions of material value at substantially
lower than fair market value or the value at which such goods or
services is being offered to the general public, when such transaction
takes place between themselves and any person involved in any matter
or case which arose out of their employment with the Department,
except as may be specifically authorized by the Chief.
L. Use of official position. An officer shall not use his official position,
Department identification card or badge to gain privileges not
otherwise available to him except in the performance of duty. His
§ 179-16 CHARTER § 179-16
C:317
§ 179-17. Orders.
An order is a command or instruction, written or oral, given by a superior
officer. All lawful orders, written or oral, shall be carried out fully and in
the manner prescribed. All general orders, memorandums, special circulars
or other orders printed upon authorized departmental forms that have
been approved by the Chief of Police shall have the force and effect of a
Department regulation. All members of the force shall become familiar with
the regulations and provisions thereof.
official position, Department identification card or badge shall never be
used to avoid the consequences of illegal acts.
M. Contributions. A member of the force or uniformed employee shall not
seek or be obliged to make contributions in money, service or
otherwise, for any political purpose.
N. Prohibited places. Except in the line of duty, a member or employee of
the Department shall not visit or loiter near any bar, tavern, tap, lounge
or other establishment suspected by the police as being a place of
actual or probable law violations or a place that is frequented by known
hoodlums or other unsavory characters.
A. General orders. General orders are permanent written orders issued by
the Chief of Police outlining policy matters which affect the entire
Department. A general order is the most authoritative written order the
Chief issues and may be used to amend, supersede or cancel any
previous order. General orders remain in full effect until amended,
superseded or canceled by the Chief. Arrangements shall be made to
include general orders in the Police Manual.
B. Special orders. Special orders are temporary written orders issued by
the Chief of Police outlining instructions covering particular situations.
Special orders are automatically cancelled when their objective is
achieved.
C. Unlawful orders. No member shall knowingly issue an order in violation
of any law or any departmental regulation. Unlawful orders shall not be
obeyed. The officer to whom the order was given shall notify the
ordering officer of the illegality of his order. Responsibility for refusal to
obey rests with the officer to whom the order was given. He shall be
strictly required to justify his action.
D. Unjust or improper orders. Lawful orders which appear to be unjust or
improper shall be carried out. After carrying out the orders, the officer
to whom the order was given may file a written report to the Chief via
the chain of command indicating the circumstances and the reasons for
questioning the orders, along with his request for clarification of
departmental policy.
E. Conflicting orders. Should any order given by a superior officer conflict
with any previous departmental order, the member to whom such order
§ 179-16 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 179-17
C:318
§ 179-18. Required conduct.
is given will call attention to the conflict. If the superior officer does not
change his order to avoid such conflict, then his order will be obeyed,
but the member obeying such order will not be held responsible for
disobedience of the previous order. It should later be reported to the
Chief in writing for clarification.
F. Complying with instructions from radio dispatcher. All messages
transmitted over the police radio system by any member of the force
shall be direct and concise and shall conform with all departmental
radio procedures and the rules and regulations of the Federal
Communications Commission. No member shall disobey or refuse to
take cognizance of any communication transmitted through the radio
dispatcher by a superior officer.
A. In addition to the specific duties of each individual rank and
assignment, as set forth in Section II of the Police Manual, the following
provisions are applicable to all members of the Department:
(1) Reporting for duty. Report for duty whenever so ordered by proper
police authorities. Report for duty at the regularly appointed time
and not absent himself from duty without leave. Every member of
the force shall report for duty and be present at the time and place
specified by his commanding officer. He shall be properly equipped
with the regulation weapons and other accoutrements and shall be
clothed in the prescribed uniform of the day.
(2) Awareness of activities. Upon returning to duty from any absence,
inform himself about all new orders, regulations, memoranda and
all other important matters governing his assignment. Every
member of the force shall familiarize himself with all the laws,
statutes, ordinances and regulations necessary for the proficient
execution of his duty as a police officer.
(3) Submitting reports. Promptly and accurately complete and submit
all reports and forms as required.
(4) Attention to duty. Every member of the force who has occasion to
handle any complaint, assistance call, arrest or other duty shall
attend to such duty with a businesslike dispatch and courtesy and
without any unnecessary loss of time. He shall furnish information
or render police aid to all persons with due courtesy whenever such
request is consistent with his duty.
(5) Address and telephone. An officer shall have a telephone in his
residence and shall report any change of phone number or address
to his superior officer within 48 hours.
(6) Truthfulness. An officer shall truthfully state the facts in all reports
as well as when he appears before any judicial, departmental or
other official investigation, hearing, trial or proceeding. He shall
§ 179-17 CHARTER § 179-18
C:319
cooperate fully in all phases of such investigations, hearings, trials
and proceedings. A member or employee of the Department shall
speak the truth at all times and under all circumstances. In cases
in which he is not allowed by the regulations of the Department to
divulge facts within his knowledge, he will decline to speak on the
subject.
(7) Physical fitness. Maintain good physical condition in accordance
with a standard determined by the Chief. Every member of the
force shall keep himself as physically fit as his age and the nature of
his duties require. The Department police surgeon shall have the
responsibility, subject to the approval of the Chief of Police, for
judicious interpretation of this regulation in individual cases.
(8) Physical examination. A member shall submit to a physical exam at
any time, at the expense of the Department, when so ordered by the
Chief of Police.
(9) Communication. Transmit communications to other members of the
Department when required.
(10) Civil suits for personal injuries. Any claims for damage to clothing
or other personal property belonging to a member or employee
caused by the performance of duty shall be made in accordance
with current departmental directives. Members and employees
shall not seek in any way, nor accept from any persons, money or
compensation for damages sustained or expenses incurred by them
in the line of duty without first notifying the Chief of Police in
writing. Members or employees who have received municipal
salaries for illness or for personal injuries sustained off duty shall
notify the Chief of Police in writing of any intent to seek, sue, solicit
or accept compensation as damages for such illness or injury.
Notice shall be filed before the action is taken. It shall include the
facts of the claims and the name of the defendant. Keep the Chief
informed of the status of the case and the final court determination.
This provision shall not apply to private insurance policies held by
members or employees for which premiums are not paid for in part
or in whole by the municipality.
(11) Line-of-duty disability. Any injury, illness or disability incurred in
the line of duty shall be reported in writing by the concerned party
to his commanding officer; such report to be investigated by his
supervisor. Final disposition as to line-of-duty injuries, illnesses or
disabilities shall be made by the Chief after consultation with a
physician. In each case of illness, injury or disability incurred in the
line of duty, no officer shall be returned to duty until his ability to be
placed on duty status is certified by proper medical authority,
except that an officer may be returned to light duty by proper
medical authority. Such light duty may be assigned by proper
authority.
§ 179-18 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 179-18
C:320
(12) Respect. On or off duty, in uniform or out of uniform, a member or
employee of the Department shall extend the proper courtesy and
respect toward all superior officers of the Department.
(13) Instant action. Every member of the force, regardless of rank or
assignment, shall act instantly to protect life, liberty or property; to
enforce all laws and to detect the commission of crimes; and to
apprehend law violators.
(14) Rendering assistance. Department personnel shall render police
assistance to all persons and fellow officers who request it, so far as
such assistance is consistent with police duties. Personnel shall
cooperate with all other agencies engaged in the administration of
criminal justice or public welfare, affording them all the aid and
authorized information such organizations are entitled to receive.
(15) Duty to report information. It shall be the duty of every member of
the force to report to his commanding officer any information given
to him in good faith by any citizen regarding matters that indicate
the need for police action.
(16) Assisting fellow members of the force. Members of the force are
expected to be firm and calm in their actions at all times and, at
times of peril, shall act together to protect each other from danger
and for the restoration of peace and order.
(17) Knowledge of the Town. Every member shall familiarize himself
with the geography of the Town, including routes of public
transportation, the location of streets, highways, bridges, public
buildings and places, hospitals, courts, transportation offices and
stations, prominent or important office buildings, large industrial
plants or commercial establishments, and such other information
as may be disseminated by superiors from time to time.
(18)Weapons, badge, identification card. Except when on annual
furlough, a member of the force shall be armed at all times while off
duty and shall have on his person his police badge and his police
identification card. It shall not be necessary that a member carry
his service revolver while off duty. No member of the force who is
dressed in civilian clothes, either on or off duty, shall wear his pistol
or revolver, holster, handcuffs or blackjack in such a manner that
will attract attention or be in open view of the public, but rather, he
shall wear it concealed in a manner as to be inconspicuous. An
exception to this regulation is granted to those members
participating in raids or acting in a police emergency.
(19) Annual firearms qualification. In accordance with the requirements
of state law, a member of the force shall qualify in the use of
firearms at least once each year at the Department's weapon range.
(20) Condition, loss or damage to firearms. A member of the force shall
maintain his service revolver in a serviceable condition at all times
§ 179-18 CHARTER § 179-18
C:321
and shall clean and oil it each week to prevent rust or wear.
Unserviceability, damage or loss of the firearm shall be
immediately reported to the Department weapons officer through
the member's commanding officer.
(21) Custody of Department and personal weapons or ammunition. A
member of the force having temporary or permanent custody of
weapons or ammunition shall be held accountable for the security,
amount and condition of the weapons and ammunition throughout
the period that the weapons or ammunition remains in his custody
and shall keep such weapons and ammunition in a safe and secure
condition at all times.
(22) Repair or alteration of firearms. A member of the force shall not
alter or repair any part of his service revolver without the approval
of the Chief of Police.
(23) Handling money and property. All money or other property coming
into the possession of any member of the force through the normal
course of police duty which is not his own shall be delivered to the
proper custodian of the Department or to a superior officer, and a
report shall be made of the transaction.
(24) Knowledge of police regulations. Every member of the force shall
have a copy of the regulations of the East Greenwich Police
Department and shall be familiar with the provisions thereof.
(25) Use of in-service training manuals. A member of the force shall be
held accountable for all the information contained within the inservice
training manuals distributed by the Police Academy, shall
practice all the procedures and shall utilize all the information set
forth within the manuals.
(26) Use of weapons. A member of the force who finds it necessary to
use his baton or blackjack in making an arrest or attempting to
make an arrest or who shall find it necessary to discharge his
service revolver under any condition shall immediately notify his
commanding officer in writing. Such commanding officer shall
conduct an immediate investigation as to the possibility of injury to
any person or property and to the propriety of the member's use of
his weapon.
(27) Trials and hearings.
(a) All members of the force concerned with cases before the
courts, grand jury or hearing boards shall be punctual in
attendance and shall make a clean and neat appearance. All
members shall have the cases in which they are complainants
or witnesses properly prepared; the witnesses shall be present
and suitably arranged for presentation to the court, grand jury
or hearing board. They shall afford the utmost respect toward
officers of the court, officers of hearing boards and members of
§ 179-18 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 179-18
C:322
the jury. When presenting evidence or testimony, they shall
speak calmly and explicitly in a clear, distinct and audible
tone so as to be easily understood. They shall give evidence
with accuracy, confining themselves to the case before the
court and shall neither suppress nor overstate the slightest
circumstance with an intention of favoring any person or
projecting ill will to either the complainant or the defendant.
When cross-examined by a defense attorney, they shall answer
with the civility and readiness as when giving testimony in
support of the prosecution.
(b) If at any time a member of the force presents to the court any
improper or unsatisfactory testimony or whenever any remarks
detrimental to the presentation of testimony by a member are
made by the justice of a court, members of a grand jury or
members of a hearing board, a full report shall be made by the
member setting forth all the facts, and the report shall be
forwarded to the Chief of Police.
(28) Duty status. Although certain workday hours are allotted to every
member of the force for the performance of specific workday
duties, a member of the force shall be in an on-duty status at all
times for the preservation of the peace and the protection of life,
liberty or property. A member shall be prepared at all times and
under all circumstances to perform immediately a police duty
whether or not the member is in uniform or off workday duty
whenever the member is cognizant of a need for police service. A
member of the force shall be fit for duty at all times except when
carried on a sick or injured report.
(29) General knowledge and performance. Every member of the force
shall familiarize himself with all the laws, statutes, ordinances and
regulations necessary for the proficient execution of his duty as a
police officer. Any member who fails to perform efficiently his
assigned duty may be charged with neglect of duty.
(30) Reporting for duty. Every member of the force shall report for duty
and be present at the time and place specified by his commanding
officer. He shall be properly equipped with the regulation weapons
and other accoutrements and shall be clothed in the prescribed
uniform of the day.
(31) Bearing. A member of the force shall carry himself as befits an
officer of the law and the representative of the sovereignty of the
state. He shall walk erect and present a military posture, and any
slouching in the public view shall be regarded as a breach of
discipline.
(32) Member to know identity of superior officers. It shall be the duty of
every member of the force to know the identity of his superior
officers.
§ 179-18 CHARTER § 179-18
C:323
§ 179-19. Prohibited conduct.
(33) Traffic observation posts. A uniformed member of the force
assigned to mobile unit patrol duty who finds it necessary to take a
fixed traffic observation post shall dismount from his vehicle,
maintain an alert soldierly bearing and shall observe traffic
conditions.
(34) Duty to report false information. It shall be the duty of every
member of the force to report to his commanding officer any
Department reports or statements of which he has knowledge and
which he believes or knows to be false in whole or in part.
A. The following acts by a member of the Department are prohibited or
restricted:
(1) Criminal conduct. Commission of any felony or misdemeanor.
(2) Conduct unbecoming an officer. Any specific type of conduct which
reflects discredit upon the member as a police officer, upon his
fellow officers, or upon the Police Department he serves.
(3) Neglect of duty. Being absent from assigned duty without leave or
failing to take suitable appropriate police action when any crime,
public disorder or other incident requires police attention.
(4) Insubordination. Failure or deliberate refusal to obey a lawful order
issued by a superior officer.
(5) Unnecessary force. The use of more physical force than that which
is necessary to accomplish a proper police purpose.
(6) Discourtesy. Discourtesy, rudeness or insolence to any member of
the public. An officer shall be courteous and tactful in the
performance of his duties and shall control his temper, exercising
the utmost patience and discretion, even in the face of extreme
provocation.
(7) Intoxicant, drugs, etc., possession. A member or employee of the
Department shall not bring, place or permit to be brought or
placed, or allow to be kept in any building, location or vehicle
within the Department any intoxicant, exhilarant, hypnotic,
hallucinogen, or narcotic, except in the strict performance of police
duty as required by regulations or orders or when it is needed for
prompt administration by a licensed physician.
(8) Use of intoxicants. A member or civilian employee of the
Department shall not drink intoxicating beverages or use
intoxicants in any manner while on duty or in uniform. When off
duty, the member or employee of the Department shall not drink
intoxicating beverages to an extent that it would render one unfit
§ 179-18 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 179-19
C:324
for immediate duty. It is strictly forbidden to drink alcoholic
beverages while in uniform or while carrying firearms.
(9) Use of drugs. A member or employee of the Department shall not
use or render himself unfit for duty through the use of narcotics,
exhilarants, hypnotics or hallucinogens or other toxic drugs
unlawfully administered.
(10) Improper associations. Voluntarily maintaining or establishing
relationships with persons engaged in unlawful activity, except in
the discharge of official duty, and without prior knowledge of the
member's commanding officer or the Chief of Police. A member or
employee of the Department shall not consort with hoodlums,
criminals or other unsavory characters unless such association is
specifically required as a matter of police duty.
(11) Undue influences. Seeking the influence or intervention of any
person outside the Department for purposes of personal
preferment, advantage, transfer or advancement.
(12) Recommending private services. Recommending or suggesting in
any manner the employment or purchase of any particular
professional or commercial service or product, such as lawyers,
bondsmen, undertakers, towing services or burglar alarm
companies, except in the transaction of personal business.
(13) Personal business. Conducting personal business while on duty.
(14) Department letterhead. Use of the departmental letterhead for
private correspondence or sending official correspondence out of
the Department without the permission of the Chief of Police. No
member or employee or the Department shall send any written
communication about police business to any person, firm or other
law enforcement or public agency without the consent of his
commanding officer.
(15) Mailing address. Use of the Department as a mailing address for
private purposes, especially for the purpose of a motor vehicle
license or registration.
(16) Possessing keys to private buildings. Having keys to private
buildings or dwellings on a member's area of patrol without the
permission of the Chief.
(17) Sleeping. Sleeping while on duty.
(18) Reading. Recreational reading while on duty, except during meals.
(19) Smoking. Conspicuous smoking while on duty. A member of the
force or a uniformed civilian employee shall not smoke in uniform
while in view of the public, marching in uniform, standing in ranks,
or under any condition which might bring discredit upon the
Department.
§ 179-19 CHARTER § 179-19
C:325
(20) Notices. Altering, defacing or removing any posted notice of the
Department. No notice shall be posted on the Department bulletin
board without the permission of the Chief of Police or the officer in
charge. A member or employee of the Department shall not mark,
alter, mar or deface any printed or written notice, memorandum,
general order or directive relating to police business. A member or
employee shall not mark, alter, mar or deface any notice posted on
any bulletin board or blackboard maintained by the Department.
All notices of a personal nature and/or of a derogatory character
regarding any member or employee or organic unit of the
Department are prohibited.
(21) Lost or damaged Department property. Members or employees of
the Department shall promptly report in writing to their
commanding officer the loss, damage or unserviceable condition of
any Department property assigned to them or under their control.
The commanding officer shall forward the report to the Chief of
Police through channels with a copy for his commanding officer.
(22) Incompetence. An officer shall maintain sufficient competency to
perform his duty and to assume the responsibilities of his position.
Incompetency may be demonstrated by the following:
(a) A lack of knowledge of the application of laws to be enforced;
(b) An unwillingness or inability to perform assigned tasks;
(c) The failure to conform to work standards established for the
officer's rank, grade or position; or
(d) Repeated poor evaluations or repeated infractions of the rules
and regulations.
(23) False information on records. A member or employee of the
Department shall not make false official reports, or knowingly enter
or cause to be entered into any departmental books, records or
reports, any inaccurate, false or improper information or material
matter.
(24) Misappropriation of property. A member or employee of the
Department shall not appropriate for his own use any lost, found or
stolen property nor convert to his own use any property of the Town
or property held by the Department for evidence.
(25) Loitering by members and uniformed employees. During his tour of
duty, a member or uniformed employee of the Department shall not
loiter in cafes, saloons, restaurants, drive-in theaters, service
stations or other public places, except for the purpose of police
business. Persons other than those transacting police business
shall not be permitted to loiter in or about the police buildings.
§ 179-19 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 179-19
C:326
(26) Interfering with course of justice. All personnel of the Department
are forbidden to take part in or be concerned with, either directly
or indirectly, any compromise or arrangement with any person
whomsoever for the purpose of permitting an accused person to
escape the penalty of his wrongdoing, or seek to obtain a
continuance of any trial or otherwise interfere with the course of
justice. Information of any negotiations between an accused or his
representative and the accuser or any witness shall be disclosed to
the proper superior or to the presiding officer of a court or hearing.
(27) Recommendation for disposition of cases. A member of the
Department shall not make recommendation for the disposition of
any case pending in the courts without the consent of the Chief of
Police.
(28) Statements concerning liability. A member of the force shall not
make any oral or written statements to anyone concerning liability
in connection with the operation of police vehicles or performance
of other police duty, unless specifically authorized to do so by the
Chief of Police.
(29)Withholding evidence. A member of the force shall not fabricate,
withhold or destroy any evidence of any kind.
(30) Soliciting petitions for promotion or change of duty. A member of
the force shall not solicit a petition for his promotion to a higher
rank or a change in duty status, for the promotion or change of duty
status of any other member of the force, or for the appointment of
anyone to the force; nor shall a member of the force promote or
cause to be promoted any political influence to effect such an end.
(31) Distribution of cards, buttons, etc. Members of the force,
individually or representing police organizations, are prohibited
from issuing to persons, other than members of the force on the
active or retired list, any card, button or other device which
assumes or implies to grant to the person holding such credentials
any special privilege or consideration so far as the business of the
Police Department is concerned. The distribution of any card,
button or other device is prohibited unless authorized by the Chief
of Police.
(32) Unnecessary radio transmissions prohibited. A member of the force
shall not transmit lengthy descriptions or details of other lengthy
information over the police radio system unless circumstances
prevent the member from making such transmissions known to the
dispatcher by the use of the police telegraph system or public
telephone.
(33) Release of telephone numbers. No member or employee of the
Department shall release to the public or any public agency the
restricted home telephone number of any other member or
§ 179-19 CHARTER § 179-19
C:327
employee of the Department without authorization from his
immediate superior officer.
(34)Warrants for assault upon a police officer. A member of the force
shall not make application for a warrant charging another person
with an assault upon such member without first reporting the facts
of the case to his commanding officer. The commanding officer
shall forward to the Chief of Police a full report and shall not grant
the issuance of a warrant without written permission from the
Chief. A member of the force shall not compound any offense
committed against his person or property or withdraw any
complaint without the consent of the Chief of Police.
(35) Incurring Department liability. A member or employee of the
Department shall not incur a liability chargeable to the Town unless
with the knowledge and consent of the Chief of Police or a superior
officer designated by the Chief of Police.
(36) Dissemination of information.
(a) An officer shall treat the official business of the Department as
confidential and shall conform to the following guidelines:
[1] Information regarding official business shall be
disseminated only to those for whom it is intended, in
accordance with established departmental procedures.
[2] An officer shall not remove or copy official records or
reports from a police installation except in accordance
with established departmental procedures.
[3] An officer shall not divulge the identity of a person giving
information except as authorized by proper authority in
the performance of police duties.
(b) A member or employee of the Department shall not divulge to
any unauthorized person, in or out of the Department, (i.e., one
who does not have an official "need to know"), any information
concerning the official business of the Department if such
information would impair the public service of the Department
or improperly interfere with the due administration of criminal
justice, unless authorized by the Chief of Police.
(37) Feigning illness. An officer shall not feign illness or injury, falsely
report himself ill or injured, or otherwise deceive or attempt to
deceive any official of the Department as to the condition of his
health.
(38) Gambling in the station. No games of chance, card playing or
gambling of any kind shall be permitted in any police building or
station.
§ 179-19 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 179-19
C:328
(39) Recording devices. Any device used to record voices on tape shall
not be carried on the person of a police officer unless such
recording device is issued by the Department or authorized by the
Chief of Police.
(40) Out of service. A member or employee of the Department shall not
leave his beat or responsibilities when not on official police
business without first obtaining permission of the officer in charge
and reporting his leaving to the dispatcher or desk officer.
(41) Controversial discussion. A member or employee of the
Department shall not speak slightingly of any nationality, race or
religion.
(42) Public criticism. A member or employee of the Department shall
not publicly criticize or ridicule the Department, its policies, or any
other member or employee by talking, writing or expressing in any
other manner, where such public criticism or ridicule would tend to
impair the operation of the Department by interfering with its
efficiency, would tend to interfere with the ability of supervisors to
maintain discipline, or where such public criticism or ridicule is
made with knowing or reckless disregard to the truth or falsity of
the matters asserted.
(43) Political activity. A member of the force shall not engage in political
activity in behalf of, or against, any candidate or political question
while on duty. While on duty, a civilian employee of the Department
shall not engage in political activity or discussion on behalf of, or
against, any candidate or political question. Nothing contained in
this regulation shall be construed to mean that a member or
employee of the Department is prohibited from exercising his legal
voting rights.
(44)Written communications. No member or employee of the
Department shall send any written communication about police
business to any person, firm or other law enforcement or public
agency without the consent of the Chief of Police.
(45) Duty time limited to police work. Members of the force shall not
shop while on duty nor devote any of their on-duty time to any
activity other than that which relates to police work and shall not
perform any police duty in uniform for the purpose of private gain
unless properly authorized.
(46) Testimony in civil cases. A member of the force shall not testify in
any civil case in court, unless legally summoned to do so or unless
he shall have received permission or order from the Chief of Police.
(47) Borrowing. No member or employee of the Department shall
borrow from any other member or employee of the Department any
money, security or property, or obtain any credit or guarantee of
credit; nor shall any member or employee borrow from any tavern
§ 179-19 CHARTER § 179-19
C:329
§ 179-20. Uniforms and appearance.
Members shall be neat in appearance and well groomed while on duty in
uniform. All articles of clothing shall conform to the departmental uniform
regulations as established by the Chief. Civilian clothing shall not be worn
with any distinguishable part of the uniform.
§ 179-21. Departmental property and equipment.
Equipment issued to members of the Department shall remain the property
of the Department. Members and employees shall maintain departmental
property and equipment assigned to them in good condition. Damaged
or lost property may subject the responsible individual to reimbursement
charges and/or appropriate disciplinary action. Members shall sign receipts
for all issued equipment.
keeper or assign his wages or give any power of attorney for the
collection thereof.
A. Hair styles. Hair shall be neat, clean, trimmed and present a groomed
appearance. Hair will not protrude below the ears or the collar except
the closely cut hair on the back of the neck. Hair in front will be
groomed so that it does not fall below the band of properly worn
headgear. In no case will the bulk or length of the hair interfere with the
proper wear of any authorized headgear. The acceptability of a
member's hairstyle will be based upon the criteria in this subsection
and not upon the style in which he chooses to wear his hair.
B. Sideburns. If an individual chooses to wear sideburns, they will be
neatly trimmed and tapered in the same manner as his haircut.
Sideburns will not extend below the lowest part of the exterior ear
opening, will be of even width (not flared), and will end with a cleanshaven
horizontal line.
C. Mustaches. A short and neatly trimmed mustache may be worn, but
shall not extend over the top of the upper lip or beyond the corners of
the mouth.
D. Beards and goatees. The face will be clean-shaven other than the
wearing of the acceptable mustache or sideburns. Beards and goatees
are prohibited, except that a waiver for the wearing of a beard for
medical reasons with the prior approval of the Chief of Police shall be
allowed. When prescribed that a member not shave, the beard will be
kept trimmed so that it does not protrude more than 1/2 inch from the
skin surface of the face.
E. Wigs. Wigs or hairpieces will not be worn on duty in uniform except for
cosmetic reasons to cover natural baldness or physical disfiguration. If
under these conditions a wig or hairpiece is worn, it will conform to
departmental standards. Wigs or a hairpiece may be worn by officers
assigned to undercover with the prior approval of the Chief of Police.
§ 179-19 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 179-21
C:330
A. Damaged inoperative property and equipment. Members and
employees shall immediately report to their commanding officer on
designated forms any loss or damage to departmental property or
equipment assigned to them. The immediate superior shall be notified
of any defects or hazardous conditions existing in any departmental
property or equipment.
B. Care of departmental buildings. Members and employees shall not mar,
mark or deface any surface in any departmental building. No material
shall be affixed in any way to any wall in departmental buildings
without specific authorization from a commanding officer.
C. Surrender of departmental property. Members and employees are
required to surrender all departmental property in their possession
upon separation from the service or when otherwise ordered.
D. Departmental vehicles. A valid state driver's license is required of all
members. Members shall not use departmental vehicles without
permission of the commanding officer. Departmental vehicles shall
never be used for personal business or pleasure. While a member of the
force is on duty, he shall not drive a private vehicle to his post or
assignment or patrol his post or cover his assignment with a private
vehicle unless he is authorized to do so by his commanding officer.
E. Transporting citizens. Citizens shall be transported in departmental
vehicles only when necessary to accomplish a police purpose. Such
transportation shall be done in conformance with departmental policy
or at the direction of a commanding officer, immediate supervisor or the
communications center.
F. Authorized equipment. While on duty, a member shall carry only such
equipment as is issued by the Department or authorized by the Chief of
Police.
G. Reporting accidents. Accidents involving departmental property,
personnel and/or equipment must be reported in accordance with
procedures established by the Chief of Police.
H. Upkeep of Police Manual. All members and employees who are issued
the Police Manual are responsible for its maintenance and knowledge of
its contents, and they are required to make appropriate changes or
inserts as issued by the Chief. The manual shall be considered
departmental property.
I. Responsibility for items of identification. Each member of the
Department shall be responsible for the items of identification issued to
him as a member of the force, namely, the police badge, hat wreath,
name bar and identification card. He shall not permit any other person
to borrow or use the items of identification issued to him by the
Department. Any loss of such items shall be reported immediately by
the member to his commanding officer, together with a written report of
the circumstances leading to such loss.
§ 179-21 CHARTER § 179-22
C:331
§ 179-22. Regulations pertaining to the operation of police vehicles.
A. License requirements. No person shall operate a departmental vehicle
of any kind unless he has a valid license to operate such vehicle.
B. Authority to operate. No person shall operate a departmental vehicle
without receiving orders or permission from a superior entitled to give
such orders or permission.
C. Riders. No person shall be permitted to ride as a passenger in a
departmental vehicle, except when necessary for the proper
performance of police duty.
D. Safe driving of police vehicles. The driver of any police vehicle shall
operate the vehicle in a reasonable and safe manner, exercising due
caution and judgment. He shall operate the police vehicle in compliance
with the motor vehicle laws and traffic regulations, except when in
actual pursuit or in responding to an emergency, during which time he
will strictly adhere to the driving procedures established for the
operation of emergency vehicles.
E. Accidents involving police vehicles. All accidents involving police
vehicles shall be investigated by a superior officer who shall respond to
the scene and shall conduct a traffic accident investigation and make a
report thereon to his commanding officer who shall forward such report
to the Chief of Police. The commanding officer of the operator involved
in the accident shall subsequently submit a report to the Chief of Police
setting forth his findings and recommendations relative to the
responsibility or negligence on the part of the operator.
F. Injuries inflicted to persons or property. Whenever a member or
employee of the Department is involved in an accident while operating
a police vehicle or in any way injures a person or damages property, the
member or employee shall immediately notify the superior officer in
charge of the station.
G. Responsibility for vehicle. A member or employee of the Department
who is assigned to duty as an operator of a departmental vehicle shall
be responsible for the instant serviceability of the vehicle assigned to
his use. Except when the vehicle is in emergency use, the member or
employee shall inspect the vehicle when it is turned over to him and
shall render a written report to his superior officer of any defect,
damage or unserviceability of such vehicle. Furthermore, the member
or employee shall inspect the interior of the vehicle for the presence of
any unauthorized articles or things. Failure to inspect the condition of
the vehicle upon receipt by the member or employee shall be regarded
as neglect of duty.
H. Operation of departmental vehicles. No person shall use a departmental
motor vehicle for the purpose of pushing another vehicle, nor shall a
departmental motor vehicle be towed by another vehicle except by the
towing facilities provided by the Department. No person shall operate a
§ 179-22 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 179-22
C:332
§ 179-23. Miscellaneous regulations.
departmental vehicle that has a deflated tire or when there is evidence
of an apparent mechanical defect.
I. Unattended police vehicle. The operator of a departmental motor
vehicle shall lock the ignition and remove the key from his vehicle upon
dismounting and, when leaving the vehicle unattended for more than a
brief period, he shall lock the doors of such vehicle.
A. Basic workweek. The basic workweek for members and full-time
employees of the Department is established as being four days on, two
days off, which at the end of a year equals 37 1/2 hours per week.
B. Police week. Each police week will cover the period from midnight
Sunday to midnight the following Sunday.
C. Jury duty. According to Section 3, Chapter 2450 of the Public Laws of
1950 of the State of Rhode Island (R.I.G.L. § 9-9-3), all members of any
paid police force are exempt from jury service.70
D. Custody of prisoners. Any member of the force who has at any time the
custody of any person under arrest or detention shall be responsible for
the proper safeguard of such person and their property for the period of
time they remain in his custody.
E. Return of personal property to rightful owner. Whenever any member
or employee of the Department has an occasion to return personal
property held by the police to the rightful owner or to the owner's
authorized representative, the member or employee shall obtain from
either the owner or the representative his signature on a standard
police receipt form. The receipt form shall include a brief description of
the property, the reported value, the case number and the signature of
the member or employee who makes the transaction. If the property
has been listed on the standard property form, the member or employee
shall cause the rightful owner or authorized representative thereof to
affix his signature to the three copies of the standard property forms.
F. Seniority. A member's seniority status in the force shall be determined
according to the date of his appointment to his present rank. Where two
or more members of the same rank are appointed on the same day, the
first named in the order of appointment shall be the ranking member.
G. Use of Department reports, records and communications.
(1) All official communications to the Town Council or the Town
Manager shall be forwarded through the Chief of Police.
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 179-22 CHARTER § 179-23
C:333
§ 179-24. Disciplinary actions.
The Chief of Police shall have the power to discipline the members and
employees of the Department. The discipline shall be provided in
accordance with the Town Charter, these rules and regulations and/or the
General Laws of the State of Rhode Island. If a member is in a probationary
status, he may be removed at any time with or without cause and without
hearing by the Town Manager, with the approval of the Town Council and
upon recommendation of the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall be
able to suspend without pay any officer or employee; however, any such
suspensions over ten days shall be subject to the Town Manager's approval.
(2) No written communication with reference to police business shall
be made by any police officer or civilian employee to anyone,
except upon the authority of a properly designated superior officer.
(3) Copies shall be made and filed of all letters and telegrams sent
from the Police Department, and copies of all communications shall
be retained in the office from which they are sent.
(4) A Department record shall not be removed from any building or
office except with the permission of the Town Council, the Town
Manager or the Chief of Police.
(5) Entries in Department records shall be made without unnecessary
delay; they shall be accurate, concise and placed in chronological
order by the person or persons designated to such duty. Erasures
shall not be made, and, if corrections are to be made, an ink line
shall be drawn through the incorrect matter and the corrections
entered immediately above the deletion. The person making the
correction shall affix his initials alongside the correction.
H. Design of Department books, records and stationery. All books, records
or other printed forms used by the Police Department shall be of a style
and type approved by the Chief of Police. All books, records and files
necessary for the proper operation of each division, bureau or unit of
the Department shall be efficiently maintained by the division, bureau
or unit.
§ 179-23 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 179-24
C:334
ARTICLE III
Duties by Rank and Assignment
§ 179-25. Intent of list.
§ 179-26. Chief.
A. The following listed duties by rank and assignment are intended to list
specific assignments which are delegated by the Chief to individuals
within the Police Department. They are not intended to preclude an
individual from performing more than one assignment. For instance, a
patrolman or Sergeant might also be the armorer or weapons officer.
B. Each rank and assignment may also be assigned further duties as
required by the Chief or proper authority.
A. Summary.
(1) The Chief of Police is the chief administrative officer of the
Department and the final departmental authority in all matters of
policy, operations and discipline. He exercises all lawful powers of
his office and issues such lawful orders as are necessary to assure
the effective performance of the Department.
(2) Through the Chief of Police, the Department is responsible for the
enforcement of all laws coming within its legal jurisdiction.
(3) The Chief of Police is responsible for planning, directing,
coordinating, controlling and staffing all activities of the
Department. He is also responsible for its continued and efficient
operation, for the enforcement of rules and regulations within the
Department, for the completion and forwarding of such reports as
may be required by proper authority and for the Department's
relations with local citizens, the local government and other related
agencies.
(4) The Chief is responsible for training of all members of the
Department. The Chief shall have general charge of the station
house and all property of the Police Department.
B. Appointment. The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Town
Manager with the approval of the Town Council.
C. Rank. The Chief of Police shall hold the rank of colonel and shall wear
the insignia of that rank, viz: silver spread eagles on the shoulder straps
of the uniform coat and overcoat and on the tabs of the shirt collar.
D. Authority. Subject to all pertinent laws, these rules and regulations,
Town ordinances, and the orders of the Town Manager, the Chief of
Police shall have authority over all divisions of the Town Police
Department and over all of its members and any other nonuniformed
personnel assigned to the Department. The Chief of Police may also
§ 179-25 CHARTER § 179-26
C:335
promulgate to the Department such orders or instructions, written
or oral, which are not inconsistent with the law, these rules and
regulations, or any orders or instructions of the Town Manager. Orders
to the Department shall be issued by the Chief of Police, by direction
or approval of the Town Manager. Directives and other means of
conveying the policies and commands shall be issued in the following
forms: these rules and regulations, general orders, special orders,
memorandums, manuals, bulletins and verbal orders.
E. Succession. In case of the extended absence or disability of the Chief of
Police, the Town Manager shall appoint an acting Chief of Police with
the approval of the Town Council.
F. General duties and responsibilities. It is the duty and responsibility of
the Chief of Police to:
(1) Ensure compliance with all laws which the Department or its
officers have the authority to enforce.
(2) Organize, direct and control all resources of the Department to
preserve the peace, protect persons and property and enforce the
law.
(3) Develop a professional organizational structure for the
Department.
(4) Establish a routine of daily duties to be performed by officers.
Designate an officer to serve as commanding officer in his absence.
(5) Assign, detail or transfer any member or employee of the
Department to or from any unit or assignment whenever he shall
deem such action to be in the best interest of the efficiency,
discipline or morale of the Department.
(6) Institute an adequate and progressive program of training for
members and employees of the Department.
(7) Ensure that all members have available to them copies of the
Department's Police Manual.
(8) Promulgate all general and special orders of the Department and
issue on his own authority orders, written and oral, not inconsistent
with his powers, duties and responsibilities.
(9) Plan and execute police programs designed to prevent and repress
crime, to apprehend and prosecute offenders and to recover
property. Modify these programs to meet current trends.
(10) Provide for investigation into all cases of alleged or apparent
misconduct by departmental personnel.
§ 179-26 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 179-26
C:336
(11) Enlist the suggestions of members and employees of the
Department to ensure maximum relevance and acceptance of all
departmental regulations.
(12)Keep himself informed as to the affairs of the Department, ensuring
that the duties and responsibilities of members and employees are
being properly discharged.
(13) Be responsible for the necessary delegation of authority to those
under his command, commensurate with their duties and
responsibilities.
(14) Exercise general supervision and inspection of all licensed public
places within the community.
(15) Develop or adopt new techniques to improve effectiveness in the
discharge of police obligations of the Department.
(16) Adopt a policy covering the safekeeping of all evidence and any
property recovered, found or confiscated. Designate a member of
the Department as evidence officer.
(17) Be responsible for the preparation and justification of the annual
departmental budget and for the control of all departmental
expenditures.
(18) Maintain a personnel record system in which shall be kept all
pertinent information on all departmental members and
employees.
(19) Perform all other duties as assigned or required by the proper
authority.
G. Reports to Town Manager. The Chief of Police shall, within 30 days from
the close of the fiscal year, report in writing to the Town Manager on
activities of the Department for the previous fiscal year. In addition, he
shall report to the Town Manager on such matters as the Town Manager
deems necessary.
H. Delegation of duties and responsibilities. The Chief of Police may
delegate some of his duties and responsibilities to appropriate persons
within the Department, which delegation, in his opinion, will serve the
best interest of the Town and the efficiency, discipline and morale of the
Department.
I. Establishment of departmental boards. The Chief of Police, with the
approval of the Town Manager, may appoint various members of the
Department to serve on personnel boards and disciplinary hearing
boards, i.e., trial boards.
J. Removal for cause. Any member of the permanent police force of the
Town below the rank of Chief of Police may be removed for cause by the
§ 179-26 CHARTER § 179-26
C:337
§ 179-27. Captain.
Town Manager with the approval of the Town Council and upon the
recommendation of the Chief of Police.
K. Conflict with the Town Charter. To the extent that there is no conflict
with this section of the rules and regulations and the provisions of the
Town Charter, the provisions of the Town Charter shall take
precedence.
L. Suspensions and demotions. The Chief of Police, with the approval of
the Town Manager, may demote any officer for cause. The Chief shall be
able to suspend without pay any individual up to 10 days. Any time over
10 days shall be subject to the Town Manager's approval.
A. Summary. Subject to the direction and control of the Chief, a Captain is
responsible for the supervision and control of all officers of his division
and is responsible for their efficiency and effectiveness as members of
the Department.
B. General duties and responsibilities. It is the duty and responsibility of a
Captain to:
(1) Familiarize himself with the authority delegated to him.
Understand the responsibilities of those under his command.
(2) Coordinate the training of all members of his division. Be sure that
all officers are knowledgeable of all new developments in federal
law, state law and departmental regulations.
(3) Obey and transmit promptly all orders of the Chief, ensuring
uniform interpretation and full compliance.
(4) Handle infractions of departmental standards. When a member of
the Department has consistently refused to improve his conduct,
despite efforts by the Captain and other appropriate officers, a
written report must be submitted. Full details of the incident or
series of incidents shall be included in the report. Convey the
report to the Chief with written comments on the situation and a
recommendation for action to be taken.
(5) Assist in the administration of the division program for:
(a) Organizing and conducting personnel training programs.
(b) Improving working conditions for maximum efficiency and
morale.
(c) Using personnel records and performance evaluations for
individual guidance and improvement.
(d) Ensuring the proper and economical use of police manpower,
property and equipment.
§ 179-26 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 179-27
C:338
§ 179-28. Commanding officer of Patrol Division (Lieutenant).
(e) Promoting personnel safety.
(6) Examine reports for conformity with approved procedures as
outlined by various departmental instructions.
(7) Ensure prompt reporting to other municipal agencies and outside
authorities of any important matter within their jurisdiction.
(8) Keep members and himself informed of all significant events or
developments in law enforcement which affect the Department. If
changes or revision in any present practices of the Department
seem advisable, submit oral or written reports detailing
recommendations.
(9) Inform authorized personnel of any other significant events or
developments affecting the Department.
(10) Organize and assign duties to assure proper performance of
division functions.
(11) Perform such other duties as may be assigned by the Chief.
(12)He shall secure all revolvers, pistols or other Department-owned
equipment or property from the possession of any member of his
command who resigns, retires or is suspended, dismissed or
hospitalized, or from the effects of any deceased member.
(13)He shall supervise and, if necessary, assist in the interrogation of
all suspects detained by members of his command at police
headquarters or at any hospital in the city.
A. Summary. Subject to the direction from the Chief, the Lieutenant has
direct control over all members and employees of his division. He is
responsible for the direction and control of personnel under his
command to assure the proper performance of duties and adherence to
established rules, regulations, policies and procedures. He will provide
for continuation of command and/or supervision during absence of his
immediate superior.
B. General duties and responsibilities. It is the duty and responsibility of a
Lieutenant to:
(1) Familiarize himself with the authority delegated to him; understand
the responsibilities of those under his command.
(2) Investigate personnel complaints as assigned by the Chief.
(3) Promote harmony and cooperation among all units of his division.
(4) Handle infractions of departmental standards. When a member of
the division has consistently refused to improve his conduct,
despite efforts by himself and his officer in charge, require that a
§ 179-27 CHARTER § 179-28
C:339
written report be submitted. Full details of the incident or series
of incidents shall be included in the report. Convey the report
to the Chief with written comments on the situation and a
recommendation for action to be taken.
(5) Prepare required correspondence and reports and maintain proper
records of the division's activities. Communicate information as
required.
(6) Maintain quarters, equipment, supplies and material in good
condition.
(7) Organize and assign duties to assure proper performance of
division functions.
(8) Periodically inspect all members of his division to assure proper
maintenance of personnel and departmental equipment.
(9) Assist departmental personnel in the preparation of cases.
(10) Prepare efficiency ratings on division personnel as directed by the
Chief.
(11) At the direction of the Chief, observe probationary officers and,
prior to the expiration of their probationary period, submit to the
Chief a detailed written report concerning their qualifications to
secure permanent status and his opinion as to the desirability of
their retention.
(12) Assist in the administration of the division program for:
(a) Organizing and conducting personnel training programs.
(b) Improving working conditions for maximum efficiency and
morale.
(c) Using personnel records and performance evaluations for
individual guidance and improvement.
(d) Ensuring the proper and economical use of police manpower,
property and equipment.
(e) Promoting personnel safety.
(13) Coordinate the training of all members of the division. Be sure that
all officers are knowledgeable of all new developments in federal
law, state law and departmental regulations.
(14) Obey and transmit promptly all orders of the Chief, ensuring
uniform interpretation and full compliance.
(15) Examine reports for conformity with approved procedures as
outlined by various departmental instructions.
§ 179-28 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 179-28
C:340
§ 179-29. Sergeant.
(16) Ensure prompt reporting to other municipal agencies and outside
authorities of any important matter within their jurisdiction.
(17)Keep members and himself informed of all significant events or
developments in law enforcement which affect the Department. If
changes or revision in any present practices of the Department
seem advisable, submit oral or written reports detailing
recommendations.
(18) Inform authorized personnel of any other significant events or
developments affecting the Department.
(19) Hours are to be flexible and to be designated by the Chief of Police.
(20) Perform such other duties as may be assigned by the Chief.
(21) Secure all revolvers, pistols or other Department-owned equipment
or property from the possession of any member of his command
who resigns, retires or is suspended, dismissed or hospitalized, or
from the effects of any deceased member.
(22) Supervise and, if necessary, assist in the interrogation of all
suspects detained by members of his command at police
headquarters or at any hospital in the city.
A. Summary.
(1) A Sergeant occupies the first level of supervision in the
Department. His primary responsibility is exacting the proper
performance of police duty from the officers assigned to duty
within the area subject to his supervision. The Sergeant is charged
with ensuring compliance with the Department's regulations. He
handles all infractions and reports all violations to his superior.
(2) He shall thoroughly acquaint himself with the duties of patrol
officers and shall assist and instruct the officers under his
supervision in the proper discharge of their duties. He shall be
responsible for the proficiency, discipline, conduct, appearance and
strict attention to duty of all officers under his supervision.
B. General duties and responsibilities. It is the duty and responsibility of a
Sergeant to:
(1) Supervise patrol officers assigned to his command.
(2) Be fully familiar with the current departmental rules, policies,
procedures and developments in the law that affect him and
members under his supervision.
§ 179-28 CHARTER § 179-29
C:341
(3) Review the performance of officers under his supervision on a
regular basis to determine whether they are properly, effectively
and consistently carrying out their police duties.
(4) Ensure that when the police performance of an officer under his
command is unsatisfactory, measures are taken through
encouragement, explanation, referral to his superior officer or
other means consistent with departmental policy to see that the
officer's future conduct is up to standard.
(5) Submit a written report to the officer in charge regarding any
member of the Department when he commits a serious breach of
the regulations of the Department and informal corrective
measures prove inadequate. Include in such report the complete
details of the misconduct and of those corrective measures
attempted. Examples of types of misconduct which would
ordinarily be considered serious include, but are not limited to, the
following:
(a) Flagrant refusal to obey orders.
(b) The commission of any criminal offense.
(c) Verbal and/or physical abuse of a member of the public or of his
fellow officers.
(d) Excessive use of force with a prisoner or other person.
(e) Absence without leave.
(f) Excessive tardiness.
(g) A conflict of interest.
(h) Negligent failure by the departmental personnel to discover or
act upon a felony or upon the existence of dangerous
conditions to the health or safety of the public.71
(i) Repeated failure to respond to orders, instructions or other
admonitions to correctly execute his duties.
(6) Implement all orders received from officers in charge. To this end,
thoroughly explain to departmental personnel under his command
the content of new orders that affect their responsibilities.
(7) Be accountable for the actions or omissions of officers under his
supervision which are contrary to departmental regulations or
policy.
71.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 179-29 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 179-29
C:342
§ 179-30. Officer in charge of Detectives.
(8) Respond to emergencies, incidents or dispatches as required. Take
command of the situation until relieved by an officer of superior
rank.
(9) Ensure that all patrol officers receive warrants, summonses,
subpoenas or other official papers, and serve or deliver or perform
their duties regarding such papers promptly and accurately.
(10) Inspect the daily log before beginning his tour of duty and
familiarize himself with all important matters that have occurred
since his last inspection of such daily log. He shall make note of all
complaints at roll call and make certain that the officers under his
supervision are giving them proper attention.
(11) Require officers under his supervision to carry all authorized and
issued police equipment.
(12) Inspect detail sites and check on officers assigned to each detail.
The Sergeant makes sure all construction, special events, football
and baseball games, etc., have the proper amount of police
supervision and comply with the Town ordinances.
(13) Perform such other duties as may be assigned by the Chief.
C. Duties and responsibilities for reporting and notification.
(1) Comply with the departmental records and reporting system and
instruct police officers in the proper method of reporting.
(2) Report to his officer in charge all serious or unusual occurrences
that occur during his tour of duty.
(3) Cause reports to be filed on preliminary investigations and periodic
reports on the status of more in-depth investigations, calling to the
attention of his officer in charge any significant developments in all
investigations.
(4) Respond to the scene of any serious or unusual incident, fire,
accident, catastrophe or major crime.
(5) Report immediately to the Juvenile Bureau all cases involving
juveniles and all sex or morals cases where women are involved
whether as complainants, victims or violators. However, nothing
contained in this subsection shall be construed to limit the powers
of the Sergeant or units in the discharge of their duties and
functions in all investigations regarding women or juveniles.
A. Summary. The officer in charge of Detectives supervises the Detectives
assigned to his command. He coordinates the case load and directs
criminal investigations where required. The officer in charge of the
Detective Division shall have complete responsibility for the operation
§ 179-29 CHARTER § 179-30
C:343
of the Detective Division and shall be held accountable for the
successful completion of the investigation of all crimes that are
assigned to his division and he shall require his subordinates to exert
their best efforts in the investigation of such crimes and their clearance
by arrest. He is responsible to the Chief of Police.
B. General duties and responsibilities. It is the duty and responsibility of
the officer in charge of Detectives to:
(1) Supervise the officers assigned to his command.
(2) Ensure that the Detectives cooperate fully with other units within
the Department and with the departments and agencies in other
jurisdictions.
(3) When necessary, and with the approval of the Chief of Police, assign
Detectives to duty outside the community.
(4) He shall personally report to the Chief of Police on a daily basis all
important activities of the division, keeping him advised of the
crime situation in the Town, the effectiveness of the police action in
combating crime, problems of morale or discipline, or any
significant incidents or complaints which, in his discretion, should
be brought to the attention of the Chief.
(5) Ensure that the Evidence Officer maintains custody of all controlled
substances and paraphernalia.
(6) Review all reports submitted by those under his command for
accuracy, completeness and conformity with departmental
requirements. Forward such reports, when requested, to the Chief
of Police.
(7) Inform the Chief of Police of all significant events or developments.
(8) Perform such other duties as may be assigned by the Chief.
(9) Prepare and present appropriate cases to the Juvenile Hearing
Board.
(10)He shall assist, whenever practicable, in returning lawbreakers
from other jurisdictions and shall maintain proper police relations
with other law enforcement agencies outside the state by aiding
them in the apprehension of lawbreakers and by providing them
with criminal records or other information useful to them. He shall
act as liaison officer between the Department and all other police
departments and law enforcement agencies.
(11)He shall have the authority to detail members under his command
to special assignments and may, with the approval of the Chief of
Police, order any member of his division to leave the Town on police
business whenever the exigency of service requires it.
§ 179-30 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 179-30
C:344
§ 179-31. Detective.
(12) The commanding officer of the Detective Division shall cause to be
prepared by the Bureau of Criminal Identification police circulars
containing all necessary data and information on cases involving
wanted persons whenever the case warrants it or the value of the
stolen property is sufficiently large enough to require such action.
(13)He shall make investigations for and provide information to outside
police agencies when compliance with such request does not
conflict with any investigation being conducted by this Department.
(14) When circumstances require it, he shall personally visit the scene
of a major crime or those of an unusual nature.
(15)He shall make certain that all reports submitted by the Detectives
under his command contain the names of members of the
uniformed force or others who have given assistance in the
investigation and shall be responsible for promoting a close
cooperation and harmonious relationship between the members of
the Detective Division and the members of other divisions, bureaus
and units.
(16)He shall keep the Chief of Police informed of all activities of the
Division so that in his absence there will be no interruption in the
orderly operation of the Division.72
(17)He shall actively train subordinates in the proper techniques of
criminal investigation and shall instruct them in the proper method
of report writing.
(18)He shall ensure that proper arrest charges are placed against
offenders; that cases are properly prepared for court or grand jury
action and shall oversee the activities of Detectives in the
presentation of cases to the grand jury.
(19)He shall perform whatever special assignments the Chief of Police
may designate.
(20)He shall require that members of his squad submit periodic
supplementary reports reflecting the progress of the investigation
and the status of all matters assigned to their attention.
A. Summary.
(1) The Detective will be responsible for the further investigation and
prosecution of all felonies, thefts, frauds, burglaries, check cases,
aggravated assaults and other such misdemeanors that require
extended investigation. He shall perform other duties as may be
assigned by the Chief or officer in charge who has full authority and
72.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 179-30 CHARTER § 179-31
C:345
direct control over all Detectives, subject to any limitation set by
the Chief. The degree of proficiency required in the performance of
the specific sections of duties which follow shall be determined by
the officer in charge of Detectives.
(2) The Detective shall have the role of supporting the uniformed arm
of the force. While this division provides specialists' services, its
members, nevertheless, are still policemen and have the same
police responsibility as do all other members of the force. The
division shall have the special mission to investigate all serious
crimes, to clear crimes by arrest, to prosecute lawbreakers, and to
recover stolen property.
(3) The Detective shall have authority to take original complaints or
reports of any nature whenever it is indicated that such action will
aid the investigation and best serve the ends of justice.
B. General duties and responsibilities. It is the duty and responsibility of a
Detective to:
(1) Cooperate fully with other units within the Department and with
departments and agencies in other jurisdictions. Make
investigations for them and provide criminal records and other
information to them, where such action does not conflict with any
investigation being conducted by this Department. In addition, be
prepared to aid them in the apprehension of suspects or offenders,
and generally act as liaison officer between this Department and all
similar divisions or units in other police departments and law
enforcement agencies.
(2) Be fully familiar with the law and departmental procedures and
policies surrounding the handling of suspects, crime scene control,
the care of prisoners, and the presentation of evidence in the court.
(3) Be familiar with known criminals and their associates. Know their
general behavior patterns, their hangouts, and their modus
operandi. Be alert for sources of information and cultivate them.
(4) Investigate promptly and diligently all crimes assigned, utilizing all
available resources. Upon receipt of the case, immediately
interview the complainant, victim and witness. When any person is
interviewed or interrogated, identify properly before asking any
questions.
(5) Keep his officer in charge informed of the progress of his
investigations and request additional instructions when further
progress appears impossible. Also, communicate to his officer in
charge any information uncovered which relates to criminal
activity beyond the scope of his immediate investigation.
§ 179-31 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 179-31
C:346
(6) Submit a written report of his activities regarding assigned cases to
his officer in charge as requested. Furnish such other daily or
monthly reports as required.
(7) Follow up all cases until there is a final disposition or the case is
declared inactive by the officer in charge.
(8) Contact the complainant or victim periodically to apprise him or
her of the state of the investigation. Within the first two weeks
following a crime, personally contact the complainant or victim for
these purposes unless special reasons not to do so exist.
(9) Keep an accurate, up-to-date account of expenses incurred when on
out-of-Town assignment. Submit this account to the officer in
charge for his approval before presenting it for reimbursement.
(10) Make note on his report when an officer renders exceptional
assistance in order that the officer rendering such assistance may
receive due credit for his efforts.
(11) Prepare cases for court. Carefully prepare the presentation of
facts, and ensure that witnesses appear. Obtain the court
disposition of all cases in which he was involved.
(12) Report during the tour of duty, at such intervals as the Chief and/or
officer in charge may designate.
(13) See that any assigned motor vehicle is well maintained
mechanically and that it is kept clean both inside and out.
Immediately report all defects and damages sustained to the
vehicle to the officer in charge and complete all reports and forms
required for such by current procedures. Use the call number
assigned to the car to contact headquarters. Operate the radio in
line with FCC regulations and current departmental procedures.
(14) Secure any vehicle which is left unattended and ensure that doors
are locked and windows shut. When a vehicle returns to the station
at the end of a tour of duty, ensure that the gas tank is filled.
(15) Communicate to the officer in charge all information received or
known which may affect the safety of other members of the
Department in the execution of their duties. For example, the
identity of persons known to be carrying weapons.
(16) Meet periodically and in all other ways coordinate your police work
with the other members of the Department assigned to operate in
your sector.
(17) Be available by telephone or radio during the tour of duty when the
situation permits.
§ 179-31 CHARTER § 179-31
C:347
(18) Safeguard all property recovered; tag and stamp all lost, stolen or
found property that comes into your possession. Submit a written
report to the officer in charge concerning such property.
(19)He shall dress in civilian clothes, keep himself neat and clean and,
except when otherwise ordered, his general appearance shall be
businesslike and presentable at all times while in the public. He
shall not wear sport clothes while on duty.
(20) Under no circumstances shall he make public any information that
might jeopardize the successful completion of an investigation or
interfere with the apprehension of a suspect.
(21)He shall interview the complainants, victims and witnesses in all
cases assigned to him for investigation without delay and shall
properly identify himself to all persons interviewed or interrogated
by him.
C. Licensing duties.
(1) Visit licensed business establishments periodically, such as openair
parking lots, used car dealers, boardinghouses, antique shops,
junkyards, pawnbrokers, liquor stores, etc. Ensure that each
license is in order and up-to-date and that nothing is present which
violates its terms.
(2) Visit, on a periodic basis, establishments containing automatic
amusement machines, jukeboxes, pool tables, and bowling alleys.
(3) Investigate complaints against licensed establishments and
cooperate with and render assistance to the license board in all
matters.
D. Auto theft duties.
(1) Conduct a daily review of automobile theft reports. Note those
which will require investigative work and undertake investigation
of them.
(2) Conduct a daily review of auto towing reports to discover stolen
vehicles.
(3) Cooperate with other police departments and agencies in the
investigation of auto larcenies and in the recovery of stolen cars.
E. Bank responsibilities.
(1) Receive complaints from banks and other establishments and
persons in the area regarding fraudulent checks and all similar
cases. These cases may involve uttering, forgery and uttering,
fraud or theft. Apprehend and prosecute offenders for these and
related offenses. Prepare complaints for prosecution in court.
§ 179-31 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 179-31
C:348
(2) Maintain records of all known check passers, check passing rings
and worthless checks. Make out original cards on each individual
complaint.
(3) Check teletypes from other departments in the state and outside
the state relating to check passers.
F. Narcotics duties.
(1) Have absolute control over and custody of all controlled substances
coming into the possession of any officer or unit of the Department
when so assigned. See to it that all drugs and paraphernalia are
securely locked and marked for identification.
(2) Make application for and review all search warrants obtained by
any officer or unit of the Department alleging drug violations.
Whenever possible, be personally present at execution of the
warrant, when so assigned.
(3) Act as liaison officer between the Department and other
departments and governmental agencies involved with controlled
substances.
(4) Keep records on all persons arrested for or charged with Controlled
Substance Act violations and see to it that photographs and
fingerprints of all persons arrested who are charged with such
violations are included in such records. (Note: These records are in
addition to departmental arrest records.)
(5) Maintain a record of all controlled substance arrests. Indicate the
amount and type of drug seized, the age, race and sex of the
offender, the offense or offenses charged, and the disposition of the
case.
(6) Be available when requested by any civic, church or fraternal
organization, with the permission of the Chief of Police, for the
purpose of drug education and participation in other community
drug programs. Cooperate fully with all recognized drug
rehabilitation groups in Town including the probation office.
(7) Prepare training programs on narcotics enforcement issues and
participate in the training of recruits when requested.
(8) Maintain an up-to-date drug information file for use at legislative or
other hearings on drug problems.
(9) Investigate all complaints of Controlled Substance Act violations.
Apprehend, charge and prosecute offenders. Carry out protracted
surveillance and undercover purchases when so ordered.
G. Evidence and identification duties.
§ 179-31 CHARTER § 179-31
C:349
(1) Become proficient in techniques of fingerprinting, photography,
and the collection, preservation and presentation of all physical
evidence.
(2) Take and classify fingerprints, and maintain the fingerprint files on
all arrested persons. Take palm prints of all persons arrested for
any crime punishable by death or life imprisonment.
(3) Take any noncriminal fingerprints and photographs as required for
firearm permits or identification purposes, etc.
(4) Act as custodian of all controlled substances seized in the course of
any arrest or investigation.
(5) Photograph persons taken into custody by the police. Maintain the
photography files.
(6) Photograph as required:
(a) Sites of fires of suspicious origin;
(b) Homicides;
(c) Sudden deaths and suicides if there is a possibility of an
inquest;
(d) Safe breaks;
(e) Autopsies when requested by the Medical Examiner;
(f) Serious accidents and accidents involving Town-owned
vehicles; and
(g) Take other photographs as requested by the officer in charge
or the Chief.
(7) Search crime scenes systematically and carefully for physical
evidence in conformity with established and approved procedures
of the Department.
(8) Preserve for court any and all physical evidence found at the scene
of a crime. Make any enlargements of photographs as may be
required for presentation in court.
(9) Process all physical evidence collected by or brought to the unit.
(10) Preserve the security and custody of evidence by giving or
receiving a standardized receipt whenever evidence is received or
transferred. Transfer evidence only to persons authorized to
receive it and only according to departmental policy regarding
handling of evidence.
(11) Receive, mark for identification, prepare, package, record and
forward to the laboratories all evidence that requires further
scientific processing.
§ 179-31 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 179-31
C:350
§ 179-32. Shift commander - commanding officer.
(12) Be responsible for conducting authorized searches of the various
files maintained by the Department. Refrain from divulging
information contained in such files to persons other than those
specifically authorized by the commanding officer or the Chief to
receive such information.
(13)Keep himself informed of all improvements in scientific
investigative techniques with regard to police identification and
laboratory processes.
(14) Prevent the destruction or removal of any records, fingerprint
cards or photographs from the files, except upon the order of the
Chief of Police.
H. Other duties. Perform other duties as assigned by proper authority.
A. Summary. A shift commander is normally a ranking officer from the
Department who has been designated by the Chief to command a shift.
He is responsible for the immediate supervision and control of all
officers under his command and is personally responsible for their
efficiency and effectiveness as members of the Department.
B. General duties and responsibilities. It is the duty and responsibility of
the shift commander to:
(1) Provide for the daily inspection of members assigned to patrol.
Correct any noncompliance with departmental standards of
uniform or equipment.
(2) Provide for all significant changes in departmental rules,
regulations, policies and procedures to be explained first at roll call
and later as required.
(3) Provide for the proper and complete upkeep of the daily log.
(4) Coordinate the deployment and activities of traffic and patrol
personnel.
(5) Be responsible for the conduct of roll calls, dissemination of
information and/or materials, and inspection of officers for only
such equipment as has been authorized by the Chief of Police.
(6) Ensure the proper use of radio procedures by all members under
his command.
(7) Ensure the efficient operation and maintenance of the
Department's communications system.
(8) Periodically evaluate the adequacy of the communications
equipment to meet the Department's needs. Report any inadequacy
§ 179-31 CHARTER § 179-32
C:351
using current departmental procedures and recommend the
procurement of needed equipment.
(9) Ensure that inspections of motor vehicles and equipment are
carried out and that the results of such inspections are properly
reported by current departmental procedures.
(10) Ensure that uniformed patrol personnel not use unmarked cars
without the approval of the Chief of Police.
(11) Provide for the security, cleanliness and maintenance of the station
house and its equipment during his tour of duty.
(12) Ensure that the cells are kept well ventilated and clean and that all
prisoners coming into or remaining in the station house are treated
in accordance with departmental rules and procedures.
(13) Ensure that all persons coming into the station house are treated
courteously.
(14) Ensure proper processing of all complaints by citizens.
(15) Oversee the prompt and accurate entry of all official police
business submitted to the desk that is to be included in the records
kept at the desk.
(16) Ensure that the desk files are maintained.
(17) Maintain the order and security of the station house and the proper
conduct of officers.
(18) Oversee and direct officers who are assigned to desk duty.
(19) Take special measures to ensure that the departmental procedures
are carried out regarding the handling of lost, stolen or abandoned
property required as evidence or taken from a prisoner.
(20) Examine for approval or disapproval all reports or records
submitted to the desk. If approved, initial the report or record in
the proper place. If disapproved, order the police officer to correct
the deficiencies and resubmit the report or record.
(21) Be responsible for the care and handling of prisoners in accordance
with departmental policies and procedures and state law.
Responsibilities include but are not necessarily limited to the
following guidelines:
(a) Examine each prisoner upon his arrival at the station house for
injuries. If any are found, record the fact in writing and submit
the report to the Chief of Police. Determine whether any of the
injuries were inflicted by a member of the Department. If they
were, note such in the report. Investigate the circumstances of
the incident and require the officer who inflicted the injury to
§ 179-32 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 179-32
C:352
submit a detailed report describing the incident. Forward such
report to the Chief.
(b) If the prisoner requires medical attention, summon a physician
or, if necessary, have him conveyed to a hospital.
(c) When a prisoner is unconscious for any cause, immediately
attempt to restore consciousness. Failing to do so within a
reasonable time, call a physician and be guided by his
instructions. Allow no unconscious person to be placed in a cell
except with the approval of a physician.
(d) Inform a prisoner charged with operating a motor vehicle
while intoxicated of his right to be examined immediately by a
physician selected by him at his expense. Afford him a
reasonable opportunity to exercise the right.
(e) Remove from each prisoner to be put in a cell, his shoes, belt,
jewelry and any other items that could be used in injuring
himself.
(f) Require each prisoner be kept under proper surveillance using
the equipment provided therefor.
(22) Oversee arrests of juveniles and immediately notify the parents; if
there is no parent, the guardian or person with whom the juvenile
resides.
(23) See that any person, including a juvenile, arrested for a felony, a
narcotics violation or an offense arising from a civil disorder, is
fingerprinted and photographed. Also, have palm prints taken of
persons arrested for capital or possible life sentence offenses.
(24) Be responsible for ensuring the prompt and effective service of all
summonses, subpoenas, warrants and other official documents
forwarded by proper authority.
(25) Ensure that departmental procedures surrounding the handling of
female prisoners are followed.
(26) Oversee the booking process. If an arrested person has been taken
directly to a hospital and is remaining there, see that proper
booking procedures are carried out at the hospital.
(27) Inform any prisoner upon his being booked of his right to use the
telephone.
(28) Oversee the bonding procedures and release of prisoners on bond.
(29) Designate work assignments in conjunction with the Chief of
Police.
(30) Inform the relieving officer of all police business that is pending or
would otherwise be of interest or importance to him.
§ 179-32 CHARTER § 179-32
C:353
(31) Perform such other duties as may be assigned by proper authority.
(32) Supervise and direct the activities of the dispatcher.
(33) Establish whatever details and assignments that are necessary for
the efficient performance of his unit's assignment.
(34) Be responsible for the punctual reporting for duty of all personnel
within his command.
(35) Report immediately to his superior officer any unusual occurrence
or serious crime, and he shall be held responsible for the proper
handling of any crime, incident or matter.
(36) Be responsible for keeping the Department's standard records,
reports and accounts which pertain to the operation and execution
of the activities of the unit under his command.
(37) Inspect or cause to be inspected all personnel equipment, supplies
and installations assigned to his command. They shall be
responsible for the good order, proper care, use, efficiency and
serviceability of all departmental property assigned for the use of
his unit and ensure its proper use by the members of his command.
(38) Constantly train his subordinates through example, precept,
admonition, correction, formal and informal instructions, seminars,
conferences, field and staff problems and any other suitable way.
(39) Foster efficiency, good discipline and high morale among the
members and employees of his command; investigate or cause to
be investigated any complaint made against the members or
employees of his command; any violations of departmental
regulations committed by them or any conditions, incidents or
situations tending to undermine the good order and discipline of
his unit. He shall make a full report of such investigations to his
superior officer, and the report shall contain his findings and
recommendations.
(40) Secure all revolvers, pistols or other Department-owned equipment
or property from the possession of any member of his command
who resigns, retires or is suspended, dismissed or hospitalized, or
from the effects of any deceased member.
(41) Review the circumstances of the arrest of each person
apprehended by any member of his command.
(42) Supervise and, if necessary, assist in the interrogation of all
suspects detained by members of his command at police
headquarters or at any hospital in the city.
(43) Insist that every member of his command comply with standard
police procedures and regulations for the accomplishment of the
mission of his unit, giving special attention to those phases that
§ 179-32 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 179-32
C:354
§ 179-33. Patrol officer.
may jeopardize the safety of personnel assigned to his unit and the
reputation of the Police Department.
(44) Receive and forward to the recovered property and evidence
storage section all property coming into the possession of members
of his command in the course of his official duties.
(45) Respond to the scene of any unusual incident, fire, accident,
catastrophe or major crime.
(46) Report immediately to the Juvenile Bureau all cases involving
juveniles and all sex or morals cases where women are involved,
whether as complainants, victims or violators; however, nothing
contained in this subsection shall be construed to limit the powers
of the commanding officers of all bureaus or units in the discharge
of their duties and functions in all investigations regarding women
or juveniles.
(47) See that all orders are carefully read and explained to the members
and employees under his command. Members or employees who,
by reason of absence, have not been officially informed of such
orders, shall be so instructed upon their return to duty.
(48) Inspect or cause to be inspected by a superior officer of his
command, between tours of duty, all motor vehicles assigned to his
bureau or unit. The inspection shall include tires, fenders, body,
upholstery and safety equipment to determine the cleanliness and
serviceability of the vehicle.
(49) Submit a report in writing to the Chief of Police setting forth the
assigned furlough period for each civilian employee under his
command at least three weeks in advance of the effective date of
the furlough.
(50) Ensure that a suitable bulletin board is maintained and is
accessible to all members of his command setting forth the
registration numbers of motor vehicles reported stolen or wanted
by his Department or other police departments and law
enforcement agencies. The bulletin boards shall be maintained in
an accurate and up-to-date condition at all times.
(51) Perform other such duties as assigned.
A. Summary. The mission of the Patrol Division covers a wide scope of
traditional police services which may be generally defined as the
patrolling of the Town streets and roads for the purpose of preventing
crime, preserving the peace, protecting life and property, enforcing the
laws and ordinances, assisting the public; also, security inspection of
commercial establishments, vacant buildings, etc.; investigation of
suspicious-acting persons; and the checking of establishments that may
§ 179-32 CHARTER § 179-33
C:355
be frequented by gamblers, prostitutes, narcotics peddlers or addicts,
thieves or other law violators. The division shall make preliminary
investigation of crimes, compile necessary crime and incident reports,
protect crime scenes, control public gatherings, render miscellaneous
police field services, and arrest offenders of the law.
B. General duties and responsibilities. It is the duty and responsibility of a
patrol officer to:
(1) Exercise authority consistent with the obligations imposed by the
oath of office and be accountable to superior officers. Promptly
obey orders.
(2) Coordinate efforts with those of other members of the Department
so that teamwork may ensure continuity of purpose and maximum
achievement of police objectives.
(3) Communicate to superiors and to fellow officers all information
obtained which is pertinent to the achievement of police objectives.
(4) Respond punctually to all assignments.
(5) Acquire and record information concerning events that have taken
place since the last tour of duty.
(6) Record activity during tour of duty in the manner prescribed by
proper authority.
(7) Maintain weapons and equipment in a functional, presentable
condition and secure all weapons and equipment when not in use.
(8) Assist citizens requesting assistance or information. Courteously
explain any instance in which jurisdiction does not lie with the
Police Department and suggest other procedures to be followed.
(9) Be accountable for the securing, receipting and proper
transporting of all evidence and property coming into custody.
(10) Answer questions asked by the general public, counsel juveniles
and adults when necessary and refer them to persons or agencies
where they can obtain further assistance.
(11) Preserve the peace at public gatherings, neighborhood disputes
and family quarrels.
(12) Serve or deliver warrants, summonses, subpoenas, and other
official papers promptly and accurately when so directed by a
superior officer.
(13) Confer with court prosecutors and testify in court.
(14) Be responsible for parking violations and summons books and shall
not void any parking violations or summons without permission of
§ 179-33 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 179-33
C:356
the officer in charge and must also submit a report to the Chief of
Police as to why they will have to be voided.
(15) Accomplish other general duties as they are assigned or become
necessary.
(16) Perform such other duties as may be assigned by the Chief.
(17) Members of the Patrol Division shall patrol the Town and observe
conditions which may facilitate or promote the commission of
crime, i.e., any unwholesome conditions, questionable characters,
or other police hazards that may threaten the peace and welfare of
the community.
(18) Members of the Patrol Division shall respond to accident scenes,
fires, catastrophes or any other incidents that attract a
spontaneous gathering of citizens and shall maintain control and
order. When responding to such gatherings or incidents, the police
shall keep in mind that free speech and peaceful assembly are
important constitutional rights which cannot be abrogated.
(19) Members of the Patrol Division shall maintain frequent and
conspicuous patrol to prevent crime and to ensure the security of
persons and property in their area of responsibility. In addition,
members shall render miscellaneous police patrol services such as
aiding sick, lost or injured persons; discovering and reporting fires
and fire hazards, leaking water and gas mains, sidewalk and
highway defects, defective street and road lights, obstructions in
the highway and the checking of licenses and permits, etc.
(20) In all primary contacts, the Patrol Division shall obtain and record
all necessary and required data relative to each crime or incident
coming to its attention.
(21) Members of the Patrol Division shall make every effort to adjust
and settle minor disputes among the public peacefully by
persuasion or explanation of the laws or regulations involved.
Whenever a member receives complaints over which he lacks
authority as a police officer, he shall explain the limit of his
jurisdiction to the parties concerned and refer them to the proper
individual, agency or agencies capable of handling their problems.
(22) Members of the Patrol Division shall investigate door-to-door
canvassers, beggars, suspicious-acting persons and vehicles. They
shall note any evidence of vice activities or juvenile delinquency
and shall make preliminary investigation of crimes. In the event of
serious crime, members of the Patrol Division shall immediately
notify the commanding officer of the division, who shall, in turn,
notify the officer in charge of the Detective Division.
(23) Members of the Patrol Division have the responsibility to protect all
serious crime scenes. Upon arriving at the scene of a serious crime,
§ 179-33 CHARTER § 179-33
C:357
a member of the Patrol Division shall prevent the removal or
destruction of, or the tampering with, any evidence by anyone and
shall preserve the scene until the arrival of a superior officer, a
Detective or the Bureau of Criminal Identification specialist.
(24) The arrest of offenders is a prime duty of the members of the patrol
force. Members of the Patrol Division shall make arrests of subjects
in accordance with arrest laws and established police procedures.
Every person arrested for any cause, unless in need of medical aid,
shall be taken at once to police headquarters and registered on the
books of the arresting division. The commanding officer of the
Patrol Division shall deliver to the appropriate division any person
taken into custody whenever in his opinion such action would be in
the best interests of police procedures.
(25) Members of the Patrol Division are required to keep notes and
records so as to enable them to effectively present testimony in
court, before a grand jury or at an official hearing.
(26) Members of the Patrol Division shall cooperate with the members
of all other divisions, bureaus, units and sections of the
Department.
(27) Shall perform other duties as assigned.
C. Specific duties and responsibilities: preventive patrol.
(1) Patrol an assigned area for general purposes of crime prevention
and law enforcement. Patrol includes:
(a) Being thoroughly familiar with the assigned route of patrol.
Such familiarity includes knowledge of residents, merchants,
businesses, roads, alleyways, paths, etc. Conditions that
contribute to crime should be reported. The location of
fireboxes, telephones and other emergency services should be
noted.
(b) Apprehending persons violating the law or wanted by the
police.
(c) Completing detailed reports on all crimes, vehicle accidents
and other incidents requiring police attention. In cases where
an arrest is made, an arrest report is submitted along with the
required crime reports. When property is recovered or
additional information is discovered pertaining to a previously
reported offense, the officer completes an investigation report.
(d) Preserving any crime scene until an officer in charge or
Detective arrives, when such crime scene is encountered or
when dispatched to the scene as the first responding officer.
(e) Public assembly officer.
§ 179-33 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 179-33
C:358
(f) Building security checks.
(g) Observing and interrogating of suspicious persons.
(h) Issuing traffic citations.
(i) Being alert for and reporting fires.
(j) Report streetlight and traffic signals out of order, street
hazards and any conditions that endanger public safety.
(k) Checking of schools, parks and playgrounds.
(l) Responding to any public emergency.
(2) Conduct a thorough investigation of all offenses and incidents
within the area of assignment and scope of activity. Collect
evidence and record data which will aid in identification,
apprehension and prosecution of offenders, as well as the recovery
of property.
(3) Be alert to the development of conditions tending to cause crime or
indicative of criminal activity. Take preventive action to correct
such conditions, and inform superiors as soon as the situation
permits.
(4) Respond to situations brought to the officer's attention while in the
course of routine patrol or when assigned by radio. Render first aid,
when qualified, to persons who are seriously ill or injured. Assist
persons needing police services.
(5) Remain on assigned beat throughout the tour of duty, except when
a police emergency necessitates a temporary absence or when an
officer in charge has issued authorization for a temporary absence.
(6) Patrol area giving particular attention to and frequently rechecking
locations where the crime hazard is great. Insofar as possible, a
patrol officer shall not patrol an area according to any fixed route
or schedule, but shall alternate frequently and backtrack in order
to be at the location least expected.
(7) Be alert for all nuisances, impediments, obstructions, defects or
other conditions that might endanger or hinder safety, health or
convenience of the public within the patrol area.
(8) If assigned to operate a motor vehicle:
(a) See that it is well maintained mechanically and that it is kept
clean both inside and out.
(b) Inspect the vehicle at the beginning of the tour of duty for any
defects or missing equipment. Immediately report all defects
and damages sustained to the vehicle to the proper authority
§ 179-33 CHARTER § 179-33
C:359
§ 179-34. Training officer.
and complete all reports and forms required by current
procedures.
(c) Remove the keys whenever the patrol car is left unattended for
any reason.
(d) Use only vehicles assigned by the officer in charge.
(e) Use the call number assigned to the car to contact
headquarters.
(f) Operate the radio in line with FCC regulations and current
departmental procedures.
(g) Ensure that the assigned vehicle's gas tank is full prior to
completion of each tour of duty.
(9) Keep radio equipment in operation at all times and be thoroughly
familiar with departmental policy concerning use of the radios.
(10) Take measures to direct the flow of traffic in the area during
periods of congestion.
(11) Notify the officer in charge if more than a temporary absence from
regular duties is required.
(12) Make periodic reports to the station house.
D. Specific duties and responsibilities: traffic patrol.
(1) Direct and expedite the flow at assigned intersections keeping in
mind the duty as a traffic officer in preventing accidents, protecting
pedestrians and ensuring the free flow of traffic.
(2) Enforce the parking ordinances and motor vehicle laws in the
patrol areas.
(3) Be alert for traffic safety conditions which may endanger or
inconvenience the public and report such conditions to the shift
commander.
(4) Respond immediately when called from a traffic post to render
emergency police service. Notify the station at the earliest possible
opportunity.
(5) Wear the prescribed traffic safety clothing and equipment.
A. Summary. Under the general supervision of the Chief, the training
officer develops and prepares other officers and recruits to effectively
handle the realities of police work by promoting the skills, the
professional attitude and high sense of duty necessary to the police
profession.
§ 179-33 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 179-34
C:360
§ 179-35. Safety Officer.
B. General duties and responsibilities. It is the duty and responsibility of
the training officer to:
(1) Prepare recruits for police service through indoctrination in
departmental policies, procedures and requirements of job
performance.
(2) Prepare in-service training programs for regular officers in areas of
crime detection, firearms, regulations and policies, leadership,
human relations, crisis intervention, and the latest developments in
all other aspects of law enforcement.
(3) Provide officers the information needed in the performance of duty
or in otherwise meeting their responsibilities by furnishing them
with changes in the laws, new police methods, Supreme Court
decisions and other topics which affect police operations.
(4) Schedule training classes to be set up in prescribed units of
instruction and prepare lesson plans on material to be covered in
each class.
(5) Solicit experts from the criminal justice system to conduct classes
of instruction and ensure that they are given sufficient time for
preparation and presentation of the material.
(6) Utilize external resources to develop specialized skills that will
increase the overall effectiveness of the Department.
(7) Inform the Chief of the activities and progress of the training
program.
(8) Keep a written record of all training activities.
(9) Perform other duties as assigned by the Chief.
A. Summary. The Safety Officer has the primary responsibility for
cooperating with the schools in developing and improving safety
education programs. He supervises the training of safety patrol units at
each school and oversees the maintenance of safety patrol equipment.
B. General duties and responsibilities. It is the duty and responsibility of
the Safety Officer to:
(1) Conduct safety education programs for school personnel regarding
child molesters, playground and water safety, traffic safety and
general first aid. Supervise the training of safety patrol units.
(2) Work with school personnel and make recommendations to the
officer in charge regarding school zones, crossings, signs,
markings and the elimination of street hazards.
(3) Lecture at high school driver education classes when requested.
§ 179-34 CHARTER § 179-35
C:361
§ 179-36. Juvenile officer.
(4) Enforce laws in and around schools which may affect the health and
safety of students and faculty.
(5) Issue seasonal safety bulletins for radio and TV.
(6) Address PTA and other civic and service organizations on the
subject of school safety.
(7) Act as liaison officer between all schools and the Police
Department. Recommend a course of action to the officer in charge
which will minimize any chance of conflict between the Department
and youth in the community.
(8) Submit to the officer in charge, at the beginning of each week, a
schedule of work expected to be done during that week.
(9) Supervise school crossing guards.
(10) Inspect school bus stops, routes and related facilities periodically,
and make any required recommendations to proper authorities.
(11) Develop a bicycle safety program, if necessary, in cooperation with
school authorities.
(12) Perform other such duties as assigned.
A. Summary. The officer in charge of the Detective Division is designated
the "juvenile officer." His duties will be to investigate all juvenile
matters and preparation and presentation of appropriate cases to any
and all appropriate boards, committees, courts, etc., as so designated
by proper authority. The juvenile officer investigates all crimes
involving juveniles. He is available to members of the Department, as
well as members of the public, for consultation on handling juvenile
offenders and young persons with problems.
B. General duties and responsibilities. It is the duty and responsibility of
the juvenile officer to:
(1) Formulate a positive crime prevention program aimed at young
persons in conjunction with the local schools and social agencies.
(2) Work for the welfare of youth, protecting them from influences and
persons that might contribute to their delinquency or hinder their
wholesome maturation, and he shall study the factors involved in
the delinquent conduct of individual juveniles with a view to their
correction.
(3) Maintain a list of social agencies to which juveniles can be referred
for such things as counseling, employment and medical services.
(4) He shall have knowledge of state laws and Town ordinances
relating to youth, and he shall make every effort to discover
§ 179-35 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 179-36
C:362
§ 179-37. Patrol supervisor.
potential as well as actual delinquents and children who are victims
of neglect and abuse. He shall familiarize himself with and be
aware of juveniles who are repeated offenders of the law and shall
cooperate with other divisions or units of the Department when
they deal with any juvenile offenders.
(5) Investigate reported crimes which are likely to have involved young
persons.
(6) Coordinate the processing of juveniles with the local court
authorities, including the clerk's office and probation office.
(7) Be available to speak to community groups on youth problems;
assemble pamphlets and films on delinquency.
(8) Answer calls to the station from parents and others seeking
assistance with problem youngsters.
(9) Perform other such duties as assigned.
A. Summary. A patrol supervisor shall be responsible for the supervision of
all patrol officers on his shift and shall be directly responsible to the
officer in charge of the shift.
B. General duties and responsibilities. It is the duty and responsibility of
the patrol supervisor to:
(1) Acquaint himself with the duties of all members under his
command and supervise patrol officers in the execution of their
duties. To this end, make frequent responses to routine calls to
ensure that all officers are properly carrying out their
responsibilities.
(2) Ensure that all officers under his supervision are properly
instructed and guided in the performance of their duties, and take
special care to see that they are informed of and are thoroughly
familiar with departmental policies and procedures in all types of
situations.
(3) Investigate whenever an officer is absent from his post, fails to
report for duty, neglects any of his duties, or displays mental or
physical incompetence. Promptly report the findings of such
investigation to the officer in charge of the shift.
(4) Supervise roll call and perform the following functions:
(a) Inspect the men to see that they are properly uniformed and
equipped.
(b) Report to the officer in charge when any patrol officer is unfit
for duty.
§ 179-36 CHARTER § 179-37
C:363
§ 179-38. Prosecutor.
§ 179-39. Work detail officer.
(c) Pass on to the officers under his supervision all warrants,
subpoenas, official papers, etc., that are to be delivered or
served during the tour of duty. Ensure that they are properly
delivered or served.
(d) Ensure that all matters announced at roll call are thoroughly
understood by the men.
(5) Periodically, as the Chief or officer in charge of the shift may
require, review and evaluate the overall performance of officers
under his command. Make a report to the Chief of Police, through
the officer in charge of the shift, on the results of these evaluations.
(6) Perform other such duties as assigned.
A. Summary. The Police Prosecutor is responsible for the preparation and
presentation of cases on the District Court level. As the Department's
liaison with the court, the Prosecutor coordinates the scheduling of
cases and witnesses.
B. General duties and responsibilities. It is the duty and responsibility of
the Police Prosecutor to:
(1) Maintain an effective working relationship between the court and
the Department.
(2) Coordinate the scheduling of cases for the Police Department.
(3) Assure that witnesses are notified and that evidence is available
when needed.
(4) Minimize the time spent in court by police officers. Maintain a
record of time spent in court by police officers.
(5) Notify the Chief of any unusual occurrences requiring his personal
attention.
(6) Cooperate with the District Attorney's office in the scheduling and
presentation of cases to the grand jury or in the Superior Court.
(7) Be responsible for ensuring the punctual attendance of all
Department members and their effective preparation and
presentation of cases before the courts.
(8) Coordinate his activities with the Town Solicitor in charge of
prosecution.
(9) Perform other such duties as assigned.
§ 179-37 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 179-39
C:364
§ 179-40. Special police officer on call.
A. Summary. The work detail officer is responsible for the maintenance of
all day sheets and paid details for the Department.
B. General duties and responsibilities. It is the duty and responsibility of
the work detail officer to:
(1) Maintain an equal distribution of overtime hours among men
available for such duty. Hours are kept daily, monthly and yearly
with running totals of such hours.
(2) Special paid details for particular occasions or purposes must be
assigned by the Police Chief or some other person authorized by
him; in this case the work detail officer.
(3) Assign those available officers to extra assignments during their
off-duty hours. Maintain equal distribution of detail hours by
recording same on a daily basis.
(4) Maintain a billing system for paid details, including amounts
payable and accounts receivable.
(5) Perform other such duties as assigned.
A. Summary. Special officers on call shall meet the same high character
standards as those required for the permanent members of the force
and shall maintain a course of human conduct that benefits a police
officer and that will not reflect disrespect upon the Police Department.
A special officer on call who for any reason is deemed unfit to assume
the duties of a policeman may be dismissed by the Chief of Police with
or without cause.
B. General duties and responsibilities. It is the duty and responsibility of a
special police officer to:
(1) Be responsible for the efficient performance of his duties in
conformity with the policies of the Department and obey the
directions of the Chief of Police and other superior officers.
(2) Familiarize himself with all instructions and regulations governing
the duties, responsibilities, conduct and demeanor of a patrolman.
(3) Maintain a well groomed appearance and maintain his clothing and
equipment in a proper state of cleanliness and repair.
(4) Uniform and equipment not issued by the Town must be purchased
by the individual after approval by the Chief of Police.
(5) A special officer on call shall not exercise any police power but with
the expressed consent of the Chief of Police, nor shall he carry any
weapon on his person unless authorized to do so by the Chief of
Police, or unless he has a legal permit to do so.
§ 179-39 CHARTER § 179-40
C:365
§ 179-41. Special officer reserve police.
The special officer reserve police is an organization comprised of a group
of citizens of the community who have volunteered their services to the
Town for use in the event of a major catastrophe, emergencies or special
occasions. A member of this unit receives no pay for his services, only the
satisfaction that he is actively aiding his community in the preservation of
social order. Personnel of this unit are sworn members of the special officer
reserve police and may exercise police powers at such times and places as
may be designated by the Chief of Police, and they shall be appointed as
designated by the Charter.
§ 179-42. Animal Control Officer.73
(6) Exercise care in the use of police premises, property and
equipment.
(7) May be suspended or dismissed from duty for any infraction of the
rules of conduct applicable to a patrolman.
(8) May be dismissed for inability to grasp police procedures and
practices or failure to meet satisfactorily requirements of the police
service or attendance at police training sessions by the Chief of
Police.
(9) Perform other duties as required by the Chief of Police.
A. Summary. The Animal Control Officer has the responsibility for the
enforcement of the laws of the state and the ordinances of the Town
pertaining to the licensing and control of dogs. He answers complaints
pertaining to dogs and patrols the Town as may be necessary.
B. General duties and responsibilities. It is the duty and responsibility of
the Animal Control Officer to:
(1) Check with the dispatcher on a daily basis to ascertain if there are
any complaints awaiting his action.
(2) Pick up complaints requiring his action and take appropriate action
to pick up dogs, transport dogs to the dog pound, and issue
summonses.
(3) Patrol those areas of the Town in which there have been dog
complaints or problems and take appropriate enforcement action.
(4) File necessary activity reports and reports on all incidents and
complaints investigated.
(5) Appear in court as may be necessary.
73.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 179-40 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 179-42
C:366
§ 179-43. Weapons officer.
(6) Be responsible and take orders from the supervisor of the animal
control.
(7) Perform such other duties as may be required by proper authority.
A. Summary. The member having charge of the Department of Armor shall
be designated the "weapons officer" by the Chief of Police and shall be
responsible for the efficient management of the Department.74
B. General duties and responsibilities. It is the duty and responsibility of
the member having charge of the Department of Armor to:
(1) Supervise the Police Department pistol ranges and be responsible
for the safe operation thereof whenever the ranges are in use. He
shall not permit any person to use the range facilities without
authorization to do so by the Chief of Police.
(2) Have charge of all firearms, projectiles, missiles and explosives
coming into the possession of the Department and shall refuse to
accept any firearm, projectile, missile or explosive unless it is
accompanied by the Department's standard property form.
(3) Cause to be assigned to every firearm given into his control a
firearms identification number and enter such number in a record
book along with any pertinent information relating to the case.
(4) Supervise the firearms training program for the members of the
force and make periodic reports and recommendations to his
commanding officer regarding the efficiency of the training
program.
(5) Periodically inspect or cause to be inspected all departmental
weapons, ammunition, gas supplies and gas masks to determine
their serviceability and security and shall effect whatever repair or
replacement that is necessary.
(6) Maintain the effectiveness of the Department arsenal and be
strictly responsible for its security at all times. In maintaining the
arsenal, make certain that an adequate reserve supply is kept on
hand of all weapons in use by the force, i.e., necessary ammunition,
gas masks, gas grenades, gas projectiles, repair parts and other
firearms equipment.
(7) Make provision for the firearms qualification of all holders of, and
applicants for, pistol permits in accordance with the provisions of
the firearms law of the state.
74.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 179-42 CHARTER § 179-43
C:367
§ 179-44. Meter man.
(8) Provide for the annual qualification testing of all members of the
force in the use of firearms and make a report to the Chief of Police
regarding any member who fails to qualify according to the
provisions of the firearms law of the state.
(9) The weapons officer, or a trained member of his staff, upon
notification from the commanding officer of another department,
shall respond to any scene where firearms have been used and shall
conduct an investigation into the use of the firearms. He shall
conduct all necessary tests and examinations of any firearm that
may be required in the investigation of any case.75
(10) Provide for a member of the Department of Armor to be on call for
investigations on an around-the-clock basis.
(11) Maintain and make available, day or night, all necessary reserve
firearms, ammunition, gas supplies and gas masks, helmets, riot
sticks, radios, bullhorns, shields, lights and other equipment
needed for an emergency.
(12) Maintain a complete and accurate record of the identification
numbers of all departmental firearms, showing thereon the person,
bureau or unit to whom they are assigned.
(13) Perform other duties as assigned by the Chief.
A. Summary. Under the general supervision of the Chief of Police, the
meter man is authorized and responsible for collecting funds from
parking meters.
B. General duties and responsibilities. It is the duty and responsibility of
the meter man to:
(1) Report for his tour of duty at the assigned time and receive any
special orders of instructions appropriate to his tasks.
(2) Report directly and promptly to his assigned area and collect funds
from the parking meters.
(3) Perform his duties with diligence and courtesy and refer any and all
complaints regarding his duties to the Chief.
(4) Take cognizance of and report all defective or broken meters.
(5) Repair all defective and broken meters as soon as possible.
(6) Ensure that all funds collected are turned over to the Treasurer's
office immediately after collection.
75.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 179-43 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 179-44
C:368
§ 179-45. Armorer.
§ 179-46. School crossing guards.
(7) Perform other duties as assigned by the Chief.
A. Summary. Under the general supervision of the Chief, the armorer is
responsible for the maintenance and security of all property and
material contained in the Department armory and firing range, and for
the instruction of all departmental members in the proper operation of
such equipment as is maintained in the inventory.
B. General duties and responsibilities. It is the duty and responsibility of
the armorer to:
(1) Maintain an accurate and complete serialized inventory of all
departmental weapons, equipment and property contained in the
armory and firing range, and of such weapons and equipment as
may be issued to members of the Department as authorized by the
Chief.
(2) Submit a quarterly inventory report to the Chief, indicating the
status of all departmental weapons and of all other equipment and
property maintained in the armory.
(3) Conduct regularly scheduled weapons qualifications firing for all
members of the Department. Ensure that each member qualifies at
least twice annually and that a report of such qualification is
submitted to the Chief to become a part of the members' personnel
records.
(4) Ensure that all members of the Department are instructed in the
proper care and maintenance of such weapons and related
equipment as may be issued to them.
(5) Establish a specialized training program in addition to the regular
training program and in cooperation with the Chief. Ensure that
selected members of the Department are familiar with the
operation and functioning of all special weapons and related
equipment maintained by the Department.
(6) Perform regular preventive maintenance on all weapons and
related equipment.
(7) Maintain and issue all new weapons, ammunition and related
equipment purchased by the Department.
(8) Submit to the Chief requests for the purchase of all equipment and
material required to maintain a sufficient inventory in the armory.
(9) Perform other duties as assigned by the Chief.
§ 179-44 CHARTER § 179-46
C:369
§ 179-47. Matrons.
§ 179-48. Secretary-clerk.
A. Summary. School crossing guards are responsible for directing traffic at
assigned crossings to protect schoolchildren and to provide for the
orderly movement of traffic.
B. General duties and responsibilities. It is the duty and responsibility of
the school crossing guards to:
(1) Report directly to assigned crossing stations, be on time, and
remain there until the conclusion of the assignment.
(2) Ensure that children use the proper crossing locations and that no
children are in the street while traffic is moving.
(3) Be alert for present or potential traffic hazards in the area
surrounding the assigned crossings. Submit to the Safety Officer a
written report of any such hazards with a recommendation for
remedial steps to be taken.
(4) Perform such other duties as may be assigned.
A. Summary. The matron assists female prisoners as directed by the
officer in charge.
B. General duties and responsibilities. It is the duty and responsibility of
the matron to:
(1) Maintain the matrons' quarters and women's cells in a state of
cleanliness, order and good repair.
(2) Search all female prisoners when ordered to do so by the officer in
charge, taking possession of all articles which might be used to
effect an escape or suicide or be used as weapons. Handle all
property taken in accordance with regular departmental
procedures.
(3) Be responsible, under the direction of the officer in charge, for the
well-being and safekeeping of all female prisoners.
(4) Communicate all significant information to the officer in charge of
the desk.
(5) Care for lost children brought into the station house when
requested to do so by the officer in charge.
(6) Perform such other duties as may be assigned by the Chief.
A. Summary. The secretary-clerk functions much the same as her
counterpart in the business world. General office duties include typing,
filing and recordkeeping.
§ 179-46 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 179-48
C:370
§ 179-49. Dispatcher.
B. General duties and responsibilities. It is the duty and responsibility of
the secretary-clerk to:
(1) Provide for the efficient operation of the office.
(2) Record all court actions on the court arrest cards.
(3) Be familiar with the duties of the desk officer and remain prepared
to assist the desk officer when requested by the officer in charge.
(4) Maintain sufficient office supplies to ensure the office's efficient
operation.
(5) Lock or otherwise make secure all files, office doors, and other
places of safekeeping at the conclusion of the tour of duty.
(6) Perform matron duties if assigned matrons are absent.
C. Records duties.
(1) Be in charge of the orderly operation and security of the record
room.
(2) Be responsible for the service of warrants and subpoenas.
(3) Be responsible for the safekeeping of all lost, found, stolen or
recovered property coming into the possession of the Department
when so assigned.
(4) Compile, maintain files on, index and coordinate the following:
(a) Departmental reports and records;
(b) Accident reports and statistics;
(c) A record of incidents and action taken on them;
(d) Statistical data as required by law and departmental policy;
(e) Records of arrests and detentions; and
(f) Records on the ultimate disposition of cases.
(5) Maintain security of all records and not divulge information of a
confidential nature or which relates to departmental business.
(6) Prohibit the removal of any record, police report or written
communication without the specific authority of the Chief.
(7) Obtain a receipt when records are removed or material is picked up
from the records area.
(8) Perform such other duties as the Chief may require.
§ 179-48 CHARTER § 179-49
C:371
A. Summary. The dispatcher receives all oral communications from the
public and law enforcement personnel coming into the police station.
By following established procedures and employing common sense, he
transmits requests for service to the appropriate location.
B. General duties and responsibilities. It is the duty and responsibility of
the dispatcher to:
(1) Grant strict priority to officers calling in.
(2) Report any deployment of police officers beyond their regularly
assigned routes or sectors to the officer in charge.
(3) Inform the officer in charge whenever a police officer or a police
vehicle is out of service.
(4) Be accurate and exact in the performance of his duties, shall use
tact and good judgment, and shall keep his commanding officer
fully informed of all serious complaints or unusual requests for
police service. When in doubt about any procedure to be followed,
or action to be taken on any request for police service, he shall
forthwith consult his commanding officer.
(5) Announce the call letters of the Department as issued by the
Federal Communications Commission.
(6) Be thoroughly familiar with the Department's procedures relating
to use of radio and other communications equipment.
(7) Acquire a thorough knowledge of the location and layout of streets,
buildings, parks, housing projects and other significant areas of the
community so as to maximize the accuracy and speed of dispatches.
(8) Respond to all complaints received in a calm civil manner.
(9) Be familiar with emergency procedures that relate to matters
requiring urgent police attention so as to be capable of activating
them immediately.
(10)Keep personnel who have been dispatched on calls fully informed
of all facts affecting the safety or efficiency of their response to the
call.
(11) Inform the officer in charge when contact with an officer on patrol
cannot be made after a reasonable amount of time.
(12) Maintain equipment, especially the emergency call lines, in
working order and immediately report any malfunction or defect to
the officer in charge.
(13) Record all significant communications as required by current
departmental procedures.
§ 179-49 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 179-49
C:372
§ 179-50. Administrative assistant.
(14) Answer all telephone calls promptly and respond by stating "East
Greenwich Police Department," followed by his surname.
(15) Be calm, articulate and concise when broadcasting. Be courteous
in manner, no use of vulgarity or profanity, refrain from using an
angry or impatient tone of voice while broadcasting and shall not
indulge in any conversation "over the air" which does not pertain
strictly to police matters.
(16) Maintain a telephone directory of all companies and persons who
have hired police officers for paid details.
(17) Maintain a record of all keys to rooms in the building including an
indication of where each key is kept. Number each key.
(18) Prepare and maintain business listings for the central desk.
Periodically, distribute business listing cards to all police officers.
(19) Maintain surveillance over all prisoners while in their cells.
(20) Be responsible for the electronic alarm devices in the station and
shall initiate prompt action upon receiving an alarm. Note on the
day sheet any faulty alarms upon assuming his tour of duty.
(21) Remain at his desk at all times while on duty unless relieved by a
competent person and shall not allow anyone to use the
broadcasting equipment unless authorized by his commanding
officer.
(22) Perform such other duties as the Chief may require.
A. Summary. The administrative assistant is responsible for the
performance of varied secretarial tasks and public contact work. Work
requires the exercise of considerable independent judgment and
knowledge of departmental policies gained through experience in
responsible, specialized duties. Emphasis is placed on relieving a Police
Chief of significant administrative details, including correspondence
and public contacts, or by gathering necessary background material for
his review.
B. General duties and responsibilities. It is the duty and responsibility of
the administrative assistant to:
(1) Serve as secretary to the Chief of Police.
(2) Maintain records of correspondence and follow up on work in
progress.
(3) Prepare and/or maintain.
(a) Schedule appointments and maintain calendar;
§ 179-49 CHARTER § 179-50
C:373
§ 179-51. Superior officer.
(b) Organize and maintain files for correspondence;
(c) Assist in the preparation of the budget;
(d) Maintain a current record of names, addresses and telephone
numbers of all members and employees and the badge
numbers of all officers;
(e) Maintain a record of all sick leaves and other absences.
(4) Prepare patrol reports and any general orders that are to be read at
roll call.
(5) Issue firearm registrations and permits when so assigned.
(6) Maintain a list of all off-duty men and all men assigned to the
various departments. Maintain a list of all sick and injured
personnel, days due for holidays and vacation, and detail each on a
day-by-day basis.
(7) Maintain strict attendance records daily. Record monthly running
totals of sick and injured days that an officer does not report for
work. Report on sickness or injury, place such reports in each
officer's personal file. Forward weekly sick and injured lists, along
with the names of those officers who are on light duty, to the Town
Manager and the Town Treasurer.
(8) Perform such other duties as the Chief may require.
A. Summary.
(1) The Town Manager, with the approval of the Town Council upon the
recommendation of the Chief of Police, shall appoint superior
officers subordinate to the Chief of Police in the manner prescribed
by ordinance. Superior officer ranks shall be designated as
Captain, Lieutenant and Sergeant. Superior officers shall take
precedence by seniority, i.e., date of appointment in present rank.
If the dates are the same, the position on the order announcing the
elevation to present rank shall be the factor determining the
seniority. The assigned senior officer present for duty in each
subdivision of the force shall be in command of the subdivision if
and when a superior officer is not on duty, unless otherwise ordered
by competent authority.
(2) Every superior officer in the Department, by law and by these rules
and regulations, has sufficient authority to perform his assigned
mission, and any superior officer who is directed to act in a capacity
of rank above his ordinary or usual rank shall for that necessary
time possess the authority of that rank.
§ 179-50 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 179-51
C:374
(3) Every member of the permanent force has a supervisory officer;
namely the next officer above him in the line of command. All
supervisory officers, and those temporarily assigned as such, are
accountable for the proper execution of every order and are
therefore required to supervise the execution of every order,
written regulation, oral instruction or delegation of authority. The
lack of his physical presence does not relieve the superior of his
supervisory responsibilities. It is his specific duty to know who his
immediate supervisory officer is and to ensure that all subordinates
know their supervisory officer.
B. Duties and responsibilities. It is the duty and responsibility of a superior
officer to:
(1) Effectively perform his assigned duties as detailed in the
Department rules and regulations, manuals, orders (written or
verbal) or in the generally accepted and traditional customs of the
police service. He shall convey the intent and spirit of orders and
directives to all subordinates.
(2) Display personal and supervisory qualities that foster efficiency,
discipline and morale in his subordinates. He shall set an example
in sobriety, courtesy, initiative, courage, integrity, sincerity,
decisiveness, judgment, fairness and devotion to duty.
(3) Be continually responsible to members of higher rank and always
follow through on his assignments to ensure that subordinates
know and understand Department policies, procedures and orders.
(4) Promptly obey all orders of his commanding officer and issue
orders in a clear, concise and definite manner to his subordinates.
He shall not issue any order that is unlawful or in violation of
Department regulations.
(5) Except in an emergency or when it is required for the good of the
Department, not give any order to a subordinate who is not
assigned to his command.
(6) Conduct personal inspections at suitable intervals to determine
that all assignments are performed as ordered, anticipated results
are attained, Department resources are fully exploited for the
accomplishment of the police mission, and that any apparent needs
or operational deficiencies of the Department are revealed.
(7) Make an immediate, impartial report to his commanding officer
relating any incident which he is aware of that involves a violation
of law or Department regulation by any subordinate member or
employee of the Department. He shall similarly bring to the
attention of his commanding officer any complaint lodged against
any member or employee by another person.
§ 179-51 CHARTER § 179-51
C:375
(8) Make certain that subordinates observe regulations, obey orders
and properly execute the details, assignments and functions of the
Police Department, and otherwise maintain high standards of
discipline.
(9) Not abuse those under his command by tyrannical or capricious
conduct; by disrespect for their dignity as human beings; or by
harsh, abusive and degrading language.
(10) Inspire confidence and industriousness in his subordinates by the
use of tact in giving orders and by constructively correcting
mistakes. He shall test understanding of instructions with care so
that the subordinate will know in detail what he is to do and how he
is to do it.
(11) Avoid, as far as circumstances may permit, the censuring of a
subordinate in the presence of others, and he shall be fair and
impersonal in evaluating the work of subordinates.
(12) Be responsible for the development and maintenance of proper
professional attitudes of his subordinates in their dealings with the
public.
(13) After the completion of his tour of duty, report to his relief officer
all the facts and conditions relative to police business that may be
necessary so that the relief section coming on duty may know what
police action has been taken and what remains to be done.
(14) Designated to serve as acting Chief of Police in the absence of the
Chief of Police, perform the functions of the office of the Chief of
Police with the delegated authority of that office.
(15) Upon assignment, assist at, be present for, or conduct roll call in
accordance with specific orders of his commanding officer. A
superior officer participating in roll call shall be held equally
responsible with the superior officer calling the roll for the
attendance of all subordinate personnel. He shall ensure the fitness
for duty of all personnel and shall inspect their uniforms, weapons
and equipment. He shall be responsible that all special duty
assignments, orders or instructions necessary for the proper
performance of the police mission are carried out.
(16) Upon assignment, conduct roll call for all incoming members of
patrol units after the completion of the tour of duty. He shall
inspect their physical condition, uniforms, weapons and equipment.
Absence from roll call by any member shall be reported
immediately to the commanding officer. Reports from the incoming
relief shall be collected and delivered to the commanding officer,
and any notices or details shall be announced at this time.
(17) Perform other such duties as assigned.
§ 179-51 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 179-51
C:376
Chapter 184
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Junkyards — See Ch. 138.
Minimum housing standards for rental
dwellings — See Ch. 191.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Authority to adopt minimum housing
standards — See R.I.G.L. § 45-24.2-1 et seq.
Fresh Water Wetlands Act — See R.I.G.L.
§ 2-1-18 et seq.
§ 184-1. Authority.
The requirements of this chapter are adopted pursuant to the authority
granted by R.I.G.L. § 45-24.2-1 et seq., and are deemed necessary for the
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of East Greenwich.
§ 184-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and
morals and for the purpose of making dwellings and dwelling places safe,
sanitary and fit for human habitation, and to prevent blighted and
substandard housing conditions.
§ 184-3. Definitions.
When used herein, the following terms shall be defined as follows:
DWELLING UNIT — Any building or structure or part thereof that is used,
occupied or intended to be used or occupied for human habitation.
RESIDENTIAL LOT — A lot of land which is improved with a dwelling unit.
§ 184-4. Building exteriors.
All exposed surfaces of dwelling units which have been adversely affected
by exposure or other causes shall be repaired and coated, treated or sealed
so as to protect them from serious deterioration.
§ 184-5. Maintenance of land.
No owner or occupant of any occupied residential lot shall allow grass or
weeds to become overgrown beyond the height of 12 inches, or permit the
accumulation of garbage, trash, junk or other debris, or yard waste so that
the citizens of the Town shall be safe from fire, the breeding of rodents,
vermin or obnoxious insects.
§ 179-51 CHARTER § 184-6
C:377
§ 184-6. Exemptions.
§ 184-7. Notice of violation.
§ 184-8. Violations and penalties.77
In addition to the remedies provided in § 184-7 hereof, any person who is
found in violation of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties provided
for in Chapter 1, Article III, of the Code of the Town of East Greenwich.
Chapter 187
PURCHASING POLICY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Competitive bidding — See Charter § C-28. Prohibited contracts and expenditures — See
Charter § C-29.
A. Nothing within this chapter shall prohibit the use of property for bona
fide, permitted agricultural purposes, home-use composting, or similar
uses within zones where such uses are allowed.
B. Areas subject to the Rhode Island Department of Environmental
Management's jurisdiction under the Fresh Water Wetlands Act,76
drainage and conservation easement areas, and natural wooded areas
on individual house lots shall not be subject to this chapter.
A. Upon a finding by the Building Official that property within the Town is
in such condition as to be in violation of the requirements of this
chapter, he shall give certified notice thereof to the owner or occupant
of such property to comply with the requirements of this chapter within
30 days after service of such notice. Such notice shall identify the
property by address and state the condition thereon found to be in
violation of this chapter.
B. Upon failure of the owner or occupant of such premises to remedy the
conditions existing in violation of the requirements hereof within 30
days after service of notice, the Building Official may employ
reasonable methods to remedy the condition, including employment of
agents to cut the grass, trim overgrown trees and shrubs, and/or
remove trash, debris and yard waste.
C. Cleanup costs incurred by the Town shall become a lien against such
property to the same extent and character as the lien for real estate
taxes, with penalty and interest and with the same right of collection
and tax sale as apply to tax liens.
76.Editor's Note: See R.I.G.L. § 2-1-18 et seq.
77.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 184-6 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 184-8
C:378
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Award of municipal contracts — See R.I.G.L.
§ 45-55-1 et seq.
§ 187-1. Authority.78
This chapter is adopted in accordance with R.I.G.L. Title 45, Chapter 55,
Award of Municipal Contracts, §§ 45-55-1 through 45-55-17. The Town shall
comply with requirements of Chapter 55, if not specifically stated herein.
§ 187-2. Purpose.
§ 187-3. Purchasing Agent.
The Town Manager or his or her designee shall serve as the Purchasing
Agent.
§ 187-4. Powers and duties of Purchasing Agent.
The Purchasing Agent shall have the following powers and duties:
A. The primary purpose of this policy is to prescribe the manner in which
materials, supplies, equipment and contracted services are obtained. In
providing a framework for purchasing activities, the policy also makes
clear the Town's position that all qualified vendors have an opportunity
to do business with the Town.
B. The policy is intended to provide sufficient flexibility to allow for small
individual purchases and purchases of an emergency nature. There
shall be no deviation from the policy except in an emergency. The
department head, in writing, must explain any deviation to the Town
Manager.
A. To purchase materials, supplies and equipment, and the procurement of
contracted services requisitioned by any agency of the Town, subject to
the provisions of federal, state and local regulations;
B. To maintain high standards of quality in materials, supplies, equipment
and services for the lowest reasonable cost;
C. To take advantage of bulk, seasonal or cooperative purchasing, where
possible;
D. To dispose of obsolete or unusable personal property of the Town; and
E. To coordinate and assist departments and agencies of the Town and
School Department in purchasing and contract matters, and otherwise
78.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 184-8 CHARTER § 187-4
C:379
§ 187-5. Purchasing procedure; exceptions.
§ 187-6. Purchase orders.
observe practices in the best interests of the Town and the School
Department.
A. In order to achieve the goals of the purchasing policy, the following set
of procedures is established. The guidelines recognize the need for
convenience and flexibility in making routine and small individual
purchases. This is balanced with the principles of effective budget
management at the department level, and the interests of the Town in
making purchases with consistently high standards of quality at
reasonable prices.
B. The following items shall be exempt from the purchasing procedures
contained in this policy:
(1) Utility bills.
(2) Expense reimbursement, under $100.
(3) Office equipment maintenance and repairs.
(4) Vehicle and equipment maintenance and repairs (except major
repairs exceeding $2,000, which shall require a purchase order).
(5) Equipment lease payments under an approved original lease
agreement.
(6) Identical recurring purchases such as uniform rental, cleaning
services, etc. (except that the original contract must be authorized
prior to any payments).
(7) Service or maintenance contract payments (except that the original
contract or agreement must be authorized prior to any payments).
A. Purchase orders must be requested and approved by the Purchasing
Agent and the Town Manager prior to placement of an order. All laws of
the State of Rhode Island shall be adhered to at all times regarding
purchasing.
B. Purchase orders shall be required for individual purchases of more than
$1,000. The distribution of copies of the approved completed purchase
order is as follows:
(1) Original copy to vendor, where necessary;
(2) One copy for requesting department files; and
(3) One copy for Finance Department files.
C. The following information must be included on the purchase order:
§ 187-4 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 187-6
C:380
§ 187-7. Competitive purchasing.
Competitive purchases are required in accord with R.I.G.L. § 45-55-9 and as
amended.
§ 187-8. Written quotations.
§ 187-9. Emergency purchasing.
(1) Date;
(2) Vendor's name and address;
(3) Quantity and description of item(s);
(4) Department and account to be charged; and
(5) Amount.
D. The Purchasing Agent may request further information about the
purchase. The Purchasing Agent shall approve the purchase requisition
prior to the Town Manager indicating that all the requirements of this
policy have been met.
E. Approved purchase orders shall be mailed or delivered directly to the
vendor. Direct mail purchase orders must be accompanied by vendor
order forms where necessary.
F. Purchase orders that are not approved by the Purchasing Agent and
Town Manager shall be returned to the department placing the order
accompanied by a memorandum explaining why the purchase order
was not approved.
A. Written quotations from at least three qualified vendors are required
for individual purchases of $1,500 to the limit established by R.I.G.L.
§§ 45-55-1 through 45-55-17. Copies of written quotations must be
submitted to the Finance Department along with the purchase order
requisition as proof for this level of competitive purchasing.79
B. Exceptions. Quotations may not be required if the department placing
the order can demonstrate that competitive purchasing requirements
have already been satisfied through other means (i.e., state contract,
federal contract, other municipality, regional cooperative purchase).
The department requesting an exception on a particular purchase must
file a request with the Purchasing Agent, with a copy to the Town
Manager, stating the reasons for the exception. The request for an
exception must be approved prior to making the purchase.
A. Under certain circumstances, such as, but not limited to, a declared
emergency, the interests of the Town are best served by quick action. To
79.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 187-6 CHARTER § 187-9
C:381
§ 187-10. Advertised competitive selection.
that end, observance of these purchasing policies may be temporarily
suspended as a means of satisfying an immediate need.
B. In the event of an emergency, the department head shall have the
authority to make such immediate purchases as deemed necessary,
provided that all reasonable efforts to contact the Purchasing Agent or
Town Manager have failed. Once the emergency has been resolved, the
department head shall submit a detailed report of all emergency
expenditures, the circumstances, and justification for all purchases to
the Town Manager.
A. Following the development of specifications or the scope of work, as
appropriate, the timetable for the competitive selection process will be
set up by the department head and Purchasing Agent. The Purchasing
Agent will review bid documents prior to advertisement.
B. A notice will be placed in the legal classified section of a newspaper of
general circulation and posted in at least two public places with the
following information:
(1) Brief description of the item or service desired.
(2) Identify a contact for questions or copies of specifications, scope of
work, request for proposals (RFP) or request for qualifications
(RFQ).
(3) The mailing address for response to the notice (Town of East
Greenwich, Town Manager's Office, P.O. Box 111, East Greenwich,
RI 02818).
(4) Other applicable information about the form in which submissions
should be made (i.e., how packages are to be labeled, specific items
to be included).
(5) The deadline for receipt of responses to the notice.
(6) Information about the opening of responses (i.e., date, time and
place).
(7) Statement reserving the exclusive right to accept or reject any or
all responses to the notice.
C. Notices shall appear in a newspaper of general circulation and be
posted in at least two public places not less than seven days prior to the
last date for receipt of responses. Notices of RFP or RFQ for
professional services or other significant items or projects shall be
advertised at least seven days, but usually not more than 30 days, prior
to the last date for receipt of responses. In all cases, notice to potential
vendors shall be made early enough to provide reasonable opportunity
to participate and prepare responsible proposals.
§ 187-9 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 187-11
C:382
§ 187-11. Property disposition.
If property is to be disposed of, the Town Manager must give prior approval
to the disposal with the award of the bid by Town Council. The method
of disposal will be determined by the Purchasing Agent and may include
sealed bid, auction, trade in, or any other method deemed appropriate.
§ 187-12. Award of contract or purchase.
The award of a contract or purchase, or sale of Town property, shall follow
the competitive selection process. Consistent with the other provisions of
these guidelines, the criteria for award shall be flexible enough to allow
consideration of all factors involved, yet still provide a clear sense of public
policy intent.
A. Sealed bid. Notice shall be placed in a newspaper of general circulation
with the following information:
(1) A brief description of the item to be sold;
(2) Information for bidders with questions;
(3) The deadline for submission of sealed bids;
(4) Information regarding the opening of bids received; and
(5) A statement reserving the right to accept or reject any or all bids.
B. Auction. In situations where a large number of items are to be disposed
of, an auction may be held in which prospective bidders view and make
bids at a specific time and place. Notice of auction shall be posted in at
least two public places and advertised in a newspaper of general
circulation not less than seven days prior to the date of the auction,
which notice shall include:
(1) The time and place at which the auction will be held;
(2) A brief description of the items offered at auction; and
(3) Payment requirements.
C. Payment. The Town of East Greenwich will accept payment for items
awarded by sealed bid or auction in the following forms:
(1) Cash;
(2) Certified treasurer's, bank or cashier's check; or
(3) Money order.
§ 187-11 CHARTER § 187-13
C:383
§ 187-13. Review of bids or proposals; standards for determining
award.
After bids or proposals have been received through the competitive
selection process, the bids or proposals shall be reviewed for completeness.
The bids or proposals shall be reviewed to determine how well they meet
the specifications or scope of work, the input from references, or other
aspects indicating the overall ability of the prospective vendor to provide
the goods or service desired. In all cases, the goal of the award shall be to
select the vendor offering the best overall value to the Town; the "lowest/
best" bidder. Price, quality, service and experience, either demonstrated
through other clients or with the Town of East Greenwich, shall be included
in the determination of award.
§ 187-14. Proper disposition of property sold by Town.
Bids for property being sold by the Town shall be awarded to the bidder
making the highest responsible bid. In making this determination, bidders
may be requested to supply proof of their ability to meet their bid before the
final award is made.
§ 187-15. Specifications.
§ 187-16. When effective.
This policy shall be effective immediately upon its adoption by the Town
Council.
Chapter 191
RENTAL DWELLINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning Board of Review — See Charter, Art.
XX; Ch. 260, Art. XV.
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 184.
A. Specifications for any purchases under the advertised competitive
selection process shall be reviewed by the Purchasing Agent prior to
the purchasing process. Specifications shall adequately define the
operating characteristics, performance requirements, or scope of work
to be performed. They shall not be so specific as to unnecessarily
restrict competition but shall be complete enough to represent superior
value for the Town.
B. Any specifications maintained by individual departments or agencies
for particular items or services shall be reviewed periodically and
revised if necessary. All specifications for products or services shall be
placed on file in the respective departments.
§ 187-13 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 187-16
C:384
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Rhode Island Housing Maintenance and
Occupancy Code — See R.I.G.L. § 45-24.3-1 et
seq.
§ 191-1. Authority.
The rules and regulations provided in this chapter are hereby adopted
pursuant to the authority granted by R.I.G.L. § 45-24.3-1 et seq., and these
rules and regulations are deemed necessary for the carrying out of the
purposes of such provisions.
§ 191-2. Minimum Housing Inspector.
The office of the Minimum Housing Inspector is hereby established as the
enforcing agency, and the Minimum Housing Inspector is hereby designated
as the enforcing officer to enforce and administer the powers and duties
authorized by R.I.G.L. § 45-24.3-1 et seq., entitled the "Rhode Island
Housing Maintenance and Occupancy Code."
§ 191-3. Housing Board of Review.
The members of the Zoning Board of Review are hereby designated as
the Housing Board of Review to act on appeals from the decisions of the
Minimum Housing Inspector in accordance with the Rhode Island Housing
Maintenance and Occupancy Code. All hearings of the Housing Board of
Review shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote upon each question, and shall keep records
of its decisions and findings and the reasons therefor, and of its
examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be filed
immediately in the office of the Board and shall be a public record.
§ 191-4. Vacancies in rental dwellings.
A. The owner of any rental dwelling or rental dwelling unit older than 10
years shall notify the Minimum Housing Inspector of the termination of
occupancy of any such dwelling or dwelling unit, and such owner shall
secure the inspection and the written approval of the condition of the
rental dwelling unit or rental dwelling by the Minimum Housing
Inspector before allowing any such dwelling or dwelling unit to be
reoccupied. Notification may be given within 15 days prior to the
termination of occupancy. If the Minimum Housing Inspector shall fail
to inspect and grant or deny his written approval of the condition of the
rental dwelling or rental dwelling unit within 10 working days after
receiving notice of the termination of occupancy, the owner of the
rental dwelling or dwelling unit shall be deemed to have complied with
the requirements of this section. If such inspection reveals any
violations of the Rhode Island Housing Maintenance and Occupancy
Code, the Minimum Housing Inspector shall issue the appropriate
§ 187-16 CHARTER § 191-4
C:385
§ 191-5. Violations and penalties.80
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, of the Code of the Town of East Greenwich.
Chapter 197
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Sewer permit fees — See Ch. 93, Art. I.
Industrial wastewater discharges — See Ch.
134.
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Service and return of citations — See R.I.G.L.
§ 44-5-29.
Sewer charges — See R.I.G.L. § 45-14-1 et seq.
violation notice to the tenant or to the owner of such rental dwelling or
rental dwelling unit pursuant to such code.
B. During the ten-day period, it shall be the responsibility and duty of the
owner to make the rental dwelling or rental dwelling unit available for
inspection at the convenience of the Minimum Housing Inspector.
C. The provisions of this section shall not apply to motel, hotel or rooming
accommodations intended for temporary or seasonal use by guests.
D. Rental dwellings and rental dwelling units that have been constructed
within the ten-year period prior to vacancy are exempt from the
provisions of this chapter. The date of construction is hereby deemed to
be the date of issuance of the initial building permit.
E. "Dwelling" shall mean any enclosed space which is wholly or partly
used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants,
provided that temporary housing shall not be regarded as a dwelling.
F. "Dwelling units" shall mean any room or group of rooms located within
a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are
used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
80.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 191-4 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 191-5
C:386
ARTICLE I
In General
§ 197-1. Connection permit; application; fee.
Application for permits to connect with any sewer must be made in writing
to the Director of Public Works by the owners of the property to be drained
or by their attorneys. Such applications must be accompanied by a clear
description of the premises to be drained and of the drains required, and
also by certain agreements, all as provided in the printed form of
application issued by the Commissioners. The fee for such a permit shall be
in accordance with the fee schedule found in Chapter 93, Fees.
§ 197-2. Authority to make binding agreements for connection of
sewer lines.
The Director of Public Works shall have the authority to make agreements
and execute contracts with residents of the municipality of Warwick, North
Kingstown, or persons residing outside the Town relative to the connecting
of private sewer lines belonging to such residents and to the public sewer
system of the Town. The agreements and contracts shall be binding upon
future Directors of Public Works and upon the Town.
§ 197-3. Designation of person authorized to make connections.
Only such drain layers as are designated by the Director of Public Works
shall be allowed to make connection with the sewers or lay any drains in
connection therewith, and any person so designated shall give personal
attention to any work done under his permit. He shall also employ only
competent persons to do such work.
§ 197-4. Notice prior to opening streets.
Notice must be given to the Director of Public Works 24 hours before any
street or public way can be opened for the purpose of laying a private drain
or before any drainpipe can be extended from work previously done and
accepted, or new connections of any kind be made.
§ 197-5. Removal of street materials.
In opening any street or public way, all materials for paving or ballasting
must be removed with the least possible injury or loss of such materials and,
together with the excavated materials from the trenches, must be placed
where they will cause the least practical inconvenience to the public. As
little as possible of the trench must be dug until the junction piece into the
sewer is found, unless it is first determined to make a new opening into the
sewer.
§ 197-1 CHARTER § 197-6
C:387
§ 197-6. Minimum inclinations.
The minimum inclination that can be allowed for water closet, kitchen and
all other drains not over six inches in diameter and liable to receive solid
substances is 1/2 inch in two feet; and for cellar or other drains to receive
water only, 1/4 inch in two feet. The depth of the crown of a drain at the
curbline shall be determined by a rise of 1/4 inch per foot from the crown of
the sewer directly opposite.
§ 197-7. Catch basins.
§ 197-8. Connection when junction is unavailable.
Where it shall be necessary to connect a drainpipe with a public sewer and
no junction is left in the sewer, the new connection with the sewer can only
be made under the direction of some person designated by the Director of
Public Works.
§ 197-9. Interior of pipe; scraping.
The inside of every drain, after it is laid, must be left smooth and perfectly
clean throughout its entire length; to ensure such standard, a scraper of
suitable material, the shape of the pipe and slightly less in diameter, shall
be drawn through each length of the pipe after the pipe has been laid.
§ 197-10. Plugging of pipes.
The ends of all pipes not to be immediately connected are to be securely
stopped by brick and cement or other watertight and imperishable
materials.
§ 197-11. Traps; venting.
All persons are required to place an effective trap in the line of drain
just before it leaves the premises and to make an open connection with a
downspout back of the trap. In addition, when possible, they shall make an
open connection with the highest part of the soil pipe within the premises
through a large pipe or flue to a point above the roof of the building, unless
a special permit to vary from such standard shall be granted by the Director
of Public Works.
A. All pipes that must be left open to drain cellars, areas, yards or gardens
must be connected with suitable catch basins which are properly
trapped.
B. No private catch basin may be built in a public street but must be
placed inside the line of the lot to be drained, except when the
sidewalks are excavated and used as cellars.
§ 197-6 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 197-12
C:388
§ 197-12. Interference with public travel.
All sewer work shall be done in such a manner and at such times as to
interfere as little as possible with the public travel and convenience. To this
end, the drain layer shall conduct his work as the Director of Public Works
may from time to time direct.
§ 197-13. Safeguards required.
Every drain layer must enclose any opening which he may make in the
public streets or ways with sufficient barriers, must maintain red lights
at the opening by night, and must take all other necessary precautions
to adequately guard the public against all accidents from the beginning
to the end of the work. The drain layer can only lay drains on condition
that he shall use every precaution against accidents to persons, vehicles or
property of any kind.
§ 197-14. Backfilling; settling; protection of water pipes.81
Backfilling over drains after they are laid must be puddled or solidly
rammed and, together with the replacing of ballast and paving, must be
done within 48 hours after the completion of that part of the drain lying
within the public way; done so as to make the sidewalk, gutter and roadway
at least as good as they were before they were disturbed; and done to
the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works. The owner will be held
responsible for any settlement of ground which occurs within one year on
account of laying such drain. All water pipes must be protected from injury
or settling.
§ 197-15. Completion report.
The drain layer who obtains the permit shall carefully fill out the blank
return provided for new work, alterations or additions, and return the same
to the Director of Public Works within 48 hours after the completion of the
work.
§ 197-16. Violations and penalties; forfeiture of permit.82
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction, be punished in accordance with Chapter 1, Article III, and shall
be subject to a forfeiture of his permit.
81.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
82.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 197-12 CHARTER § 197-16
C:389

ARTICLE II
Repairs to Connections
§ 197-17. Certain repairs assumed by Town.
After a period of one year after the installation of any sewer connection,
the Town shall assume the responsibility for the repair of broken sewer
connections which result from broken pipe only, that are connected to
the sewer mains of the Town from the sewer main to the curbline in any
accepted street where sewer mains have been or shall be laid, except as
provided in this article.
§ 197-18. Town not to repair improper installations.
The Town will not assume the responsibility for the repair of any sewer
connection to sewer mains, unless the sewer connection has been made in
the proper manner according to this code or the ordinances governing the
connections to sewer mains in the Town.
§ 197-19. Private sewer lines; assessments.
The Town will not assume the responsibility for the repair of any private
sewer lines, whether connected to the sewer mains or not, and will not
assume any responsibility whatever unless a sewer assessment has been
made on the property served by the sewer connection and that sewer
assessment shall have been duly paid in full and the sewer connection shall
have been connected to the provided connection in the sewer main.
§ 197-20. Repair of other than sanitary drains.
The Town will assume no responsibility whatever for any sewer connection
as long as any surface drain, floor drain, cellar drain or any drain other than
a sanitary drain is connected in any manner to the sewer connection.
§ 197-21. Inspection; disconnection of nonsanitary drains.
The Plumbing Inspector or the Director of Public Works shall have access
to any premises where it is necessary to repair any sewer connection to
determine whether or not any surface water drains, floor drains, cellar
drains, or any other drains for other than sanitary purposes are connected
in any manner to the sanitary sewer mains of the Town. All drains other than
for sanitary purposes shall be permanently disconnected before the Town
shall assume the responsibility for the repair of any portion of any sewer
connection.
§ 197-22. Repairs by licensed persons only; notification of repairs.
All repairs must be made by a licensed plumber or drain layer, and the
Director of Public Works shall be notified of any repairs before
commencement of work.
§ 197-17 CHARTER § 197-23
C:391
§ 197-23. Establishment of curbline.
If there is no curbing, the curbline shall be determined by the established
curbline, if any; if not, by the general line of any existing curbing; and if
no general line of existing curbing can be established, the curbline for the
purposes of this article shall be located six feet from and parallel to the
street line, if established. If no street line has been established, then the
curbline for the purposes of this article shall be a line six feet from and
parallel to the property line.
§ 197-23 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 197-23
C:392
ARTICLE III
Rates and Charges
§ 197-24. Rates, charges and budget adoption.
A. Established. Pursuant to Chapter 3651 of the Public Laws of 1956,
Chapter 123 of the Public Laws of 1966, Chapter 187 of the Public Laws
of 1970, Chapter 227 of the Public Laws of 1970, and Chapter 38 of the
Public Laws of 1972, the following procedures are established to adopt
an operating budget, rate structure and capital budget:
(1) Assessment of sewer use charges.
(a) Every person whose particular sewer enters into the system at
12:00 midnight on December 31 of each year shall pay a sewer
use charge annually.
(b) In the case of sewers connected to the system subsequent to
December 31, the annual rate shall be prorated as determined
by the Director of Public Works.
(c) The Director of Public Works shall supply to the Town Clerk a
list of persons to be so charged, and the Town Clerk shall
provide this list to the Town Council and Town Manager.
(d) The Town Clerk shall also provide this list to the Town
Treasurer, who will prepare and collect the individual amounts
due to the Town.
(2) Establishment of rate. For any building or premises connected
directly or indirectly into the sewer system, an annual rate shall be
established by resolution by the Town Council.
(3) Budget.
(a) The Director of Public Works shall prepare an itemized annual
budget in a format so designated by the Town Manager and
submit the budget to the Town Manager no later than the first
Monday in April of each year. The budget shall include
recommended expenditures including normal operating cost,
capital items, principal and interest on all sewer bonds,
reserves for such purposes and for renewals and replacements,
and for any other expenses not otherwise provided for which
may arise. The budget shall also include revenues and a rate
structure which shall maintain a balance between the revenues
and expenditures.
(b) The Town Manager shall submit a recommended budget to the
Town Council no later than the first Monday in May of each
year. The Town Manager's budget shall include both
expenditures and revenues as previously listed.
§ 197-24 CHARTER § 197-24
C:393
(c) The Town Council shall, upon receipt of the Town Manager's
recommended budget, hold a public hearing on a proposed
budget. The Town Council at the next regular or special
meeting shall by resolution adopt a sewer budget including
expenditures, revenues and a sewer use rate structure, which
shall maintain at least a balance between expenditures and
revenues. The public hearing shall be advertised and copies of
the proposed budget shall be made available.
B. Sewer user classifications.
(1) To distinguish between the various potential needs of sewer system
users, this section hereby establishes the following sewer user
classifications. The Director of Public Works shall determine the
user class of all discharges to the public sewers in the Town, and
the annual charge for the use or the availability of such sewers
shall be as determined by the Director by the methods set forth in
this section.
Class Description Basis of Charge
Residential Residential (domestic),
discharging a
wastewater of "normal"
characteristics
Charge based on 85% of
water consumption at
the general rate
Commercial A Commercial
establishments
discharging wastewater
of "normal"
characteristics
Charge based on 100%
of water consumption at
the general rate
Commercial B Commercial
establishments typically
discharging wastewater
with "abnormal"
strength characteristics
(typically greater than
domestic wastes)
Charge based on 100%
of consumption at a
premium rate of 145%
of the general rate
Governmental Governmental
establishments (church,
school, public buildings,
etc.) discharging
wastewater with
"normal" strength
characteristics
Charge based on 100%
of water consumption at
the general rate
Industrial A Industrial
establishments
discharging a
wastewater of "normal"
characteristics
Charge based on 100%
of water consumption or
on 100% of metered
sewage discharge at the
general rate
§ 197-24 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 197-24
C:394
Class Description Basis of Charge
Industrial B Industrial
establishments typically
discharging a
wastewater of
"abnormal"
characteristics
Charge based on 100%
of water consumption or
on 100% of metered
sewage discharge, plus
a surcharge for excess
BOD and SS, and/or
other waste
constituents impacting
system costs
Out of Town A user, classified as
above, located outside of
the corporate limits of
the Town of East
Greenwich
Charge based on 150%
of the fee calculated for
the user class in
Subsection B(1) of this
section for in-Town
users
(2) Based on the annual budget for the operation and maintenance of
the Town's sewerage facilities, the Director of Public Works shall
annually establish a fee rate schedule for use of the public sewers
and wastewater treatment facilities in the Town.
(3) Any sewer user wishing to dispute the sewer user classification, as
determined by the Director of Public Works, shall appeal the
classification within 15 days of being notified of such classification.
The appeal shall be made in writing to the Director of Public Works
and shall include all related documentation for the Director to
consider in reviewing the assigned classification. Within 30 days of
the receipt of such an appeal for reconsideration of a sewer user
classification, the Director shall provide a hearing in his office with
the sewer user or an authorized representative to review the
classification. A final decision on the appeal shall be made within
15 days of the hearing.
C. Procedures for establishing user charges.
(1) All users of the public sewers shall be assigned a classification as
established in Subsection B of this section. Charges for any
individual user shall be based on the rates and methods of
determining such charges as set forth in Subsection C of this
section.
(2) All users of the public sewers shall pay regular charges for the use
of such sewer services in addition to other charges and
assessments for construction of sewers, application fees, entrance
fees or connection charges, and maintenance and repair charges
for work done on private sewers by the Department of Public
Works. Such charges shall be those found necessary to provide for
the operation and maintenance of the East Greenwich sewage
§ 197-24 CHARTER § 197-24
C:395
collection system and for the proper treatment of all sewage at the
Town's wastewater treatment plant.
(3) Individual user charges shall be determined by the application of a
rate to the user's water consumption, depending upon the assigned
classification as presented in Subsection B of this section, unless
specified otherwise in this section. In the case of users classified
Industrial B or in other cases where sewage of abnormally high
strength is being discharged to the public sewers, additional
charges shall be made based on the strength of the sewage being
discharged. The basic rate and the surcharges for sewage of
abnormally high strength shall be as determined by the Director of
Public Works.
(4) Where water meters are not installed, or where a public sewer user
obtains all or a part of its water supply from a source other than the
Kent County Water Authority system, the Director shall require that
the owner install a sealed water meter, of a type and manufacture
approved by the Director, to determine the water consumption on
the premises.
(5) Where an individual user can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Director that water consumption on specific premises does not
reasonably reflect proportionate sewage discharge with other
users of the same classification, special provisions may be made to
more accurately and equitably determine the means for
establishing the basis for the sewer use charge. Such special
provisions may include such means as installation of a separate
water meter to measure and record water consumption which is
not a potential source of sewage discharge, installation of a sewage
discharge meter, and allowances for a large one-time or periodic
user of water for which there is no potential for sewage discharge.
All costs associated with special provisions allowed to determine a
sewer use charge shall be borne by the sewer user. A petition for
such arrangements may be made at any time and shall be made
through the appeal process established under Subsection C(10) of
this section. Special provisions related to one-time or periodic
water consumption not potentially leading to a sewage discharge
shall be arranged prior to the event.
(6) The user charges established by the Director of Public Works shall
apply to all classes of users and all premises which are connected
to the public sewers, including residential, commercial,
institutional, governmental, industrial, charitable and nonprofit.
Surcharges, over and above the standard rates so established, shall
be added to those charges to Industrial B users and other
dischargers of high strength sewage to recover the added expenses
incurred due to the abnormally high strengths of wastewater being
discharged by such users.
§ 197-24 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 197-24
C:396
(7) In the case of users classified Industrial B, or other users which
discharge sewage of abnormally high strength to the public sewers,
the Director of Public Works may require that adequate facilities be
provided by the owner to allow for the observation, metering and
sampling of such discharges by the Director and that such facilities
be readily accessible to the Director at all times. The user shall
reimburse the Town for all expenses incurred by the Department of
Public Works in carrying out the sampling and testing of such
discharges.
(8) In addition to the stipulations set forth in Subsection C(5) of this
section, the Director of Public Works may establish a minimum
charge for all users or potential users of the sewer system. This
minimum charge shall apply to all users and be levied on all users
or on owners whose property is connected to the public sewers but
providing no discharge as a basic charge for the availability and
readiness to serve of the overall system.
(9) The Tax Collector shall issue bills for sewer user charges to all
owners of premises within the Town which are connected to the
public sewers, and the Town shall have the authority to collect
those charges and payments when due in accordance with state
statutes and the Code of the Township of East Greenwich. In
addition to the charges as otherwise determined under this section,
the Director may also impose special charges on certain user
classes where special services and/or tasks are required to oversee
and administer the use of Town sewers by such users.
(10) Any sewer user wishing to dispute the use of that user's water
consumption as the basis for establishing the charge for sewer
service may appeal the chargeable water volume base within 60
days of receipt of the annual sewer use charge billing. The appeal
shall be made in writing to the Director of Public Works and shall
include all related documentation for the Director to consider in
reviewing the claim for a chargeable water consumption volume at
a lower level than prescribed for that user's classification under
this section. Within 30 days of the receipt of such an appeal for
reconsideration of a sewer user classification, the Director shall
provide a hearing in his office with the sewer user or an authorized
representative to review the classification. A final decision on the
appeal shall be made within 15 days of the hearing.
D. Determination of annual user charge.
(1) All actual or estimated costs allocable to the proper operation and
maintenance of the sewerage facilities in the Town for a billing
period shall be paid from revenues derived from charges upon all
users of those facilities. Such costs shall include but not be limited
to those costs for heat, light, fuel, telephone, power, consumables,
and maintenance and repair of equipment, for the wages of
sewerage facility personnel whose duties are to operate, repair and
§ 197-24 CHARTER § 197-24
C:397
maintain the system, and for all other miscellaneous costs related
to the proper operation of the system.
(2) The actual or estimated total costs for the operation and
maintenance of the sewers in the Town and for the satisfactory
treatment of the sewage prior to discharge shall be the basis for the
determination of the charges upon users for such use. The user
charge rate discussed in Subsection C(3) of this section shall be
determined by subtracting from the actual or estimated total
sewerage service costs all other revenues, actual or estimated, to
be reviewed by the Department of Public Works in relation to the
Town's sewers; any grants or stipends awarded the Town for use in
operating and maintaining the system; the estimated added
revenues resulting from the application of a minimum charge to all
users; the estimated added revenues resulting from surcharges for
sewage discharges of abnormally high strength; and any surpluses
from previous charges which are considered to be in excess of that
needed as a reserve fund to offset the impact of unforeseeable
major costs of repair or replacement of facilities. The resultant
adjusted total cost shall then be divided by the actual or estimated
number of billable water consumption units consumed on all
premises in the Town, adjusted by a factor of 85% for all residential
users, including water consumed from both public and private
sources, which are served by the public sewers. The sewer user
charge rate in dollars per 100 cubic feet of water so calculated
shall then be used to determine the charge for sewer services for
all users in the Town.
(3) Surcharges above and beyond those costs as determined in
Subsection D(2) of this section shall be levied upon those sewer
users whose sewage exhibits abnormally high strength
characteristics. These surcharges shall be determined from rates
as determined by the Director of Public Works from time to time
and shall be reflective of the added costs for handling and treating
such sewage. Surcharges shall be made in accordance with the
following. In no case shall a credit be allowed for wastewaters with
constituent loadings below the established thresholds of 300 mg/1
for BOD and 375 mg/1 for SS. Basic use fees allow for the discharge
of wastewaters with constituent concentrations up to the threshold
limits. Surcharges are due only for wastewaters of greater
strength.
(a) Pounds of BOD subject to a surcharge shall be calculated by
the following equation: (C1 – 300) x 0.00624 x Q = lb. of BOD
subject to surcharge where C1 is the concentration of BOD in
mg/1 of the wastewater, and Q is the actual/adjusted metered
water use or wastewater discharge measured in units of 100
cubic feet. A negative surcharge or credit shall not be allowed.
This calculation is valid only where C1 is greater than 300 mg/
1.
§ 197-24 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 197-24
C:398
§ 197-25. Due date; payment; interest. [Amended 2-4-2013 by Ord.
No. 826]
The annual charges shall split in half and be due and payable on April 1 and
November 1, and all charges not paid on or before April 30 and November
30 shall bear interest at the rate of 8% from May 1 for the April 30th due
date and December 1 for the November 30th due date. The payment shall
be for the fiscal year from July to June in which the collection due date rests.
(b) Pounds of SS subject to a surcharge shall be calculated by the
following equation: (C2 – 375) x 0.00624 x Q = lb. of SS subject
to surcharge where C2 is the concentration of suspended
solids in mg/1 of the wastewater, and Q is the actual metered
water use or wastewater discharge measured in units of 100
cubic feet. A negative surcharge or credit shall not be allowed.
This calculation is valid only where C2 is greater than 375 mg/
1.
(c) Where wastewater of abnormally high strength is generated
but the regular monitoring of such discharges is not
reasonable, practical and/or desirable, additional charges may
be made by means of a basic surcharge. This can be
accomplished by assigning a classification "Commercial B" to
the user. Additional charges for wastes of abnormally high
strength discharged by users classified as Commercial B shall
be made on the basis of a rate charge which is 145% of the
charge for residential class users.
(4) The Director of Public Works, irrespective of the stipulations set
forth in Subsection D(2) of this section, may establish a minimum
charge for the use of public sewers in the Town. This minimum
charge shall be considered as an availability or readiness-to-serve
charge, and no user or user unit as set forth in Subsection B(1) of
this section shall pay less than that minimum charge as determined
by the Director for use of the system regardless of the water
consumption on those premises.
§ 197-24 CHARTER § 197-25
C:399

ARTICLE IV
Assessments
§ 197-26. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to assess the cost of any project for the
construction, completion, extension, enlargement or improvement of the
sewage disposal system upon the owners of estates abutting that portion of
any street or highway in or along which any sewer constituting any portion
of such project may be located or otherwise specially benefited by such
project.
§ 197-27. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ASSESSABLE FOOT FRONTAGE —
PROJECT — Project for the construction, completion, extension,
enlargement or improvement of the sewage disposal system.
TOWN SEWER FUND — The fund into which sewer use fees are paid for the
use of the sewer system of the Town, pursuant to Article III of this chapter.
§ 197-28. Assessment of residential estates.
The cost of a project for the construction, completion, extension,
enlargement or improvement of the sewage disposal system shall be
The frontage, in feet, of an estate along a street or highway, in or along
which street or highway a sewer constituting any portion of a project
may be located, where the estate abuts only one street or highway in or
along which such sewer is located;
A.
The frontage, in feet, of an estate along a street or highway, in or along
which street or highway a sewer connection is available, such sewer
connection being a part of a sewer constituting any portion of a project,
where the estate abuts more than one street or highway and the sewer
is located in and along both streets or highways;
B.
The frontage, in feet, of an estate along the entire side or entire rear
boundary, along which side or rear boundary a sewer connection is
available, such sewer connection being a part of a sewer constituting
any portion of a project where the sewer is located along one side or
the rear boundary of the estate;
C.
The frontage, in feet, of an estate along the entire length of a sewer
easement, in and along which easement a sewer constituting any
portion of a project may be located, where the sewer easement cuts
across an estate and is not located along either the side or rear
boundary of the estate.
D.
§ 197-26 CHARTER § 197-28
C:401
assessed by the Town Council upon the owners of estates zoned residential
and abutting that portion of any street or highway in or along which any
sewer constituting any portion of such project or projects may be located or
otherwise benefited by such project, in the following manner:
§ 197-29. Assessment of farming estates.
The cost of a project for the construction, completion, extension,
enlargement or improvement of the sewage disposal system shall be
assessed by the Town Council upon the owners of estates zoned Farming,
Farming F-1 and Farming F-2 and abutting that portion of any street or
highway, side yard, rear yard, or through an easement in or along which any
sewer constituting any portion of such project may be located or otherwise
benefited by such project or projects, in the following manner:
A. The total cost of such project shall be divided by the total assessable
foot frontage of all such estates, regardless of zoning (whether
Residential R-10, Residential R-20, Residential R-30 or any other
residential zone) or use. The result shall be the rate of assessment per
linear foot of frontage.
B. In any separate residential zone where there are 10 or more estates in
that zone, the average linear foot frontage for each separate residential
zone shall be determined for each separate residential zone by dividing
the total foot frontages for each separate residential zone by the total
number of estates within the respective separate residential zone.
C. In any separate residential zone when there are fewer than 10 estates
in that zone, the average linear foot frontage for each separate
residential zone shall be determined for each separate residential zone
by dividing the total front footage for each separate residential zone by
the total number of estates within the respective separate residential
zone; provided, however, that the average front footage shall not be
greater than the minimum front footage for the respective separate
residential zone, as specified by Chapter 260, Zoning, of the Code of the
Town of East Greenwich.
D. The average linear foot frontage for each separate residential zone, as
determined above, shall be multiplied by the rate of assessment per
linear foot of frontage, as determined in Subsection A of this section,
and the resulting sums shall then be reduced by 1/3. The resulting sums
after such reduction shall be the amounts of assessment levied against
the owners of estates in each separate residential zone, so that all such
owners of such estates within the same residential zone shall pay the
same amount of assessment.
E. The deficit in paying for such project resulting from the reductions
described in this section shall be paid by the Town Council from the
Town Sewer Fund.
§ 197-28 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 197-29
C:402
§ 197-30. Assessment of commercial or industrial estates.
The cost of a project shall be assessed by the Town Council upon the
owners of estates zoned commercial or industrial or used for commercial
or industrial purposes and abutting that portion of any street or highway in
or along which any sewer constituting any portion of such project may be
located or otherwise benefited by such project, in the following manner:
A. The total cost of such project shall be divided by the total assessable
foot frontages of all such estates, regardless of zoning (whether
Farming, Farming F-1 or Farming F-2) or use. The result shall be the
rate of assessment per linear foot of frontage.
B. In any separate farming zone where there are 10 or more estates in that
zone, the average linear foot frontage for each separate farming zone
shall be determined for each separate farming zone by dividing the total
foot frontages for each separate farming zone by the total number of
estates within the respective separate farming zone.
C. In any separate farming zone where there are fewer than 10 estates in
that zone, the average linear foot frontage for each separate rate
farming zone shall be determined for each separate farming zone by
dividing the total front footage for each separate farming zone by the
total number of estates within the respective separate farming zone;
provided, however, that the average front footage shall not be greater
than the minimum front footage for the respective separate farming
zone, as specified by Chapter 260, Zoning, of the Code of the Town of
East Greenwich.
D. The average linear foot frontage for each separate farming zone, as
determined in this section, shall be multiplied by the rate of assessment
per linear foot of frontage as determined in Subsection A of this section,
and the resulting sums shall then be reduced by 1/3. The resulting sums
after such reduction shall be the amounts of assessment levied against
the owners of estates in each separate farming zone, so that all such
owners of such estates within the same farming zone shall pay the same
amount of assessment.
E. The deficit in paying for such project resulting from the reductions
described in this section shall be paid by the Town Council from the
Town Sewer Fund.
A. The actual foot frontage for an estate zoned commercial or industrial or
used for commercial or industrial purposes shall be multiplied by the
rate of assessment per linear foot of frontage (as determined in
§ 197-28). The resulting sums shall be the amounts of assessments
levied upon the owners of estates in commercial or industrial zones or
upon the owners of estates used for commercial or industrial purposes,
so that all such owners of such estates shall pay varying amounts of
assessment, depending upon the actual linear foot frontage of the
estate assessed.
§ 197-29 CHARTER § 197-30
C:403
§ 197-31. Unimproved estates; deferred payment.
Any owner of an estate which is unimproved shall pay 1/2 of the assessment
as levied, and payment of the balance shall be deferred until such time
as the estate is improved. Such deferred payment shall not be subject to
interest. At the time of improvement of such estate, the balance of 1/2 of the
assessment as levied shall immediately become due and payable.
§ 197-32. New assessments in event of subdivision of residential
and farming estates.
In the event of the subdivision or the division in any manner of any estate
zoned residential or farming by the conveyance of any part thereof to a
different owner, the Town Council shall assess the new owners on the same
basis and in the same manner as set forth in §§ 197-28 and 197-29, so that
each new owner within a particular residential or farming zone shall pay the
same amount of assessment as the owner of an original estate within that
residential or farming zone.
§ 197-33. New assessments in event of subdivision or division of
commercial or industrial estates.
In the event of the subdivision or the division in any manner of any estate
zoned commercial or industrial by the conveyance of any part thereof to
a different owner, the Town Council shall assess the new owners on the
same basis and in the same manner as set forth in § 197-30, so that each
new owner within a particular commercial or industrial zone shall pay the
amount of assessment as the original owner of the original estate within
that commercial or industrial zone. The new assessments shall be payable
in the same manner as the original assessment, and in all other respects
the new assessments shall be governed by the provisions of this article
which applied to the original assessment. The original assessment shall not
be discharged nor affected in any way by the new assessments. The new
assessments shall be paid into the Town Sewer Fund.
§ 197-34. Assessments for project or projects.
Assessments may be made separately for each project or for several
projects taken together, as the Town Council may deem equitable.
§ 197-35. Adjustments to assessments.
The Town Council may make reasonable adjustments against estates which
for any reason are unable to derive the normal benefits from the sewage
B. This section shall not be applicable to the owner of any estate wherein a
United States law, regulation or condition for the acceptance of funds
by the Town from the United States government or any agency or
instrumentality thereof requires or provides for a different assessment
by the Town for the owner of such estate.
§ 197-30 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 197-35
C:404
disposal system. Such adjustments shall include but not be limited to the
following:
§ 197-36. Errors in assessments.
The assessments shall name the owners assessed, describe their estates and
state the amounts of the assessment, but no error or omission in the name
or description shall invalidate the assessment as long as either the owner or
the estate is substantially identified.
§ 197-37. Recording; lien.
A copy of such assessments shall be recorded with the Town Clerk as a
public record. From the date of delivery to the Town Clerk, the assessment
and interest accruing thereon shall constitute a lien upon the respective
estates on a parity with the lien for Town taxes, until paid in full. The
Collector of Taxes of the Town shall have the same rights to enforce such
liens against the estates and to collect such assessments and interest from
the owners as he has in the case of Town taxes.
§ 197-38. Notice of assessment.
Prior to or forthwith after the delivery to the Town Clerk of a copy of
the assessment, the Collector of Taxes shall cause notice to be sent to
the owner of each estate assessed. The notice shall substantially identify
the estate assessed, state the amount of the assessment and refer to the
remedy available under this article. The notice shall be mailed, postpaid,
and directed to the last known address of the addressee. If there are owners
whose addresses are unknown, a similar notice covering the assessments
A. Any property or estate owned by the Town will not be assessed, nor
shall the assessable front footage for such estate be used in any
calculation as described in this article.
B. Any property or estate owned by a public utility, including but not
limited to the railroad, and used exclusively as a utility, with the
exception of properties with structures thereon, will not be assessed,
nor shall the assessable front footage for such estate be used in any
calculation as described in this article. This subsection shall not apply
to property or estates owned by a public utility if buildings or structures
are located thereon.
C. Any estate not reasonably connectable due to gravitational restrictions
shall not be assessed unless work is performed or provisions of any
description are made so that gravitational restrictions are overcome,
nor shall the assessable front footage for such estate be used in any
calculation as described in this article.
D. Those estates used exclusively for burial sites shall not be assessed, nor
shall the assessable front footage be used for such estates in any
calculation as described in this article.
§ 197-35 CHARTER § 197-38
C:405
against their estates shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Town, and such published notice may be a single collective
notice for all such owners. No irregularity in the notice required by this
section shall excuse the nonpayment of the assessment or affect its validity
or any proceedings for the collection thereof, as long as there is substantial
compliance with the provisions hereof. No deficiency in the notice to the
owner of an estate assessed shall excuse the nonpayment by others of
the assessments against their estates or affect the validity thereof or any
proceedings for the collection thereof.
§ 197-39. Petition for relief.
Any person aggrieved by any such assessment or corrected assessment
may, within 90 days after the mailing or publication of notice to him, file
a petition for relief against the Town as respondent in the Superior Court,
and the Clerk shall thereupon issue a citation to summon the Town, and
such petition and citation shall be subject to the provisions of R.I.G.L.
§ 44-5-29. If the Court finds such assessment invalid in whole or in part, it
shall give judgment reducing the amount thereof accordingly. The filing of
such a petition shall not relieve the estate involved from the lien provided
for in § 197-37 or prevent the assessment becoming due as provided in
the following section, but the final judgment of the court reducing such
assessment in whole or in part shall reduce such lien and the amount due
accordingly. The remedy provided in this section shall be exclusive, and no
action or proceeding questioning the validity of any such assessment shall
be begun after the expiration of the ninety-day period.
§ 197-40. Correction of assessments.
If an assessment is partially or wholly invalid, the Town Council may make
a corrected assessment to replace the invalid assessment or portion. The
corrected assessment shall be made in the same manner as an original
assessment. The first installment of a corrected assessment shall be
sufficient to compensate without interest for all installments which would
have become due then or theretofore if the corrected assessment had been
made at the time of the original assessment. The corrected assessment shall
bear interest from the date notice of the corrected assessment had been
made at the time of the original assessment. The corrected assessment shall
bear interest from the date notice of the corrected assessment is delivered
to the Town Clerk.
§ 197-41. Installment payment of assessments. [Amended 2-4-2013
by Ord. No. 826]
A. Assessments for a project may be payable over a period of 10 or 20
years, as determined by the Town Council. If such owner elects to pay
such assessment by installments, then the assessment shall be paid in
annual equal installments upon May 1 in each year and shall bear
interest from June 1 until paid in full at the rate of 8% per annum. The
whole assessment against any owner or estate may be paid without
§ 197-38 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 197-41
C:406
interest at any time prior to the due date of the first installment thereof.
The whole unpaid balance of any such assessment, together with the
interest accrued thereon to the date of payment, may be paid at any
time.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the tentative amount of an
assessment may be increased by the Town Council by a reasonable
amount in lieu of interest where it is assumed that the assessment will
be paid in annual installments over either 10 or 20 years, and the
assessment shall be made in the aggregate amount of the tentative
assessment plus such interest charge, and such assessment shall be
payable in equal annual installments on May 1 of each year, and
amounts not paid on or before May 31 shall bear interest at the rate of
8% from June 1. If any such installment is paid in full before the
expiration of such period, there shall be an equitable adjustment of the
interest charge so that interest will be paid on the unpaid balance of the
tentative assessment for the period up to such payment in full.
§ 197-41 CHARTER § 197-41
C:407

ARTICLE V
Mandatory Sewer Connections in Cedar Heights Service Area
[Added 9-8-2008 by Ord. No. 794]
§ 197-42. Cedar Heights Service Area.
The Town Council, after consultation with the DPW Director, shall
determine the Cedar Heights Service Area of the Hemlock Road Sewer
Pump Station. The service area shall include all the lots generating sanitary
sewage and pumped by said pump station.
§ 197-43. Authority to order connection to sewers.
In the interest of public health and safety and pursuant to RIDEM permit
to alter freshwater wetlands (Application No. 05-0374), the Town of East
Greenwich is authorized to order any dwelling units that are to be serviced
by the sanitary sewer pump station located on Hemlock Drive within the
Cedar Heights Service Area to connect the sewage of such premises to the
East Greenwich sanitary sewer collection system. Upon the service of any
such order, or copy thereof, to connect the sewage as aforesaid, such owner
or occupant of said dwellings shall comply therewith within the following
schedule:
§ 197-44. Noncompliance.
In case the owner or occupant to whom any such order is directed neglects
or refuses to comply therewith within the schedule outlined in § 197-43, the
owner shall be fined not less than $100 and no more than $500 for each
subsequent 24 hours. In the event that the owner neglects or refuses to
comply therewith and in case such neglect or refusal shall continue for 60
days after the service of such an order, the Town may cause such connection
to the sewer system. The pendency of any appeal from any such order shall
not affect the power of the Town, after the expiration of said period of 60
days, to cause such connection to be made.
A. Dwelling units with pending failures or cesspools shall tie in within 90
days.
B. Dwelling units that have had replacement ISDS systems installed 10
years prior to the date of the connection order shall tie in no later than
10 years from the date of the notice of connection order.
C. Residents over age 65 may make application to the Town's Public Works
Director for exception to the tie-in requirement unless their ISDS
system has failed, in which case they shall be required to tie in.
D. All other dwelling units shall tie in no later than five years from the date
of the connection order.
§ 197-42 CHARTER § 197-45
C:409
§ 197-45. Elimination of cesspools and individual sanitary disposal
systems.
At the time a property is connected to the public sewer, all sewage outlets
for the property must be connected to one lateral which is connected to the
public sewer, and all devices for the reception of sewage (cesspool, privy
vault, tanks, individual sanitary disposal systems, etc.) on such land must be
filled up and destroyed.
§ 197-45 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 197-45
C:410
Chapter 207
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Earth removal — See Ch. 85.
Plan and inspection fees — See Ch. 93, Art. I.
Flood hazard areas — See Ch. 113.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Fresh Water Wetlands Act — See R.I.G.L.
§ 2-1-18 et seq.
Soil erosion and sediment control — See
R.I.G.L. § 45-46-1 et seq.
Department of Environmental
Management — See R.I.G.L. § 42-17.1-1 et
seq.
§ 197-45 CHARTER § 197-45
C:411

ARTICLE I
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan
§ 207-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
APPLICANT — Any person, corporation or public or private organization
proposing or engaged in a development which would involve disturbance of
natural terrain. "Applicant" shall also mean an authorized agent acting on
the applicant's behalf.
COASTAL FEATURES — Coastal beaches and dunes, barrier beaches,
coastal wetlands, coastal cliffs, bluffs and banks, rocky shores, and manmade
shorelines, as defined in the State Coastal Resources Management
Program, as amended.
CUT — An excavation; the difference between a point on the original ground
and a designated point of lower elevation on the final grade; and the
material removed in excavation.
DEVELOPMENT PROJECT — Any construction, reconstruction, demolition
or removal of structures, roadways, parking or other paved areas, utilities
or other similar facilities, including any action requiring a building permit
by the Town with the exception of signage and fencing, unless otherwise
required by the Building Official and/or his designee.
EROSION — The removal of mineral and/or organic matter by the action of
wind, water and/or gravity.
EXCAVATE — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other
similar material is dug into, cut, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced,
relocated or bulldozed, and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
FILL — Any act in which earth, sand or other material is placed or moved
to a new location aboveground. The fill is also the difference in elevation
between a point of existing undisturbed ground and a designated point of
higher elevation of the final grade.
GABION — A rectangular or cylindrical wire mesh cage (wire basket) filled
with rock and used as a protecting agent, revetment, etc., against erosion.
LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITY — Any physical land development activity
which includes such actions as clearance of vegetation, moving or filling
of land, removal or excavation of soil or mineral resources, or similar
activities.
MULTIFAMILY — Any site, property, building, structure intended for use
by more than one family, including but not limited to apartments,
condominiums, duplexes and townhouses.
REINSPECTION FEE — The fee charged to the applicant or owner for
repeated inspections necessitated by any oversight in the compliance with
§ 207-1 CHARTER § 207-1
C:413
the approved soil erosion sediment control plan. The Building Official or his
designee has the right to waive this fee.
RUNOFF — The surface water discharge or rate of discharge of a given
watershed after a fall of rain or snow, including seepage flows, that do not
enter the soil but run off the surface of the land; also, that portion of water
that is not absorbed by the soil, but runs off the land surface.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin
by wind, water and/or gravity as a product of erosion.
SILVICULTURE — A forestry operation or timber production that is
approved by the State Department of Environmental Management.
SITE PLANS — Plans for commerce, industry, parking lots, pipelines,
utilities, roads, public facilities, land grading, quarrying, mining, landfills
and/or demolitions.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN — The approved
document which is required before any person may cause a disturbance
to the natural terrain within the town as regulated by this article. The
document may also be referred to as "SWPPP."[Amended 11-6-2006 by
Ord. No. 781]
WATERCOURSE — Any tidewater or coastal wetland at its mean high-water
level and any freshwater wetland at its seasonal high-water level, including
but not limited to any river, stream, brook, pond, lake, swamp, marsh, bog,
fen, wet meadow, or any other standing or flowing body of water. The edge
of the watercourse, as defined under the provisions of this chapter, shall be
used for delineation purposes.
§ 207-2. Findings.
A. The Town Council finds that excessive quantities of soil are eroding
from certain areas of the Town which are undergoing development for
certain nonagricultural uses, such as housing developments, industrial
areas, recreational facilities, commercial facilities, and roads.
B. Soil erosion occurring in areas undergoing nonagricultural
development makes costly repairs necessary to gullies, washed-out fills,
roads and embankments. The resulting sediment clogs storm sewers
and road ditches and deposits silt into ponds, rivers, streams and
brooks.
C. Silt resulting from erosion threatens the water supply, as well as the
recreational, aesthetic and wildlife habitat values associated with these
waters.
D. Other construction wastes, including construction debris and
chemicals, concrete truck washout, oil and grease, litter and sanitary
waste may cause adverse impacts to water quality when discharged
from a construction site. [Added 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 781]
§ 207-1 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 207-3
C:414
§ 207-3. Purpose. [Amended 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 781]
The purpose of this article is to control the discharge of construction waste
and to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation from occurring as a result
of nonagricultural development within the Town by requiring the use of
appropriate best management practices (BMPs) to reduce or eliminate the
pollutants in stormwater discharges during and after construction so as to
promote the safety, public health and general welfare of the citizens of the
Town.
§ 207-4. Authority.
§ 207-5. Applicability.
A. The Town Council shall grant the Building Official and/or his designee
the authority necessary to administer this chapter under the provisions
of R.I.G.L. § 45-46-1 et seq., Soil Erosion and Sediment Control.
B. Application for determination of applicability required. It shall be
unlawful for any person to disturb any existing vegetation, grades and
contours of land in a manner that may affect the quality of stormwater
discharges associated with the construction activity without first
applying for a determination of applicability from the Building Official
or his designee. [Amended 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 781]
A. Generally. This chapter shall be applicable to any situation involving
any disturbance to the terrain, topsoil or vegetative ground cover upon
any property within the Town after a determination of applicability by
the Building Official or his designee based upon criteria outlined in this
chapter.
B. Application for determination of applicability required. It shall be
unlawful for any person to disturb any existing vegetation, grades and
contours of land in a manner that may affect the quality of stormwater
discharges associated with the construction activity without first
applying for a determination of applicability from the Building Official
or his designee. [Amended 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 781]
C. Contents of application for determination of applicability. The
application for determination of applicability shall describe the
location, nature, character and time schedule of the proposed landdisturbing
activity in sufficient detail so as to allow the Building Official
or his designee to determine the potential for soil erosion and
sedimentation resulting from the proposed development project.
D. Criteria for determination of applicability.
(1) In determining the applicability of this chapter to a particular landdisturbing
activity, the Building Official or his designee shall
consider site topography, drainage patterns, soils, proximity to
watercourses, and other such information as deemed appropriate
by the Building Official or his designee.
§ 207-3 CHARTER § 207-5
C:415
(2) A particular land-disturbing activity shall not be subject to the
requirements of this chapter if the Building Official or his designee
finds that erosion resulting from the land-disturbing activity is
insignificant and represents no threat to adjacent properties or to
the quality of any coastal feature or watercourse.
(3) The most current version of the Rhode Island Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Handbook; the United States Department of
Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service; Rhode Island
Department of Environmental Management; and the Rhode Island
State Conservation Committee may be consulted in making this
determination.
E. Exemptions. No determination of applicability shall be required for the
following activities:
(1) Construction, alteration or use of any additions to existing singlefamily
or duplex homes or related structures, provided the grounds
coverage of such addition is less than 1,000 square feet; such
construction, alteration and use does not occur within 100 feet of
any watercourse or coastal feature; and the slopes at the site of
land disturbance do not exceed 10%.
(2) Use of a home garden in association with on-site residential use.
(3) Accepted agricultural management practices, such as seasonal
tilling and harvest activities associated with property utilized for
private and/or commercial agricultural or silvicultural purpose.
(4) Excavations for improvements other than those described in
Subsection E(1) of this section which exhibit all of the following
characteristics:
(a) Do not result in a total displacement of more than 50 cubic
yards of material.
(b) Have no slopes greater than 10%.
(c) Have all disturbed surface areas promptly and effectively
protected to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation.
(5) Grading, as a maintenance measure or for landscaping purposes on
existing developed land parcels or lots, provided that all bare
surface is immediately seeded, sodded or otherwise protected from
erosion actions and all of the following conditions are met:
(a) The aggregate areas of such activity do not exceed 2,000
square feet.
(b) The change of elevation does not exceed two feet at any point.
(c) The grading does not involve a quantity of fill greater than 18
cubic yards except where excavated from another portion of
§ 207-5 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 207-5
C:416
§ 207-6. Liability of applicant. [Amended 11-6-2006 by Ord. No.
781]
Neither approval of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) nor
compliance with any condition of this article shall relieve the applicant
from any responsibility for damage to persons or property, nor impose any
liability upon the Town for damages to persons or property.
§ 207-7. Surety.
the same parcel, and the quantity does not exceed 50 cubic
yards.
(6) Grading, filling, removal or excavation activities and operations
undertaken by the Town under the direction of the Director of
Public Works for work on streets, roads or rights-of-way dedicated
to public use; provided, however, that adequate and acceptable
erosion and sediment controls and controls for other construction
wastes are incorporated in engineering plans and specifications
and are followed and employed. Appropriate controls shall apply
during construction as well as after the completion of these
activities. All such work shall be undertaken in accordance with the
performance principles provided for in § 207-15 and such
standards and definitions as may be adopted to implement such
performance principles. [Amended 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 781]
F. Effect of determination of applicability on need for other permits.
Compliance with the requirements as described in this section shall not
be construed to relieve the applicant of any obligation to obtain
necessary state or federal permits.
G. Submission of stormwater pollution prevention plan. Upon
determination of applicability, the applicant shall submit a stormwater
pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) for approval by the Building Official
or his or her designee as provided in § 207-16. [Amended 11-6-2006
by Ord. No. 781]
A. Required.
(1) Before approving a SWPPP for any residential subdivision,
commercial or industrial site, the Building Official or his designee
shall require the applicant to file a performance surety in the form
of a letter of credit with the Town. Before approving a SWPPP for
any individual residential lot, a performance surety in the form of a
letter of credit with the Town may be required by the Building
Official or his designee based on the consideration of topography,
drainage patterns, soils and proximity to watercourses as
described in § 207-5D. [Amended 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 781]
(2) When any land-disturbing activity is to take place within 100 feet of
any watercourse or coastal feature or within an identified flood
§ 207-5 CHARTER § 207-7
C:417
hazard district or on slopes in excess of 10%, the filing of a
performance surety shall be required.
(3) The amount of the bond, as determined by the Director of the
Department of Public Works, shall be sufficient to cover the cost of
implementing all control measures shown on the approved plan.
[Amended 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 781]
(4) The performance surety filed by the applicant shall be subject to
the approval, with regards to the form, content, amount and
manner of execution of the Director of Public Works.
(5) A performance surety for an approved SWPPP for a subdivision
may be included within the performance bond for that subdivision.
The posting of the surety as part of the subdivision performance
bond does not, however, relieve the applicant of any requirements
of this article. [Amended 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 781]
B. Default.
(1) Should the Building Official or his designee find that a default has
occurred in the performance of any terms and/or conditions of the
bond or in the implementation of measures secured by the bond,
written notice thereof shall be made to the applicant and to the
surety of the bond by the Town Solicitor.
(2) The notice shall state the nature of the default, work to be done, the
estimated cost thereof, and the period of time deemed by the
Building Official or his designee to be necessary for the completion
of the work.
(3) Failure of the applicant to acknowledge and comply with the
provisions and deadlines outlined in such notice of default shall
mean that the Town Solicitor shall take appropriate measures to
utilize the performance bond to cause the required work to be
completed. Work may be completed by the Town by contract or by
other means, as determined by the Town Council. Such measures
may be taken without further notice of proceedings whatsoever.
C. Release.
(1) The performance surety requirements shall remain in full force and
effect for a minimum of 12 months following completion of the
project per the requirements of the Building Official or his
designee.
(2) The applicant may request the release of his performance surety
from the Building Official or his designee 12 months after the final
site inspection has been completed and approved.
(3) In the instance where the performance surety has been posted with
the recording of a final subdivision, the performance surety shall be
released a minimum of 12 months after the Building Official or his
§ 207-7 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 207-7
C:418
§ 207-8. Expiration and renewal of approvals.
§ 207-9. Maintenance of control devices and watercourses.
§ 207-10. Inspections.
designee has been notified by the Director of Public Works of
successful completion of all plat improvements by the applicant.
A. Expiration. Every approval granted pursuant to this chapter shall
expire at the end of the time period set forth in the conditions. The
developer shall fully perform and complete all of the work required
within the specified time period.
B. Renewal. If the developer is unable to complete the work within the
designated time period, he shall, a minimum of 30 days prior to the
expiration date, submit a written request for an extension of time to the
Building Official or his designee, setting forth the reasons underlying
the requested time extension. If the extension is found to be warranted,
the Building Official or his designee may grant an extension of time up
to a maximum of one year from the date of the original deadline.
Subsequent extensions under the same conditions may be granted at
the discretion of the Building Official or his designee.
A. Maintenance of all erosion sediment control devices and other controls
under this article shall be the responsibility of the property owner of
record. The erosion and sediment control measures and controls for
other wastes shall be maintained in good condition and working order
on a continuing basis. [Amended 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 781]
B. Watercourses originating and located completely on private property
shall be the responsibility of the owner to their point of open discharge
at the property line or at a communal watercourse within the property.
A. Periodic inspections.
(1) The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced
by the Building Official or his designee.
(2) All work shall be performed in accordance with an inspection and
construction control schedule approved by the Building Official or
his designee, who shall maintain a permanent file of all his
inspections.
(3) The Building Official or his designee shall perform an inspection of
the site following the installation of control measures prior to
ground work and construction.
B. Final inspection.
(1) Upon completion of the work, the developer shall notify the
Building Official or his designee that all grading, drainage, erosion
§ 207-7 CHARTER § 207-10
C:419
§ 207-11. Notification of violation of article.
§ 207-12. Revocation or suspension of approval; other penalties.
and sediment control measures and devices, vegetation and ground
cover plantings, and controls for other wastes have been completed
in conformity with the approval; all attached plans, specifications
and conditions; and other applicable provisions of this article.
[Amended 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 781]
(2) Upon notification of completion by the owner, the Building Official
or his designee shall make a final inspection of the site in question
and shall prepare a final summary inspection report of his findings,
which shall be retained in the office of the Building Official or his
designee.
A. If at any stage the work in progress and/or completed work does not
conform to the approved SWPPP, a written notice from the Building
Official or his designee to comply shall be transmitted by certified mail
to the applicant and the owner. [Amended 11-6-2006 by Ord. No.
781]
B. The notice of noncompliance shall set forth the nature of the temporary
and permanent corrections required and the time limit within which
corrections shall be completed as set forth in § 207-12.
C. Failure to comply with the required corrections within the specified
time limit shall be considered a violation of this chapter, in which case
the performance surety shall be subject to the notice of default in
accordance with § 207-7.
A. Revocation or suspension of approval. The approval of a SWPPP may be
revoked or suspended by the Building Official and all work on the
project halted by the Building Official for an indefinite time period after
written notification is transmitted by the Building Official to the
developer for one or more of the reasons noted in this section.
[Amended 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 781]
(1) Violation of any condition of the approved plan or specifications
pertaining thereto.
(2) Violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable
law, ordinance, article, rule or regulation related to the work or site
of work.
(3) The existence of any condition or the performance of any act
constituting or creating a nuisance, hazard or endangerment to
human life or the property of others or contrary to the spirit or
intent of this chapter.
B. Other penalties.
§ 207-10 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 207-12
C:420
§ 207-13. Preparation. [Amended 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 781]
The stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) shall be prepared by
a registered engineer, registered landscape architect, or erosion and
sediment control specialist certified by the Soil and Water Conservation
Society. Seven copies of the plan shall be submitted to the Building Official
or his designee. SWPPPs requiring the practice of engineering shall be
stamped and signed by a registered professional engineer.
§ 207-14. Contents.
(1) In addition thereto, whenever there is a failure to comply with the
provisions of this chapter, the Town shall have the right to notify
the applicant that he has five days from receipt of notice to
temporarily correct the violations and 30 days from receipt of
notice to permanently correct the violations.
(2) Should the applicant fail to take the temporary corrective measures
within the five-day period and/or the permanent corrective
measures within the thirty-day period, the Town shall then have the
right to take whatever actions it deems necessary to correct the
violations and to impose a lien on the subject property in an amount
equal to the costs of remedial actions.
(3) The lien shall be enforced in the manner provided or authorized by
law for the enforcement of common law liens on personal property.
The lien shall be recorded with the records of land evidence of the
Town, and the lien shall incur legal interest from the date of
recording. The imposition of any penalty shall not exempt the
offender from compliance with the provisions of this chapter, nor
shall it preclude any revocation of the performance bond on the
property by the Town.
A. The SWPPP shall include sufficient information about the proposed
activities and land parcels to form a clear basis for discussion and
review and to ensure compliance with all applicable requirements of
this article. [Amended 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 781]
B. The plan shall be consistent with the data collection, data analysis, and
plan preparation guidelines in the current Rhode Island Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control Handbook, prepared by the United States
Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service;
Rhode Island Department of Environment Management; and Rhode
Island State Conservation Committee, as may be amended.
C. Withholding or delay of this information in whole or in part may be
reason for the Building Official or his designee to judge the application
as deficient and shall serve as grounds for disapproval. See also
§ 207-19A.
§ 207-12 CHARTER § 207-14
C:421
D. If the application is deemed to be incomplete by the Building Official or
his designee, he shall send a letter of deficiency to the applicant within
seven days from the date of submission, citing those sections of the
application which are incomplete.
E. The required plan contents shall at a minimum contain the following:
[Amended 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 781]
(1) Narrative. The narrative should include the following: a description
of the proposed land-disturbing activity, estimates of the total area
of the site, estimates of the total area of the site expected to be
disturbed, and any proposed sequencing of the project; a
description of soil erosion and sediment control measures,
stormwater management measures, and measures to other wastes
to be installed; and a description of any potential sources of
pollution that may be expected to affect the quality of stormwater
discharges from the site.
(2) Supporting documentation. Supporting documentation, such as
complete maps including scale and depicting the drainage areas;
the existing site; the floodplain, if applicable; and the soils, shall be
provided as required by the Building Official or his designee.
(3) Construction drawings. Construction drawings illustrating in detail
existing and proposed contours, drainage features, limits of
vegetation, limits of clearing and grading, the location of soil
erosion and sediment control, stormwater management measures
and controls for other wastes; detail drawings of the controls and
measures; the location of stockpiles and borrow areas; the
sequence and staging of land-disturbing activities; and other such
information needed for construction as required by the Building
Official or his designee.
(4) Erosion and sediment controls. A description, including
construction details appropriate to the site, for both vegetative and
structural practices. Vegetative BMPs are designed to preserve
existing vegetation where attainable and revegetate open areas as
soon as practicable after grading or construction. Structural BMPs
divert flows from exposed soils, filter runoff, store flows or
otherwise limit runoff from coming into contact with exposed,
unvegetated areas of the site and to prevent sediments and/or
other pollutants from leaving the site.
(5) Post-construction stormwater management. A description of
measures that will be installed during the construction project to
control pollutants in stormwater discharges that will occur at the
site after the construction operations have been completed. These
measures shall be consistent with the requirements of the
Stormwater Management Ordinance. Maintenance activities for
these measures shall be described in accordance with Subsection
E(6) below.
§ 207-14 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 207-14
C:422
§ 207-15. Performance principles.
(6) Other controls.
(a) Waste disposal. A description of the other controls, including
construction details appropriate for the site, to eliminate the
discharge of other construction wastes found on the
construction site. All types of waste generated at the site shall
be disposed of in a manner consistent with state law and/or
regulations.
(b) Good housekeeping. Good housekeeping measures to provide
for the minimization of exposure of construction debris to
precipitation and for the proper disposal of such debris shall be
specified.
(c) Spill prevention. Areas where potential spills can occur shall
be identified. The potential for spills to enter the stormwater
drainage system shall be eliminated wherever feasible.
(7) Maintenance. A description of procedures to maintain, in good and
effective operating condition, vegetation, stormwater control
measures, and other protective measures identified in the site plan.
(8) Other information. Other information or construction plans and
details as deemed necessary by the Building Official or his designee
for thorough review of the plan prior to action being taken as
prescribed in this article.
A. The contents of the SWPPP shall clearly demonstrate how the principles
set forth in this article have been met in the design and how they are to
be accomplished by the proposed development. [Amended 11-6-2006
by Ord. No. 781]
B. All proposed work shall reflect the site's natural drainage
characteristics and topography.
C. The disturbance of existing slopes greater than 33% shall be avoided.
D. The grade of slopes proposed shall be minimized.
E. Post-development runoff rates shall not exceed predevelopment runoff
rates for a twenty-five-year frequency storm and shall be consistent
with other stormwater requirements which may be in effect. The
Director of Public Works shall have the right to require other frequency
storm (fifty-year, seventy-five-year and/or one-hundred-year) rates
controlled as deemed necessary by the Director of Public Works. Any
increase in storm runoff shall be retained and recharged close to its
place of origin by means of detention ponds or basins, seepage areas,
subsurface drains or similar techniques. [Amended 11-6-2006 by
Ord. No. 781]
§ 207-14 CHARTER § 207-15
C:423
F. Original boundaries, alignment and slope of watercourses within the
project locus shall be preserved to the greatest extent feasible and shall
at a minimum comply with the requirements and determination of the
Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management (R.I.G.L.
§ 42-17.1-1 et seq.).
G. Drainage shall be directed away from structures intended for human
occupancy or utility use or similar structures or structures for
municipal use which are not designed to handle increased runoff.
H. All drainage provisions shall be of such a design and capacity so as to
adequately handle stormwater runoff, including runoff from tributary
upstream areas which may be outside the locus of the project.
I. Drainage facilities shall be installed as early as feasible during
construction and prior to site clearance where possible to the
satisfaction of the Building Official or his designee.
J. Fill located adjacent to watercourses shall be suitably protected from
erosion by means of riprap, gabions, retaining walls, vegetative
stabilization, or similar measures.
K. Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect bare
areas and stockpiles from erosion during construction. The smallest
areas feasible, as approved by the Building Official or his designee,
shall be exposed at any one time. Disturbed areas shall be protected
during the nongrowing months of November through March.
L. Permanent vegetation shall be placed immediately following final
grading.
M. Trees and other existing vegetation shall be retained whenever feasible
as per the determination of the Building Official or his designee. The
area within the dripline shall be fenced or roped off to protect trees
from construction equipment and foot traffic.
N. All areas damaged during construction shall be resodded, reseeded or
otherwise restored.
O. Monitoring and maintenance schedules, where required by the Building
Official or his designee, shall be predetermined.
P. All controls installed or used to achieve compliance with this SWPPP
must be properly operated and maintained at all times. [Added
11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 781]
Q. Sediment controls, stormwater measures, and other controls shall
protect downstream water bodies from adverse water quality impacts
resulting from the construction activities. [Added 11-6-2006 by Ord.
No. 781]
§ 207-15 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 207-16
C:424
§ 207-16. Filing. [Amended 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 781]
To obtain approval for a land-disturbing activity, as found applicable by
the Building Official or his designee under § 207-5, an applicant shall first
file a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) that is signed and
stamped by the individual or agency responsible for the preparation of the
plan. The SWPPP, as described in § 207-14, shall describe and ensure the
implementation of best management practices (BMPs) to be employed by
the applicant to reduce or eliminate the pollutants in stormwater discharges
at the site.
§ 207-17. Approval under state Fresh Water Wetlands Act.
[Amended 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 781]
Where any portion of a proposed development requires approval under
the state Fresh Water Wetlands Act83 and where the approval contains
provisions for soil erosion and sediment controls, that approved plan shall
be a component of the overall SWPPP required by this article for the
development.
§ 207-18. Fees. [Amended 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 781]
The Town shall collect fees from each applicant requesting approval of a
stormwater pollution prevention plan for the purposes of administering this
article. The Town Council shall retain the right to review and amend this
schedule on a periodic basis. The nonrefundable filing fee shall be paid to
the Town according to the construction site runoff control fee schedule in
Chapter 93, Fees.
§ 207-19. Review.
A. Within seven working days of the receipt of a plan, the Building Official
or his designee shall review the plan for completeness. If the Building
Official or his designee finds that the plan is incomplete, he shall
forward a letter of deficiency within that period to the applicant, listing
the missing elements of the plan. If a deficiency exists, the review
period for that plan will not begin until all the deficiencies have been
addressed to the satisfaction of the Building Official or his designee.
B. If no deficiency is found, the Building Official or his designee shall send
a copy of the completed plan within five working days of the receipt of
the completed plan to the reviewing authorities, which shall include the
Planning Department, the Department of Public Works, and the
Conservation Commission, for the purpose of review and comment.
C. The Building Official or his designee may also submit copies of the plan
to other local departments or agencies, including the Southern Rhode
Island Conservation District, in order to better achieve the purposes of
this chapter.
83.Editor’s Note: See R.I.G.L. § 2-1-18 et seq.
§ 207-16 CHARTER § 207-19
C:425
§ 207-20. Decision of Building Official.
§ 207-21. Appeals.
D. Failure of the aforementioned reviewing authorities, with the exception
of the Building Official or his designee, to respond within 30 days of
their receipt of the plan shall be deemed no objection to the plan as
submitted unless the applicant agrees to an extension to be mutually
determined between the applicant and the reviewing authorities.
E. The time allowed for plan review shall be commensurate within the
proposed development project and shall be done simultaneously with
other reviews.
A. The Building Official or his designee shall take action in writing either
approving, approving with conditions, or disapproving the plan with
reasons stated within 10 days after the Building Official or his designee
has received all of the written opinions of the reviewing authorities
identified in § 207-19.
B. In approving a plan, the Building Official or his designee may attach
such conditions deemed necessary by the aforementioned reviewing
authorities in addition to any further conditions consistent with the
purpose of this chapter.
C. The conditions pertaining to construction site runoff control measures
and/or devices may include but are not limited to the erection of walls,
drains, dams and structures; the planting of suitable vegetation, trees
and shrubs; any necessary easements; good housekeeping and spill
prevention measures for construction waste; and the specification of
the methods for the performance and timing of various kinds of work.
[Amended 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 781]
D. Following receipt of a permit, the applicant/owner shall notify the
Building Official or his designee at least 72 hours in advance of his
intent to begin clearing and construction work on the site as described
within the approved stormwater pollution prevention plan. [Amended
11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 781]
E. The applicant shall have an approved copy of the stormwater pollution
prevention plan on site for the duration of the project and shall be made
available upon request. [Amended 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 781]
A. If the ruling made by the Building Official or his designee is
unsatisfactory to the applicant, the applicant may file a written appeal
to the Zoning Board of Review or other appropriate board of review, as
determined by the Town Council.
B. Appeal procedures shall follow current requirements of the Zoning
Board of Review or other appropriate board of review as determined by
the Town Council.
§ 207-19 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 207-21
C:426
C. During the period in which the request for appeal is filed and until such
time as a final decision is rendered on the appeal, the decision of the
Building Official or his designee shall remain in effect.
D. The Building Official or his designee and/or the Zoning Board of Review
or other appropriate board, as determined by the Town Council, may
seek technical assistance on any stormwater pollution prevention plan.
The expert opinion must be made available in the office of the Building
Official or his appointed designee as a public record to the appeals
hearing. [Amended 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 781]
§ 207-21 CHARTER § 207-21
C:427

ARTICLE II
Illicit Discharges
[Added 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 781]
§ 207-22. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALLOWABLE NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGES — Discharges not
comprised of stormwater, which are allowed under the MS4 general permit,
limited to the following, provided these are not significant contributors of
pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4): discharges
which result from the wash down of vehicles at retail dealers selling new
and used automobiles where no detergents are used and individual
residential car washing; external building wash down where no detergents
are used; the use of water to control dust; firefighting activities; fire hydrant
flushings; natural springs; uncontaminated groundwater; dechlorinated
pool discharges; air-conditioning condensate; lawn watering; potable water
sources, including waterline flushings; irrigation drainage; pavement
washwaters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous materials have
not occurred (unless all spilled materials have been removed) and where
detergents are not used; discharges from foundation or footing drains
where flows are not contaminated with process materials such as solvents,
or contaminated by contact with soils where spills or leaks of toxic or
hazardous materials have occurred; uncontaminated utility vault
dewatering; dechlorinated waterline testing water; hydrostatic test water
that does not contain any treatment chemicals and is not contaminated with
process chemicals.84
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants,
directly or indirectly, to stormwater, receiving waters or stormwater
conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT (CWA) — The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Activities subject to RIPDES construction
permits. As of March 2003, RIPDES Storm Water Phase II permits are
required for construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one
acre or more. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and
grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
84.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 207-22 CHARTER § 207-22
C:429
DISCHARGER — Any person who causes, allows, permits or is otherwise
responsible for a discharge, including, without limitation, any operator of a
construction site or industrial facility.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any material, including any substance, waste,
or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration or
physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Either of the following: any drain or conveyance,
whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to
enter the storm drain system, including but not limited to any conveyances
which allow any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system; and any
connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks,
regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed,
permitted or approved by the Town of East Greenwich or any drain or
conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the
storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps or
equivalent records and approved by the Town of East Greenwich.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Any discharge to a municipal separate storm sewer
that is not composed entirely of stormwater except discharges pursuant to
a RIPDES permit (other than the RIPDES permit for discharges from the
municipal separate storm sewer) and discharges resulting from firefighting
activities.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains):
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge that is not composed
entirely of stormwater.
Owned or operated by a city or town or the state district association,
or other public body (created by or pursuant to state law) having
jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial wastes, stormwater or
other wastes, including special districts under state law, such as a
sewer district, flood control district or drainage district, or similar
entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribal organization, or
a designated and approved management agency under Section 208 of
the CWA that discharges to waters of the state;
A.
B. Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
C. Which is not a combined sewer; and
Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as
defined in Rule 3 of the RIPDES Regulations.
D.
§ 207-22 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 207-22
C:430
OPERATOR — The party or parties that either individually or taken together
have the day-to-day operational control over the facility's activities and the
ability to make modifications to such activities.
OWNER — The party or parties that either individually or taken together
have legal title to any premises.
PERSON — Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner
or as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANTS — Anything which causes or contributes to pollution.
Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes and
solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid
wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded
or abandoned objects, ordnances and accumulations, so that same may
cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides and
fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and
pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and
residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious
or offensive matter of any kind.
STORMWATER — Any surface flow, runoff and drainage consisting entirely
of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
UNAUTHORIZED DISCHARGE — A discharge of stormwater not authorized
by a RIPDES permit or an allowable stormwater discharge found to be a
significant contributor of pollutants to the MS4.
WATERCOURSE — A natural or man-made surface drainage channel or
body of water (including a lake or pond) through which a water flow occurs,
either continuously or intermittently.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Surface and ground waters within the
boundaries of the State of Rhode Island and subject to its jurisdiction.
§ 207-23. Purpose; objectives.
A. Increased and contaminated stormwater runoff is a major cause of
impairment of water quality and flow in lakes, ponds, streams, rivers,
wetlands and groundwater; contamination of drinking water supplies;
alteration or destruction of aquatic and wildlife habitat; and flooding.
Regulation of illicit connections and discharges to the municipal storm
drain system is necessary for the protection of the Town of East
Greenwich's water bodies and groundwater and to safeguard the public
health, safety, welfare and the environment.
B. The objectives of this article are:
(1) To prevent (or reduce to the maximum extent practicable)
pollutants entering the municipally owned separate storm sewer
system;
§ 207-22 CHARTER § 207-23
C:431
§ 207-24. Statutory authority.
This article is promulgated pursuant to the Rhode Island Department of
Environmental Management's ("DEM") General Permit Rhode Island
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Storm Water Discharge from Small
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems and from Industrial Activity at
Eligible Facilities Operated by Regulated Small MS4s and in accordance
with the Administrative Procedures Act, R.I.G.L. § 42-35-1 et seq.
§ 207-25. Discharge prohibitions.
(2) To prohibit illicit connections and unauthorized discharges to the
MS4;
(3) To require the removal of all such illicit connections and
discharges;
(4) To comply with state law and federal statutes and regulations
relating to stormwater discharges; and
(5) To set forth the legal authority and procedures to carry out all
inspection, monitoring and enforcement activities necessary to
ensure compliance with this article.
A. Prohibition of unauthorized discharges. No person shall discharge or
cause to be discharged into the municipal separate storm sewer system
or watercourses any pollutant or nonstormwater discharge unless such
a nonstormwater discharge is outlined in Part I.B.3 of the MS4 general
permit. The allowable nonstormwater discharges (described below) are
permitted if deemed not to be a significant contributor of pollutants to
the municipal separate storm sewer system.
B. Allowable nonstormwater discharges:
(1) Discharges which result from the wash down of vehicles at retail
dealers selling new and used automobiles where no detergents are
used and individual residential car washing;
(2) External building wash down where no detergents are used;
(3) The use of water to control dust;
(4) Firefighting activities;
(5) Fire hydrant flushings;
(6) Natural springs;
(7) Uncontaminated groundwater; declorinated pool discharges;
(8) Air-conditioning condensate;
(9) Lawn watering; potable water sources including waterline
flushings;
§ 207-23 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 207-25
C:432
§ 207-26. Suspension of MS4 access.
(10) Irrigation drainage;
(11) Pavement washwaters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spilled materials have been
removed) and where detergents are not used;
(12) Discharges from foundation or footing drains where flows are not
contaminated with process materials such as solvents or
contaminated by contact with soils where spills or leaks of toxic or
hazardous materials have occurred;
(13) Uncontaminated utility vault dewatering; dechlorinated waterline
testing water; and
(14) Hydrostatic test water that does not contain any treatment
chemicals and is not contaminated with process chemicals.
C. Prohibition of illicit connections. The construction, use, maintenance or
continued existence of illicit connections to the municipal separate
storm sewer system is prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes,
without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of
whether the connection was permissible under law or practices
applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. A person is
considered to be in violation of this article if the person connects a line
conveying sewage to the MS4 or allows such a connection to continue
and must provide corrective action.
A. Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The
Building Official may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge
access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual
or threatened nonstormwater discharge which presents or may present
imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or
welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the state. If the violator
fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the
Building Official may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent
or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the state, or to minimize
danger to persons.
B. Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person
discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may have his or her
MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an
illicit discharge. The Building Official will notify a violator of the
proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the
Building Official for reconsideration and a hearing. A person commits
an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated
pursuant to this section without the prior approval of the Building
Official.
C. Entry to perform duties under this article. To the extent permitted by
state law, or if authorized by the owner or other party in control of the
§ 207-25 CHARTER § 207-26
C:433
§ 207-27. Industrial and construction activity discharge.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity RIPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the Building Official prior to the allowing of discharges to the
MS4.
§ 207-28. Inspections and monitoring.
The Building Official shall be permitted, upon the presentation of
credentials and other documents as may be required by law, to:
§ 207-29. Requirement to prevent, control and reduce stormwater
pollutants.
In an attempt to prevent, control and reduce stormwater pollutants, any
person engaged in activities or operations or owning facilities or property
which will or may result in pollutants entering stormwater, the storm sewer
system or waters of the state shall implement best management practices
to the extent they are technologically achievable to prevent and reduce
such pollutants. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial
establishment shall provide reasonable protection from accidental
discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm
drain system or watercourses. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or other wastes shall be provided and maintained at
the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 207-30. Watercourse protection.
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
property, the Building Official, his or her agents, officers and
employees, may enter upon privately owned property for the purpose of
performing their duties under this article and may make or cause to be
made such examinations, surveys or sampling as the Building Official
deems reasonably necessary.
A. Enter the discharger's premises where a regulated activity is conducted
or where records must be kept as required under the conditions of this
permit;
B. Have access to and copy, at reasonable times, any records that must be
kept as required under the conditions of the permit;
C. Inspect at reasonable times any equipment, practices or operations
regulated or required under this permit; and
D. Sample or monitor any substances or parameters at any location, at
reasonable times, for the purposes of assuring permit compliance or as
otherwise authorized by the CWA or Rhode Island law.
§ 207-26 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 207-30
C:434
the property reasonably free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and
other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate or significantly retard the
flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee
shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to
a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the
use, function or physical integrity of the watercourse. The owner or lessee
shall not remove healthy bank vegetation beyond that actually necessary for
maintenance, nor remove said vegetation in such a manner as to increase
the vulnerability of the watercourse to erosion. The property owner or
lessee shall be responsible for maintaining and stabilizing that portion
of the watercourse that is within his or her property lines in order to
protect against erosion and degradation of the watercourse originating or
contributed from his or her property. Nothing in this section shall preclude
any owner/lessee from compliance with relevant provisions of the Rhode
Island Fresh Water Wetlands Act, R.I.G.L. § 2-1-18 et seq., or other
applicable laws or regulations.
§ 207-31. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation, has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in
unauthorized discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the
storm drain system, or waters of the state from said facility, said person
shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment and
cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of a hazardous
material, said person shall immediately notify emergency response officials
of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services (911). In the event of
a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the Building
Official no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by
phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the
Building Official within three business days of the phone notice. If the
discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial
establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain
an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent
its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years.
Nothing in this section shall preclude any owner/lessee from compliance
with relevant provisions of the Rhode Island Clean Water Act, R.I.G.L.
§ 46-12-1 et seq., or other applicable laws or regulations.
§ 207-32. Notice of violation.
A. Whenever the Building Official finds that any person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the Building
Official may order compliance by written notice of violation to the
responsible person. Such notice may require, without limitation:
(1) The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;
§ 207-30 CHARTER § 207-32
C:435
§ 207-33. Appeal of notice of violation.
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of
the Building Official. The notice of appeal must be received within 30 days
from the date of the receipt of the notice of violation. The notice of appeal
shall be in writing and contain a detailed basis upon which the appeal
was taken. The procedure for said appeal shall be in conformity with the
Administrative Procedures Act, R.I.G.L. § 42-35-1 et seq.
§ 207-34. Settlement of appeal of notice of violation.
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties and remedies authorized by
this article, the Building Official may enter into a negotiated settlement to
resolve the appeal of the notice of violation. Such settlement may impose
upon a violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain
stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc.
§ 207-35. Enforcement measures after appeal.
If no timely appeal of a notice of violation has been taken and the violation
has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice
of violation or, in the event of an appeal, within 30 days of the decision of
the Building Official upholding the decision of the Building Official, then
representatives of the Town of East Greenwich shall undertake all necessary
actions, including requesting injunctive relief through the Superior Court,
to enter upon the subject private property and take any and all measures
necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property.
(2) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
(3) That violating discharges, practices or operations shall cease and
desist;
(4) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
and
(6) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
B. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further
advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the
established deadline, the work will be done by a designated
governmental agency or a contractor, and the expense thereof shall be
charged to the violator.
§ 207-32 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 207-36
C:436
§ 207-36. Administrative orders.
The Building Official is authorized to issue the following administrative
orders at any time he or she deems such action appropriate to secure timely
and effective compliance with this article or a discharge permit or order
issued pursuant to this article, whether or not any previous notifications of
violation have been provided to the user.
§ 207-37. Cost of abatement of violation.
Within 14 days after abatement of the violation, by or under the direction of
the Building Official, the owner of the property will be notified by the Town
of East Greenwich of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs.
If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the
Town of East Greenwich, the charges shall become a special assessment
against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the
amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of the provisions of this
section shall become liable to the Town of East Greenwich by reason of such
violation. The liability shall be paid in not more than 12 equal payments.
Interest at the rate of 12% per annum shall be assessed on the balance
beginning on the first day following discovery of the violation.
A. Cease and desist order. The authorized enforcement agency may issue
an order to cease and desist a violation or an action or inaction which
threatens a violation and to direct the user to comply forthwith or to
take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed
to properly address the violation or threatened violation, including
halting operations and terminating the discharge.
B. Compliance order. The Building Official may issue an order requiring a
user to provide within a specified period of time such treatment,
pretreatment or discharge control facilities or related appurtenances as
are necessary to correct a violation or to prevent a threatened violation.
A compliance order may also direct that a user provide improved
operation and maintenance of existing discharge facilities, conduct
additional self-monitoring or submit appropriate reports or
management plans.
C. Show cause order. The Building Official may issue an order to show
cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice
shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for a meeting,
the proposed enforcement action and the reasons for such action, and a
request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action
should not be taken. Whether or not a duly notified user appears as
noticed, additional enforcement action may be initiated.
D. Consent order. The Building Official may enter into consent orders,
assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents
establishing an agreement with a user. Such orders shall include
specific actions to be taken by the user and specific time frames to
correct a violation or to remove the threat of a violation.
§ 207-36 CHARTER § 207-38
C:437
§ 207-38. Injunctive relief.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this article, the Building Official may
petition for a temporary, preliminary or permanent injunction restraining
the person from activities which would create further violations or
compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
§ 207-39. Violations deemed public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this article is a threat to public health, safety and welfare, and is declared
and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the
violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel
the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
§ 207-40. Criminal prosecution; recovery of costs.
§ 207-41. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law, and it is within the
discretion of the Town of East Greenwich to seek cumulative remedies.
A. Any person that has violated or continues to violate this article shall be
liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law and shall
be subject to a criminal penalty of $250 per violation per day.
B. The Town of East Greenwich may recover all attorneys' fees, court costs
and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article,
including sampling and monitoring expenses.
§ 207-38 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 207-41
C:438
Chapter 212
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Fees — See Ch. 93, Art. I.
Junkyards — See Ch. 138.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Rhode Island Recycling Act — See R.I.G.L.
§ 23-18.8-1 et seq.
Beverage container recycling — See R.I.G.L.
§ 23-18.12-1 et seq.
Refuse disposal — See R.I.G.L. § 23-18.9-1 et
seq.
Hazardous Waste Management Act — See
R.I.G.L. § 23-19.1-1 et seq.
§ 207-41 CHARTER § 207-41
C:439

ARTICLE I
Dumping, Littering and Garbage Collection
[Adopted 6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 595 as Secs. 19-1 to 19-26 of the
1993 Code]
§ 212-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
DIRECTOR — The Director of Public Works of the Town.
GARBAGE — Decomposable organic matter with a high water content that
would act as a breeding place or provide sustenance for flies, mosquitoes,
insects, rodents, rats, vermin or other vectors.
LARGE NONCOMBUSTIBLE WASTE — Includes such items as discarded
automobiles, refrigerators, tanks, washing machines, dryers, large
appliances, etc.
MUNICIPAL WASTE DISPOSAL AREA — Any parcel of land owned or leased
and operated by the Town as a designated waste disposal site.
NONRESIDENT — Any person not a resident and shall include any person
conducting business in the Town and not owning land or having a vehicle
currently registered in the Town.
RESIDENT — Any person owning land in the Town or any person residing
in the Town and having a vehicle currently registered at his same address
within the Town.
SLUDGE — Any matter obtained from a cesspool, septic tank, seepage pit,
or any other sewage disposal unit.
WASTE — Includes refuse, rubbish, trash, weeds, grass, leaves,
noncombustible waste, combustible waste, demolition materials, forestry
products, commercial refuse, industrial refuse, sludge and garbage.
§ 212-2. Dumping prohibited; exception.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit, or to cause or permit
to be thrown or deposited, any garbage, discarded receptacles capable of
holding water, or any combustible material which might serve to increase
the danger of fire upon any vacant land in the Town, unless such land
shall have previously been designated by the Town Council as a proper and
suitable place for such use.
§ 212-3. Dumping on private property without consent prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any waste material
or debris upon the land of another without the consent of the owner of such
land.
§ 212-1 CHARTER § 212-4
C:441
§ 212-4. Dumping on highways prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any waste material
or debris upon any public highway or platted street.
§ 212-5. Dumping in sewers and catch basins prohibited.
No person shall place or deposit in any street opening to any sewer or in
any catch basin any animal or vegetable matter, solid or liquid, or any filthy
substance.
§ 212-6. Approval required to dump certain items in Town disposal
area.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit in a municipal
disposal area any swill, house offal, cesspool waste, sewage waste or
combustible materials, except dead leaves, grass, weeds, branches or limbs
of trees, without first obtaining special permission from the Town Council.
§ 212-7. Removal of appliance doors required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit in a municipal
disposal area or in any other dump authorized by the Town Council any
icebox, refrigerator unit or other cabinet without first removing the doors
therefrom.
§ 212-8. Use and location of garbage receptacles.
The owner or occupant of any premises where swill or garbage accumulates
shall provide a covered metal watertight receptacle on such premises for
such swill or garbage, and shall deposit, or cause to be deposited, all such
swill or garbage in the receptacle. The owner or occupant shall not locate
such receptacle in any place which is not satisfactory to the Health Officer
or State Department of Health.
§ 212-9. Deposit of garbage in prescribed receptacle required.
No person shall deposit any swill or garbage in any other place than such a
garbage receptacle as prescribed in this article.
§ 212-10. Container requirements.
All refuse material must be contained in individual rigid containers with
covers, each of a capacity not exceeding 30 gallons except as otherwise
specifically allowed. Oil drums, paper bags, cardboard boxes, and baskets
are not satisfactory containers.
§ 212-4 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 212-11
C:442
§ 212-11. Certain articles in garbage containers prohibited.
No person shall deposit any bottles, broken glass or crockery, house
sweepings, or any other refuse, other than swill or garbage, in any garbage
receptacle.
§ 212-12. Refuse not acceptable for municipal collection.
Refuse consisting of toxic chemicals, dead animals, demolition debris,
excrement, surgical medical wastes, furniture, large appliances, bulky
mechanical equipment, explosives, building materials, and other similar
special wastes are not acceptable for municipal collection. Such items shall
be disposed of by separate arrangement and at the sole expense of the
owner.
§ 212-13. Garbage-hauling vehicle requirements.
All swill and house offal shall be removed in or from the Town in watertight
covered vehicles or containers which shall be kept tightly closed when they
are driven through the streets of the Town.
§ 212-14. Preparation of garbage and refuse for collection.
All garbage must be drained and wrapped securely in heavy newspaper or
placed in a suitable bag for storage in the refuse container. Items of trash
that are not readily contained in a refuse container, such as hedge clippings,
tree limbs, and similar trash, shall be securely tied in bundles, but the
length shall not exceed three feet, and the diameter of such bundles shall
not exceed two feet, nor shall the weight of such bundles exceed 75 pounds.
Old books, magazines and newspapers may be placed separately if securely
tied in bundles not larger than 20 inches by 20 inches by 26 inches. Ashes,
cinders and similar debris may be placed in open containers, provided that
they can be adequately handled and do not weigh over 75 pounds.
§ 212-15. Approval of garbage-hauling vehicles.
No vehicles shall be used for the removal of swill or offal in or from the
Town unless first examined and approved by the Health Officer or State
Department of Health, and the vehicles shall have upon them such marks as
required by the Health Officer or State Department of Health.
§ 212-16. Collection schedule; placement at curbline.
A. The Department of Public Works of the Town shall collect garbage,
rubbish, tin cans and combustible materials once a week. The garbage,
rubbish and tin cans shall be placed at the curbline or adjacent to the
public highways in suitable containers.
B. The Department of Public Works shall collect garbage, rubbish, tin cans
and combustible materials once a week when such material is placed at
the curbline or adjacent to the roadway of a condominium development,
§ 212-11 CHARTER § 212-16
C:443
§ 212-17. Dangerous or offensive matter in rubbish containers
prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place in trash cans or other containers
meant for trash, being handled by the Department of Public Works of the
Town, any fluids, acids, swill, offal or other materials that are liable to do
injury to persons or property.
§ 212-18. Covering of matter deposited in private dumping grounds.
Whenever land, other than a municipal disposal area, is used as a dumping
ground by permission of the Town Council, the owner of such ground or
the agent of such owner shall cause all offensive or decaying matter to be
completely covered with earth or clean ashes immediately upon the deposit
of such matter.
§ 212-19. Refuse from outside Town prohibited in municipal
disposal area.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit in a municipal
disposal area anything which is collected from outside the Town.
§ 212-20. Scavenging at disposal area without permission
prohibited.
No person shall remove anything from a municipal disposal area except by
permission of the Town Council.
§ 212-21. Scavenging of rubbish left for collection prohibited.
No person other than the owner thereof or a duly authorized agent of the
Town shall examine, disturb, interfere with or remove any of the contents
of any can, box or receptacle containing rubbish and placed by such owner
upon the sidewalks or highways of this Town for collection and removal by
the Department of Public Works of the Town.
§ 212-22. Discharging wastewater into drainage facilities.
No owner or occupant of any premises within or abutting the Town shall
cause or permit the direct discharge of polluted water or wastewater from
any sink, water closet, washing machine, shower, wash tub, cesspool, septic
tank, stable, washbasin, floor drain, or other facility discharging polluted
wastewater into any storm sewer, drainage ditch (natural or man-made),
street gutter, surface drain, natural brook, catch basin, manhole or any
other stormwater drainage facility.
if such condominium development was approved by the Town prior to
the enactment of Article VIII, Planned Development and Mixed Use
Planned Development Overlay, of Chapter 260, Zoning, of this Code.
§ 212-16 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 212-23
C:444
§ 212-23. Wastepaper littering.
No person shall carry or convey through or in any street wastepaper not so
covered or protected to prevent the escape of such paper into any street,
and no person while loading or unloading a vehicle shall scatter or permit
any wastepaper to be scattered in any street or highway or where such
wastepaper shall be blown into any street or highway.
§ 212-24. Placing sharp objects in streets prohibited.
Every person who shall put, or cause to be put, into any part of any street,
road, alley, highway or way used by the public as a highway within the
compact part of the Town, any oyster shells or other shells of shellfish, any
broken glass, broken crockery, tin scraps or other broken metal, or other
sharp substances shall be guilty of an offense.
§ 212-25. Placing rubbish in streets prohibited.
Each person who shall put, or cause to be put, into any part of any street,
road, highway, or way used by the public as a highway in this Town, any
ashes, offal, or rubbish of any kind, except under the direction of the
Director of Public Works, shall be guilty of an offense.
§ 212-26. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-14-2016 by Ord. No.
849]
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, of the Code of the Town of East Greenwich.
§ 212-23 CHARTER § 212-26
C:445

ARTICLE II
Municipal Waste Disposal Area
[Adopted 6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 595 as Secs. 19-56 to 19-68 of the
1993 Code]
§ 212-27. Scope.
This article shall regulate and control the use of a municipal waste disposal
area for purposes of promoting the public health, welfare, safety and benefit
of the inhabitants of the Town.
§ 212-28. Dumping permit required.
It shall be unlawful to deposit any waste at a municipal waste disposal area
without a dumping permit issued in accordance with this article.
§ 212-29. Special permits required for certain materials.
It shall be unlawful to deposit any garbage, sludge or large noncombustible
waste at a municipal waste disposal areas without a special permit issued
in accordance with this article. Special permits shall be issued by the Town
Council upon application and consultation with the Director.
§ 212-30. Duties and authority of Director.
§ 212-31. Permit fees.
Fees to be charged for all dumping permits issued pursuant to this article
shall be as follows:
A. The Director shall accept applications and issue dumping permits to all
residents seeking the use of any municipal waste disposal area.
B. Nonresidents seeking permits shall clearly establish that waste
originates within the Town. The Director may deny the issuance of a
nonresident permit application if he feels the applicant has not clearly
established proof that waste shall originate within the Town.
C. The Director shall file, at least annually, a detailed report with the Town
Council concerning all permits issued, fees collected and disposal area
conditions.
D. The Director may, with approval of the Town Council, rescind any
permit previously issued if the provisions of this article are being
violated by the permittee.
A. Automobiles or utility trailers: no fee.
B. Any vehicle with commercial motor vehicle registration plates or
camper registration plates, and with up to three-fourths-ton carrying
capacity, without integrated compaction equipment, shall be allowed to
dump 12 loads of waste per calendar year at no fee. Any waste
§ 212-27 CHARTER § 212-31
C:447
§ 212-32. Building demolition materials and brush.
§ 212-33. Rules for use of disposal area.
The Town Council shall from time to time establish and post rules
concerning the time and procedure for depositing of waste at any municipal
waste disposal area.
§ 212-34. Dumping waste originating outside Town prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any waste originating outside
the Town at a municipal waste disposal area.
§ 212-35. After-hours dumping prohibited; exception.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any waste at a municipal
waste disposal area at times other than the hours posted, unless deposits
are made in authorized containers posted for off-hours use.
§ 212-36. Burning and salvaging prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ignite or salvage any waste at a
municipal waste disposal area.
§ 212-37. Possession of firearms.
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess firearms at a municipal
disposal area unless authorized by the Police Chief.
§ 212-38. Violation of rules of Town Council.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit waste at a municipal waste
disposal area in a manner not in accordance with rules established and
posted by the Town Council.
§ 212-39. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to enforce the provisions of this
article.
deposited beyond 12 loads per year shall be charged in accordance with
the fee schedule in Chapter 93, Fees.
C. Special permits: fee established by the Town Council according to use.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any building demolition
materials from a truck with a carrying capacity greater than 1/2 ton at
the waste disposal area.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit brush from a truck with a
carrying capacity greater than 1/2 ton at the waste disposal area,
unless such brush is reduced in size by a mechanical chipper.
§ 212-31 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 212-40
C:448
§ 212-40. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-14-2016 by Ord. No.
849]
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, of the Code of the Town of East Greenwich.
§ 212-40 CHARTER § 212-40
C:449

ARTICLE III
Solid Waste Disposal and Recycling
[Adopted 6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 595 as Secs. 19-86 to 19-106 of the
1993 Code]
§ 212-41. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
BULK ITEM — An item of solid waste larger than two feet by two feet by
two feet or heavier than 75 pounds. Doors and enclosures related to such
items must be removed.
DIRECTOR — The Director of Public Works of the Town.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any waste defined in the Rhode Island Hazardous
Waste Management Act, R.I.G.L. § 23-19.1-4, or in regulations adopted
pursuant thereto, and as they may be amended.
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE — Hazardous municipal waste
generated by residents of the Town.
MIXED RECYCLABLES — Recyclable materials which are required to be
removed from the municipal solid waste at the source and placed in or on
top of set-out approved containers for transport to the nearest materials
recovery facility (MRF) for recycling.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE — Solid waste generated by the residents of
a municipality in the course of their daily living, the disposal of which
the governing body of the municipality has undertaken in the discharge of
its duties to protect the health of the municipality. Municipal solid waste
does not include solid waste generated by residents of a municipality in
the course of their employment or that generated by any manufacturing or
commercial enterprise.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials separated from municipal solid
waste for reuse as specified by the State Director of the Department of
Environmental Management and including but not limited to plastic milk
and beverage containers, newspapers, glass and metal and such other
materials as may be listed by the Director of Public Works of the Town and
the Town Recycling Coordinator and added to this article by amendment
passed by the Town Council from time to time.
RESIDENT — Any person whose principal place of residence is within the
corporate limits of the Town. This shall include all persons, corporations,
business entities, churches, nonprofit institutions and any person or entity
not specifically exempted from this article.
SLUDGE — Any matter obtained from a cesspool or septic tank.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse and other discarded solid materials
generated by residential, institutional, commercial, industrial and
agricultural sources but not including solids or dissolved material in
§ 212-41 CHARTER § 212-41
C:451
domestic sewage or sludge, nor hazardous waste as defined in the
Hazardous Waste Management Act.
SOURCE SEPARATION — The removal by the generator of recyclable
materials including mixed recyclables from all other solid waste generated
by the household, and conveyance of the recyclables to the curbside or
other location designated by the municipality or its agents.
TRANSFER STATION — A facility or facilities operated by or for the
municipality whose purpose is the temporary storage and accumulation
by permit only of the municipal solid waste generated by residents at
their residences prior to its transport and disposal at a state landfill or
resource recovery facility and for the temporary storage and accumulation
of commercial waste generated by commercial enterprises from within the
municipality to which the Town has granted a storage permit for use of the
transfer station. Such permits shall be limited to commercial enterprises
within the Town and shall require that commercial waste be separated into
the categories required by the Town limited to one-half-ton vehicle and for
which the Town shall charge a fee, to be established from time to time,
for each load to be deposited in the transfer station. All residential and
commercial waste must be separated into recyclable and nonrecyclable
material.
WHITE GOODS — Major kitchen or laundry appliances, including but not
limited to stoves, washers, refrigerators and dryers. Nothing in this
definition shall waive compliance with the rules and regulations for
generation, transportation, storage and disposal of hazardous waste.
§ 212-42. Implementation.
There is hereby established a program for the mandatory separation of
certain recyclable materials from municipal solid waste by the residents
of the Town and the collection of segregated solid waste at the Town's
curbside or at other specified locations. The collection of separate
recyclables shall be made periodically under the supervision of the Director
of Public Works and the Recycling Coordinator.
§ 212-43. Duties of Director of Public Works.
The Director of Public Works, at the direction of the Town Manager of
the Town, shall have the responsibility and shall oversee implementation
of this article. The Director shall be responsible for providing support for
the Recycling Coordinator to adequately perform his duties under state and
local law.
§ 212-44. Recycling Coordinator.
The Town Manager shall appoint an individual, either part- or full-time,
to provide recycling education for residents and schoolchildren and to
coordinate the recycling program with the Department of Public Works,
private trash haulers and recycling centers in a manner consistent with
state and federal regulations. One of the prime duties of the Recycling
§ 212-41 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 212-44
C:452
Coordinator shall be to encourage public education regarding recycling
through the media and through the schools.
§ 212-45. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to enforce the provisions of this
article.
§ 212-46. Curbside collection of mixed recyclables.
§ 212-47. Collection schedule for recyclables not picked up weekly.
The Department of Public Works shall set up and prominently publish its
schedule for the collection of other recyclable materials that are not picked
up under weekly curbside collection.
§ 212-48. Bulk items.
Bulk items shall be collected by the Department of Public Works at least
once a year. The collection shall be prominently advertised.
A. The Department of Public Works of the Town shall collect mixed
recyclables once a week from all dwellings consisting of four or less
dwelling units. Materials shall be placed at the curbside, or other
locations as approved by the Department of Public Works, in approved
containers. The Department of Public Works shall prominently publish
the initial schedule of such collection and shall publish a new schedule
or procedural guidelines thereafter whenever there is a change in
either materials to be collected, collection procedures or schedules.
Mixed recyclables, which shall be placed in the containers provided,
shall consist of the following:
(1) Food and beverage containers made of glass.
(2) Aluminum products.
(3) Tin cans.
(4) Plastic soda bottles and milk jugs.
B. In addition to the following mixed recyclables, which shall be placed in
the containers, newspapers shall be placed in close proximity to the
containers in stacks 12 inches high or less and tied or placed in brown
paper grocery bags.
C. The mixed recyclables shall be pretreated prior to placing in the
containers in the following manner: Glass, food and beverage
containers shall be rinsed and lids removed. No broken glass shall be
placed in the containers. Aluminum and tin cans shall be rinsed and
paper labels removed. Aluminum furniture shall have webbing removed
and glass shall be removed from aluminum windows. Plastic containers
shall be rinsed and caps removed.
§ 212-44 CHARTER § 212-49
C:453
§ 212-49. Containers.
All nonrecyclable materials must be contained in individual plastic or metal
containers with covers, each of a capacity not exceeding 35 gallons and 75
pounds, when loaded, or otherwise shall be appropriately bundled, all of
which shall be deposited at the curbside.
§ 212-50. Containers for recyclable materials.
Recyclable materials shall be deposited at the curb in special approved
recycling containers provided by the Town to the residents. These
containers shall initially be provided free of charge and thereafter for a fee
specified by the Director of Public Works. If there is an overflow, recyclables
shall be placed in approved containers stacked close to the special recycling
container, clearly indicating its similar nature and to facilitate separate
collection from nonrecyclable materials. Materials shall be prepared for
recycling according to directions.
§ 212-51. Multifamily housing units.
The Town will service any multifamily housing unit complex of four
residential units or less, unless the Town has otherwise specifically agreed
to service a specific multifamily housing unit complex of more than four
units.
§ 212-52. Licensed public events and festivals.
The Town shall require the separation of recyclables as a condition of
licensing or authorizing public events at which significant solid waste will
be generated for which the Town accepts responsibility for disposal. With
the license, the Town shall require sufficient collection bags or boxes for
expected recyclables and/or shall provide specially marked containers to be
used for the recyclables at certain municipal facilities where such events
normally occur.
§ 212-53. Household hazardous waste.
The Director, in cooperation with the Department of Environmental
Management and with other state and federal regulatory authorities, will
implement a plan to encourage and effectuate the periodic collection of
hazardous substances, recyclable or not, and prominently publish
information on the procedures for safe and ecologically sound disposal
of these substances. Certain substances such as toxic chemicals, dead
animals, demolition debris, excrement, surgical medical waste, explosives
and other similar dangerous wastes that are liable to do injury to persons or
property are not acceptable for municipal collection, and such items shall
be disposed of in accordance with the terms of R.I.G.L. § 23-19.1-1 et seq.
§ 212-49 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 212-54
C:454
§ 212-54. Separation and collection of recyclables.
All residents shall separate recyclables from the nonrecyclable portion of
their solid waste and prepare them for recycling according to directions
published by the Town. The Town's trash haulers shall pick up the two
different portions so that the recyclable materials are taken to proper drop
sites for sale, processing or composting according to the requirements
of specific materials and so that nonrecyclable materials are disposed of
properly.
§ 212-55. Collection by private parties and nonprofit groups.
Residents may separate recyclables and place the same in containers at the
street line for collection by private nonprofit organizations that have been
duly licensed and whose collections are reported in a manner specified by
the Director to be in compliance with DEM reporting requirements.
§ 212-56. Penalties for noncompliance.
Violation of this article shall be punished by the following means:
§ 212-57. Solid waste and recyclables not to become a hazard.
No person having custody or control of residential, industrial or business
premises from which garbage, rubbish or other refuse, including
recyclables, is collected for disposal by the Town shall permit or cause any
solid waste including recyclables within his control to become a hazard to
public travel, health or safety, or to become a nuisance of any sort.
§ 212-58. Collection.
No person engaged in the business of separation, recovery, collection,
removal, storage or disposition of garbage, rubbish or other refuse within
the Town shall pick up or procure any recyclable materials as defined in
this article or a valid regulation, except as specifically authorized by the
Director. The restriction shall include any independent citizen, resident,
taxpayer or person who might engage in such practice for personal gain.
A. First offense: a verbal notification from the Department of Public Works
to the resident recorded.
B. Second offense: a written warning that subsequent violations can result
in fines from the Department of Public Works.
C. Third offense: a written warning that a subsequent violation will result
in fines from the Department of Public Works.
D. Fourth offense: any person who violates any of the provisions of this
article after an oral and two written warnings shall be subject to a fine
of not more than $100.
§ 212-54 CHARTER § 212-59
C:455
§ 212-59. Collection of recyclables by charitable organizations;
reporting requirements.
The Director may issue collection permits to private parties or charitable
organizations to collect recyclable materials on the condition that a report
is filed by the party or organization detailing the amount of materials
collected, so that the Director may comply with the reporting requirements,
and provided that the Director determines that such collection does not
defeat the purpose or cost-effectiveness of the Town's recycling program
nor conflict with the Town's local implementation program.
§ 212-60. Recycling contracts.
The Director is empowered and directed to supervise, facilitate and contract
with either the state recycling facilities as mandated by the General Laws or
with commercial firms for the receipt and processing of recyclable materials
in a manner consistent with the Town's local implementation program that
yields the best rate of recycling and the most cost-effective result to the
Town.
§ 212-61. Regulations.
The Director of Public Works is hereby authorized and directed to prepare
and publish, subject to Council approval, regulations governing use of the
Town transfer station, including eligibility for use and the types of waste
which will be accepted at that facility and what recycling facilities will be
made available to residents of the Town.
§ 212-59 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 212-61
C:456
ARTICLE IV
Leaf and Yard Waste Collection Regulations
[Adopted 10-28-1991 by Ord. No. 571 (Secs. 19-121 to 19-128 of the
1993 Code)]
§ 212-62. Authority.
The Town Council shall grant the authority necessary to administer this
article pursuant to the provisions of the Rhode Island General Laws
§ 23-18.9-1.
§ 212-63. Purpose and intent.
§ 212-64. Definitions.
Words and phrases used in this article shall have their plain and ordinary
meaning unless otherwise defined.
BACKYARD COMPOSTING — The composting of leaf and yard waste
materials on the property of a resident in a bin or pile constructed for this
purpose or, in the case of grass clippings, by leaving the material on the
lawn after mowing.
BIOSHEET — A cellulose net sheeting, 100% biodegradable, used to contain
yard waste for the purpose of curbside collection, with a filled capacity not
to exceed the greater of 50 pounds in weight or 20 cubic feet in size.
COMPOST — The humus-like material generated as the final product of the
composting process.
COMPOSTING — Refers to the process of accelerated biodegradation and
stabilization of organic material under controlled conditions.
DROPOFF LOCATION — The area designated for the disposal of leaf and
yard waste by residents.
LEAF AND YARD WASTE COLLECTION SEASON — The autumn leaf season
beginning the first full week in November and ending the second full week
in December.
A. The purpose of this article is to mandate the source separation and
collection of leaf and yard waste for the purpose of composting in
accordance with the Town's commitment to resource recovery.
B. This article shall regulate the preparation of yard waste in a manner
consistent with the compost process.
C. This article shall restrict the type of yard waste material collected for
composting in order to encourage process efficiency.
D. It is the intent of this article to encourage backyard composting of
leaves and yard waste in a bin or pile, and the self-composting of grass
clippings by leaving them on the lawn after mowing.
§ 212-62 CHARTER § 212-64
C:457
LEAVES — Seasonal depositions by deciduous and coniferous trees and
shrubs.
MUNICIPAL COMPOST PROGRAM — Refers to the composting program
specifying mandatory separation of certain leaf and yard waste materials
from household waste by the residents of the Town and the curbside
collection or voluntary dropoff of this separated leaf and yard waste
material.
PAPER LEAF BAG — A paper sack of 30 gallons in capacity, with standard
dimensions of 16 inches by 12 inches by 35 inches, as per the specifications
set by the Town.
RESIDENT — Any person whose principal place of residence is within the
corporate limits of the Town who generates solid waste at his or her place
of residence.
YARD WASTE — Grass clippings, weeds, hedge clippings, and garden waste.
§ 212-65. Applicability.
This article shall be applicable to the municipal collection of leaf and
yard waste material during the designated leaf collection season from any
residence within the Town that qualifies for curbside solid waste collection
and the dropoff of the same material by residents at the designated location.
§ 212-66. Placement for collection during season; off-season
procedure.
§ 212-67. Collection and disposal receptacle.
§ 212-68. Collection schedule.
Municipal leaf and yard waste collection shall run for four weeks beginning
with the first week in November. Each residence shall be scheduled two
A. During the designated leaf collection season, residents shall separate
the leaf and yard waste materials and place at curbside for collection on
days advertised in the local newspapers.
B. During the period off season, when curbside collection is not offered,
residents shall dispose of separated material at the designated dropoff
location or in a backyard compost pile.
A. Acceptable leaf and yard waste receptacles shall include paper leaf
bags and biosheets, as defined by this article.
B. Plastic bags are prohibited. Leaf and yard waste contained in plastic
bags shall be refused by the hauler.
C. Residents utilizing the designated dropoff location shall dispose of
leaves and yard waste in paper leaf bags or de-bag the materials on
site.
§ 212-64 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 212-68
C:458
collection days during this period. The Town shall advertise specific dates
in the local newspaper.
§ 212-69. Noncompliance.
When a resident fails to comply with the requirements of this article,
collection shall be refused. Materials shall be removed from the curbside
and prepared in compliance with this article for the following scheduled
collection day.
§ 212-70. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-14-2016 by Ord. No.
849]
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, of the Code of the Town of East Greenwich.
§ 212-68 CHARTER § 212-70
C:459

ARTICLE V
Commercial Refuse Containers
[Adopted 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. 682 (Sec. 10-4 of the 1993 Code)]
§ 212-71. Covered container required.
The owner or operator of any commercial establishment which receives
a license or permit from the Town Council and where swill, garbage or
refuse accumulates shall provide at such establishment a covered container,
which does not leak, for the deposit of all swill, garbage and refuse. The
container shall have a cover, which shall be fully closed at all times except
when refuse is deposited or removed. No excess refuse may protrude from
said container. If deemed necessary and feasible by the Building Official,
all containers shall be placed on either a concrete or asphalt pad with an
adequate water supply and drainage available for washing the container
and the pad.
§ 212-72. Fencing of containers holding perishable food.
Unless the Building Official determines that it is not feasible, any container
which is visible from the street and which holds perishable food waste shall
be located within an opaque fenced area, which fence must be at least one
foot higher than the highest point of the container on three sides. The fourth
side shall have a properly hinged access door, which shall be kept closed
at all times except for the depositing or removal of refuse. All containers
holding perishable food waste shall be located more than 30 feet from the
nearest residence unless the Building Official determines it is not feasible
to do so.
§ 212-73. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-14-2016 by Ord. No.
849]
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, of the Code of the Town of East Greenwich.
§ 212-71 CHARTER § 212-73
C:461

ARTICLE VI
Reusable Carryout Bags
[Adopted 10-15-2019 by Ord. No. 888]
§ 212-74. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to improve the environment in East Greenwich
and the health, safety, and welfare of its residents by reducing the number
of plastic and paper bags being used and by encouraging the use of reusable
carryout bags and banning the use of plastic bags for retail checkout of
goods. Retail establishments are encouraged to make reusable carryout
bags available for sale.
§ 212-75. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CARRYOUT BAG — A bag used by a customer at the point of sale for
the purpose of removing products purchased from retail establishments.
Carryout bag does not include plastic barrier bags, double-opening plastic
bags, or plastic bags measuring larger than 28 inches by 36 inches.
DOUBLE-OPENING PLASTIC BAG — Any thin plastic bag with a double
opening (top and bottom) to protect clothing or other items for transport.
PAPER BAG — A paper bag that is fully recyclable overall and contains
a minimum of 40% post-consumer recycled content and contains no oldgrowth
fiber.
PLASTIC BAG — A bag where any portion of the bag is made of plastic,
including those called "biodegradable, "compostable" or "oxobiodegradable."
PLASTIC BARRIER BAG — Any thin plastic bag with a single opening used
to:
RECYCLABLE PLASTIC — Plastic that meets the current Rhode Island
Resource Recovery Corporation's standards.
RETAIL SALES ESTABLISHMENT — Any enterprise whereby the sale or
transfer to a customer of goods in exchange for payment occurs in retail
stores, farmers' markets, flea markets, and restaurants. This does not
Transport fruit, vegetables, nuts, grains, small hardware items, or other
items selected by customers to the point of sale;
A.
Contain or wrap fresh or frozen foods, meat, or fish whether
prepackaged or not;
B.
Contain or wrap flowers, potted plants, or other items where damage
to a good or contamination of other goods placed together in the same
bag may be a problem; or
C.
D. Contain unwrapped prepared foods or bakery goods.
§ 212-74 CHARTER § 212-75
C:463
include sales of goods at yard sales, tag sales, other sales by residents at
their homes, and sales by nonprofit organizations.
REUSABLE CARRYOUT BAG — A bag, with handles which are stitched and
not heat-fused, that is specifically designed and manufactured for multiple
reuse. The bag must be made of washable cloth, other durable woven or
nonwoven fabric, or durable plastic film that is recyclable plastic with a
minimum thickness of four mils.
§ 212-76. Regulations.
§ 212-77. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. Other than reusable carryout bags as provided in this article, no retail
sales establishment shall make available any plastic carryout bags
(either complimentary or for a fee).
B. All retail establishments that provide plastic produce, product, or
double-opening bags must offer a recycling opportunity on-site and
must recycle any plastic collected in accordance with current laws.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude persons engaged in retail sales
from making reusable carryout bags or paper bags available for sale to
customers.
A. This article shall be implemented, administered and enforced by the
East Greenwich. Police Department or any other Town department or
division designated by the Town Manager.
B. Upon being made aware of a potential violation of this article, the East
Greenwich. Police Department or other designee shall investigate and
determine whether a violation has occurred.
C. If the investigation confirms that a violation has occurred, then the East
Greenwich. Police Department or other designee shall give written
notice to the owner of the property, the owner's agent, or the person
performing such violation that the violation is occurring and must stop.
D. Such notice shall be in writing and may be served upon a person to
whom it is directed, either by delivering it personally to him or her or by
posting same upon a conspicuous portion of the property and sending a
copy of same by certified mail to the person to whom the notice is
directed.
E. The owner, the owner's agent, or the person performing the violation is
responsible for confirming, in writing, that the violation has ceased to
the East Greenwich Police Department or other designee within 14 days
of receipt of the notice.
F. A second violation after the fourteen-day response period of the first
violation and within one year of the receipt of the confirmation that the
violation had ceased shall incur a penalty of $150.
§ 212-75 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 212-77
C:464
§ 212-78. Appeals.
Any violation charged under this article may be appealed, in writing, to the
Town Manager within 14 days of receipt of a written notice of violation. The
Town Manager may waive the individual violation or the requirements of
this article on showing of good cause or undue hardship.
§ 212-79. When effective.
This article shall become effective 90 days following passage by the Town
Council; provided, however, that the Town Manager shall have the authority
to extend the effective date by up to 180 days for a retail sales
establishment upon written application and a showing of good cause or
undue hardship by such retail sales establishment.
G. A third violation within one year of the second and any subsequent
violations shall incur a penalty of $300.
H. Each occurrence of a violation after the first and each day that such
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation and may be
cited as such.
§ 212-77 CHARTER § 212-79
C:465
Chapter 218
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Fees — See Ch. 93, Art. I.
Signs — See Ch. 260, Art. VII.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Removal of obstructions — See R.I.G.L.
§ 24-5-9.
Authority to require snow and ice
removal — See R.I.G.L. § 24-5-14.
Authority to regulate sidewalks — See R.I.G.L.
§ 24-7-1.
§ 212-79 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 212-79
C:466
ARTICLE I
Use and Maintenance
[Adopted 6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 595 as Secs. 20-1 to 20-5 of the
1993 Code]
§ 218-1. Covering of receptacles or vehicles required.
No person shall carry or convey, nor cause to be carried or conveyed in
any street, highway, square or park, any ashes, bituminous coal, gravel,
crushed gravel, sand, loam, dirt or rubbish unless the receptacle or vehicle
containing such ashes, bituminous coal, gravel, crushed gravel, sand, loam,
dirt or rubbish shall be closely covered.
§ 218-2. Use of sidewalks for dining and other purposes by business
establishments. [Amended 10-30-2006 by Ord. No. 776]
§ 218-3. Construction obstructions; warning lights.
Each person erecting or repairing any building adjoining any public street
or highway, who shall from necessity allow any lumber or other building
material to remain after dark in such street or highway, shall place, or cause
to be placed and kept, proper lights over or near such materials throughout
the night so as to give sufficient warning to all persons passing in or through
such street or highway.
§ 218-4. Removal of snow.
The owner, occupant or any person having the care of any building or lot
of land bordering on any street, square or public place within this Town
where there is a sidewalk supported by a curbstone shall, within the first
four hours of daylight after the ceasing of any snowfall, cause the snow
which has accumulated as a result of the snowfall or which has fallen from
A. Business establishments may use sidewalks abutting their
establishments for outside dining or sales to the extent that the use of
the sidewalk is reasonably and necessarily related to the nature and
operation of the business establishments.
B. All tables, chairs, signs, racks and merchandise must be removed from
the sidewalk or right-of-way whenever the business is closed or during
parking bans. The entire sidewalk in front of a business establishment
will be kept at all times neat, clean and free of debris, with any and all
debris immediately removed so as not to cause a hazard or annoyance
to pedestrians. [Amended 1-25-2016 by Ord. No. 847]
C. Regardless of any conditions, a public right-of-way shall be maintained
at all times on public sidewalks as mandated by the Americans with
Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. § 12132.
D. The Town of East Greenwich is specifically exempt from any conditions
or limitations imposed by this article.
§ 218-1 CHARTER § 218-4
C:467
any building to be removed therefrom and, in default thereof, shall be guilty
of an offense for each hour after the expiration of the four hours that the
snow shall remain on such sidewalk.
§ 218-5. Removal or covering of ice.
Whenever the sidewalk or any part thereof adjoining any building or lot
of land on any street shall be encumbered with ice, it shall be the duty of
the owner, occupant or any person having the care of such building or lot
to cause such sidewalk to be made safe and convenient for travel over the
sidewalk by removing the ice therefrom or by covering the sidewalk with
sand or some other suitable substance. In case such owner, occupant, or
other person shall neglect to do so for the space of two hours during the
daytime, he shall be guilty of an offense, and an additional offense shall be
committed for each day thereafter that the ice shall continue to encumber
such sidewalk or any part thereof.
§ 218-6. Violations and penalties.85
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, of the Code of the Town of East Greenwich.
85.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 218-4 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 218-6
C:468
ARTICLE II
Excavations
[Adopted 6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 595 as Secs. 20-61 to 20-74 of the
1993 Code]
§ 218-7. Nonapplicability.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to excavating or digging
conducted by the State Department of Public Works in the construction,
improvement or maintenance of state roads or to corporations operating
steam or street railroads.
§ 218-8. Permit required.
No person, including any utility company, shall excavate or dig into any
portion, including the curb, of any of the public highways or make access
onto any of the public highways in the Town without having first obtained
the special excavation permit provided in this article.
§ 218-9. Contents of permit application.
The Director of Public Works of the Town may at any time issue a special
excavation permit authorizing any person to excavate or dig into the public
highways of the Town. Before issuing such special permit, however, he shall
first receive from such person a written application setting forth the name
and address of such applicant and a designation of the particular portion of
such public highways which such applicant desires to excavate or dig into
and a designation of the purpose for which such excavation or digging is to
be carried on.
§ 218-10. Bond required; conditions.
Before issuing the excavation permit required by this article, the Director
of Public Works shall first receive a bond from the applicant running to the
Town, in a sum not less than $3,000, as the Director of Public Works may
fix, with such sureties as are satisfactory to the Director of Public Works.
The bond is to contain the conditions that the obligation of the applicant and
sureties shall be in full force and effect unless such applicant shall, upon
final completion of work, leave the public highways in as good condition as
before the commencement of the work, and that the Town shall be free and
harmless from all loss or damage arising by reason of any fault or neglect
on the part of the applicant in the performance of the work. In addition, the
Director of Public Works may require a cash deposit in a lesser amount than
the bond. If such a cash deposit is required, the Director of Public Works
may waive requirement of the bond.
§ 218-11. Insurance required.
No person shall be issued an excavation permit required by this article until
he proves to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works that he has
§ 218-7 CHARTER § 218-11
C:469
general liability insurance with policy limits for personal injury of at least
$100,000.
§ 218-12. Permit fee.
The fee for an excavation permit shall be enumerated in the fee schedule in
Chapter 93, Fees.
§ 218-13. Contents of permit.
The excavation permit required by this article, if issued by the Director
of Public Works, shall designate the purpose of the excavating or digging
permitted and shall designate the particular portion of the public highways
to be excavated or dug into and also the time limit within which such
excavation or digging shall be completed. The Director of Public Works shall
retain on record a duplicate of the permit.
§ 218-14. Scope of permit.
No person who has received the excavation permit required by this article
shall be authorized to excavate or dig into the public highways of the Town
at any other time or place or for any other purpose than the time, place and
purpose designated in such permit.
§ 218-15. Conformity to regulations; notice.
No person who has received the excavation permit required by this article
shall do any work, excavating or digging thereunder, except in conformity
with such orders, rules or regulations, general or special, established by
the Director of Public Works of the Town, as shall have been brought to the
attention of such person by notice in writing from the Director of Public
Works.
§ 218-16. Revocation of permit.
The Director of Public Works may at any time revoke any excavation permit
required by this article, and thereupon such person holding the permit shall
cease to excavate or dig into the public highways of the Town.
§ 218-17. Safeguards.
Every person opening a street or public way must enclose the opening with
sufficient barriers, must maintain red lights at the opening by night, must
take all necessary precautions to efficiently guard the public against all
accidents from the beginning to the end of the work, and shall use every
precaution against accidents to persons, vehicles or property of any kind.
§ 218-18. Backfilling.
After the work for which the street or public way is opened is completed,
the backfilling must be puddled or solidly rammed and, together with the
§ 218-11 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 218-18
C:470
replacing of ballast and paving, must be done within 48 hours after the
completion of the work; done so as to make the sidewalk, gutter and
roadway at least as good as they were before they were disturbed; and done
to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works.
§ 218-19. Protection of public travel and convenience.
All work shall be done in such a manner and at such times as to interfere
as little as possible with the public travel and convenience, and to this end,
every person shall conduct the work as the Director of Public Works may
from time to time direct.
§ 218-20. Fires in public highways.
Each person who shall make or maintain, or assist in making or maintaining,
any fire other than is specified by law in any public highway, or in any way
used by the public as a highway in this Town, shall be guilty of an offense.
§ 218-21. Violations and penalties.86
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, of the Code of the Town of East Greenwich.
86.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 218-18 CHARTER § 218-21
C:471
Chapter 227
TAXATION
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Rhode Island Historical Preservation and
Heritage Commission — See R.I.G.L.
§ 42-45-2.
Property exempt from taxation — See R.I.G.L.
§ 44-3-3.
Veterans exemptions — See R.I.G.L. § 44-3-4.
Gold star parents exemption — See R.I.G.L.
§ 44-3-5.
Exemptions for persons 65 or older — See
R.I.G.L. § 44-3-13.
Persons who are totally disabled — See
R.I.G.L. § 44-3-15.
Tax exemption for renewable energy systems
— See R.I.G.L. § 44-3-21.
Exemption and/or valuation freeze of
wholesaler's inventory — See R.I.G.L.
§ 44-3-29.
Historic residence tax credit — See R.I.G.L.
§ 44-4.1-1 et seq.
Levy and assessment of local taxes — See
R.I.G.L. § 44-5-1 et seq.
Historical area zoning — See R.I.G.L.
§ 45-24.1-1 et seq.
§ 218-21 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 218-21
C:472
ARTICLE I
Tangible Household Personal Property Exemption
[Adopted 6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 595 as Sec. 21-1 of the 1993 Code;
amended 10-10-1996 by Ord. No. 634]
§ 227-1. Exemptions granted.
A. The household tangible personal property of a housekeeper not
exceeding in value the sum of $20,000 shall be exempt from taxation in
accordance with R.I.G.L. § 44-3-3(a)(17).
B. Motor vehicles exemption. In addition to the five-hundred-dollar
exemption granted by the State of Rhode Island, the Town of East
Greenwich will exempt the next $5,500 of value of any motor vehicle
registered in the Town of East Greenwich. [Added 9-27-2010 by Ord.
No. 807]
§ 227-1 CHARTER § 227-1
C:473

ARTICLE II
Personal Property Exemption for the Aged
[Adopted 6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 595 as Sec. 21-2 of the 1993 Code;
amended 10-10-1996 by Ord. No. 634; 8-18-2003 by Ord. No. 736]
§ 227-2. Exemption granted.
Every person, a citizen and resident of the Town, of the age of 65 or more
years and residing in the Town, on proper claim being made therefor, is
hereby granted a tax exemption on the following basis:
§ 227-3. Applicability of Article III.
The provisions of Article III of this chapter shall be applicable to this
exemption.
§ 227-4. Additional nature of exemption; uniform application.
A. For taxpayers of the age of 65 through 69 years, an exemption from
taxation on any ratable property of $5,500 of valuation;
B. For taxpayers of the age of 70 through 74 years, an exemption from
taxation on any ratable property of $11,000 of valuation;
C. For taxpayers of the age of 75 through 79 years, an exemption from
taxation on any ratable property of $16,000 of valuation;
D. For taxpayers of the age of 80 or more years, an exemption from
taxation on any ratable property of $27,000 of valuation.
A. Such exemption shall be in addition to any other exemption to which
such person may be entitled. Such exemptions shall be applied
uniformly and without regard to ability to pay.
B. However, such exemptions shall not be allowed in favor of any person
unless he shall have presented to the Assessor a true and exact account
of his ratable estate as provided in R.I.G.L. §§ 44-5-15 and 44-5-16, for
the year for which exemption is claimed, together with due evidence
that he is entitled to such exemption.
§ 227-2 CHARTER § 227-4
C:475

ARTICLE III
Senior Tax Credit
[Adopted 6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 595 as Secs. 21-41 to 21-47 of the
1993 Code; amended 10-10-1996 by Ord. No. 634; 11-4-2002 by Ord.
No. 728; 8-18-2003 by Ord. No. 736; 8-28-2006 by Ord. No. 772;
8-24-2009 by Ord. No. 803; 9-27-2010 by Ord. No. 808; 9-12-2011 by
Ord. No. 816; 5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 821; 4-22-2013 by Ord. No.
827]
§ 227-5. Tax credit granted. [Amended 4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 841]
Every person, a citizen and resident of the Town, of the age of 65 or more
years and residing in the Town in a dwelling house owned by him or her
which is a constituent part of his or her real property is hereby granted, on
proper claim being made therefor, a tax credit on the following basis:
§ 227-6. Prerequisite of five years' residence and ownership.
In addition to the requirement of domicile within the Town, at the time of
making application the applicant for a tax credit on account of age must
have been a resident of the Town for a period of at least five years ending
with the date of assessment for the year for which the tax credit is claimed.
It is not necessary that the five years be consecutive, and further, the
applicant for this tax credit must have owned and had title to one or more
dwelling houses in which he or she resided for the same five-year period.
§ 227-7. Additional nature of tax credit.
The tax credit provided by § 227-5 shall be in addition to any other tax credit
to which the person may be entitled.
§ 227-8. Uniform application.
The tax credit provided by § 227-5 shall be applied uniformly and without
regard to ability to pay.
A. For taxpayers of the age of 65 through 69 years, a tax credit from
taxation on such real property in the amount of $568 applied to the tax;
B. For taxpayers of the age of 70 through 74 years, a tax credit from
taxation on such real property in the amount of $851 applied to the tax;
C. For taxpayers of the age of 75 through 79 years, a tax credit from
taxation on such real property in the amount of $1,136 applied to the
tax;
D. For taxpayers of the age of 80 through 84 years, a tax credit from
taxation on such real property in the amount of $1,703 applied to the
tax;
E. For taxpayers of the age of 85 years or over, a tax credit from taxation
on such real property in the amount of $1,712 applied to the tax.
§ 227-5 CHARTER § 227-9
C:477
§ 227-9. Effect of multiple ownership.
Only one tax credit on account of age shall be granted to cotenants, joint
tenants and tenants by the entirety even though all of the cotenants, joint
tenants or tenants by the entirety are 65 years of age or over, or all occupy
the property. The amount of the tax credit shall be determined by the age of
the eldest of the cotenants, joint tenants or tenants by the entirety.
§ 227-10. Application for senior/age tax credit.
A tax credit for age shall not be allowed in favor of any person unless he
shall have presented to the Assessor a true and exact account of his ratable
estate, as provided for in R.I.G.L. §§ 44-5-15 and 44-5-16, for the year for
which tax credit is claimed, together with due evidence that he is so entitled
to such tax credit.
§ 227-11. Termination of senior/age tax credit.
All age tax credits shall terminate immediately upon the conveyance of
the subject property, death of the person eligible for the tax credit, or the
moving of such person from the Town.
§ 227-9 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 227-11
C:478
ARTICLE IV
Credit for Aged, Totally Disabled, Veteran Disabled and Blind
[Adopted 6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 595 as Secs. 21-61 to 21-65 of the
1993 Code; amended 8-24-1995 by Ord. No. 624; 10-10-1996 by Ord.
No. 634]
§ 227-12. Tax credit granted. [Amended 1-26-2004 by Ord. No. 744]
A. Every person who, as of the date of assessment, is a citizen and resident
of the Town, has attained the age of 65 years, is totally disabled, a
veteran or nonveteran or is blind, as defined in § 227-25, and is the
owner of real estate in the Town which he occupies wholly or partially
as his dwelling, is hereby granted, on proper application being made
therefor as provided in this section, a tax exemption in the form of a
credit against the taxes assessed on such real property. The amount of
the credit with respect to each such person shall be based on the annual
income of such person under the following schedule: [Amended
8-28-2006 by Ord. No. 772]
(1) Sole-name taxpayer-owners with a gross income during the
preceding calendar year in the amount of $27,225 or less, and
taxpayers owning property jointly with a gross income of $36,775
or less during the preceding calendar year, who are 65 years of age
or totally disabled or totally disabled veteran owners or blind, shall
be eligible to share in a tax credit pool in a maximum total amount
of $75,000. This total sum shall be apportioned pro rata, based on
valuation and income as a credit against taxes among all Town
taxpayers who meet the eligibility requirements set forth above in
Subsection A of this section. Property value cannot be more than
$338,000. [Amended 6-9-2008 by Ord. No. 789; 9-12-2011 by
Ord. No. 816]
(2) The credit provided to low-income persons as set forth in
Subsection A(1) of this section shall be in addition to any other
exemption to which such person may be entitled, provided that
such credit shall apply only to the net amount of taxes otherwise
due from such person after application of all other exemptions to
which he is entitled.
(3) The total credit available to all low-income taxpayers as set forth in
this section who claim this credit shall not exceed the total of
$75,000 but may be in such lesser amount as may be set by the
Town Council annually. Those persons who qualify for this credit
shall receive the pro rata share of the $75,000 as a credit against
the net amount of taxes otherwise due as set forth in this section.
The amount of the credit shall be calculated each year by the Town
Assessor after the date for filing for such credits and before the
sending of the tax notices. The calculation of pro rata share will be
according to the following: [Amended 6-9-2008 by Ord. No.
789]
§ 227-12 CHARTER § 227-12
C:479
Tax Exemption for Aged and Handicapped Based on Income
Cap Fund Eligibility Computation
Persons in family or household of one, or persons in family or
household of two, shall be eligible for 70%, based on 180% of
the federal income guideline; 50%, based on 200% of the federal
income guideline; and/or 30%, based on 250% of the federal
income guideline.
B. Filing of application; proof of right to exemption of credit. No person
shall be entitled to any exemption or credit authorized in this section in
any year without first filing an application with the Tax Assessor on
forms provided by the Assessor. Each application shall be sworn to by
the applicant under penalty of perjury. Proof of age, ownership,
occupancy, legal domicile, disability or income shall be furnished in the
following manner:
(1) Proof of age. Age may be proved by furnishing to the Assessor
either a birth certificate, certificate of citizenship, baptismal
certificate, affidavit of a third party or by such means as may be
approved by the Town Council by ordinance.
(2) Ownership. Ownership may be established by furnishing the Tax
Assessor with the date of purchase and land record citation of the
purchase of same by the applicant of the residential property
involved.
(3) Occupancy. Occupancy of the residential property may be proved
by incorporating such fact in a sworn application for exemption.
(4) Legal domicile. Legal domicile may be established by the
production of a voter's registration certificate, by the production of
a license to operate a motor vehicle, a registration certificate, or by
such other means as the Town Council may reasonably require.
(5) Disability. Disability may be established by providing the Tax
Assessor with a signed and notarized statement by a licensed
physician declaring the applicant permanently, totally disabled or
blind.
(6) Low income. Income may be established by providing to the Tax
Assessor copies of federal income tax returns for the year
preceding the application for the credit or, in lieu thereof, a sworn
affidavit stating that the person applying for the credit did not file a
state or federal income tax return for the year preceding, and
setting forth therein under oath and penalties of perjury the income
claims by that person. In addition, persons claiming this credit may
be required to provide to the Tax Assessor authorization to obtain
copies of the claimant's tax returns from federal or state
authorities. If the property which is the subject of the credit
application is in the name of more than one person, the tax returns
§ 227-12 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 227-12
C:480
§ 227-13. Additional nature of tax credit.
The credit provided by § 227-12 shall be in addition to any other exemption
to which such person may be entitled, provided that such credit shall
apply only to the net amount of tax otherwise due from such person after
application of all other exemptions to which he is entitled.
§ 227-14. "Income" defined.
As used throughout this article, "income" shall be deemed to include the
aggregate income of such person making claim for the credit allowed by this
article and his spouse, provided such spouse is residing with such person
making claim for the credit, and provided that income shall be computed
on a calendar-year basis and shall include all income of every nature and
description, whether or not taxable, and whether earned or unearned, and
shall include but not be limited to dividends, interest, gross rents, gains,
gifts, pensions, all types of compensation, and social security and veterans'
benefits.
§ 227-15. Effect of multiple ownership.
Only one exemption in the form of a credit as provided in this article shall
be allowed with respect to any one building, provided that such exemption
shall be allowed for single-family or multiple-family dwellings and other
buildings so long as such person making application for the credit allowed
by this article resides therein.
§ 227-16. Application for credit.87
The exemption in the form of a credit as provided in this article shall
not be allowed unless the person otherwise entitled thereto shall have
presented to the Tax Assessor on or before March 15 of each year for
which the exemption is sought an application for such exemption and due
evidence that he is entitled thereto, including certified birth records, voter
of each person whose name appears in the title or the appropriate
affidavit must be filed with the Tax Assessor.
(7) Other forms of proof. An applicant may provide proof of right to
exemption or credit if the specified means in Subsection B of this
section are not available to him by furnishing military records,
passports, certificate of citizenship or by such other evidence of
proof as may be required by the Town Council.
C. All exemptions or credits shall be terminated upon the conveyance of
the subject property, death of the person exempted or claiming the
credit, or the moving of such person from the Town or, in the case of
disability exemption, when the physical or mental illness terminates.
87.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 227-12 CHARTER § 227-16
C:481
registration records, statement of annual income sworn to or affirmed by
the applicant before a person qualified to administer oaths, and such other
information as shall be reasonably requested by the Tax Assessor to enable
him to determine whether such person qualifies under this article. Such
information pertaining to annual income shall be kept confidential by the
Tax Assessor.
§ 227-16 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 227-16
C:482
ARTICLE V
Disability Tax Credit
[Adopted 6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 595 as Secs. 2-76 to 2-78 of the
1993 Code; amended 10-10-1996 by Ord. No. 634; 8-18-2003 by Ord.
No. 736; 8-28-2006 by Ord. No. 772; 8-24-2009 by Ord. No. 803;
9-27-2010 by Ord. No. 808; 9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 816; 5-29-2012 by
Ord. No. 821; 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 827]
§ 227-17. Tax credit granted. [Amended 4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 841]
Every person, a citizen and resident of the Town, who is permanently, totally
disabled is hereby granted, on proper claim being made therefor, a tax
credit from taxation on any real property situated in the Town in the amount
of $300.
§ 227-18. Prerequisite of three years' residence. [Amended
4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 841]
In addition to the requirement of domicile within the Town, at the time of
making application, the applicant for a tax credit on account of disability
must have been a resident of the Town for a period of three years ending
with the date of assessment for the year for which the tax credit is claimed.
§ 227-19. Application for tax credit.
A tax credit for total disability shall not be allowed in favor of any person
unless he or she shall have presented to the Assessor a true and exact
account of his ratable estate, as provided for in R.I.G.L. §§ 44-5-15 and
44-5-16, for the year for which the tax credit is claimed, together with due
evidence that he or she is so entitled to such tax credit.
§ 227-17 CHARTER § 227-19
C:483

ARTICLE VI
Gold Star Parent (One Parent Only)
[Adopted 6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 595 as Secs. 21-91 to 21-92 of the
1993 Code; amended 10-10-1996 by Ord. No. 634; 8-18-2003 by Ord.
No. 736; 8-24-2009 by Ord. No. 803; 9-27-2010 by Ord. No. 808;
9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 816; 5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 821; 4-22-2013 by
Ord. No. 827]
§ 227-20. Tax credit granted. [Amended 4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 841]
The property of every person, a citizen and resident of the Town, whose
son or daughter has served with the Armed Forces of the United States of
America in any of the wars in which the United States has been engaged,
as defined in R.I.G.L. § 44-3-4, and has lost his or her life as a casualty of
any of such wars, shall be exempt from taxation in the form of a tax credit
or valuation exemption in the amount of $150 on real estate or personal
property in accordance with similar provisions of R.I.G.L. § 44-3-4, applying
to honorably discharged veterans of the armed forces; provided, however,
that there shall be but one tax credit granted where both parents of the
deceased son or daughter are living.
§ 227-21. Prerequisite of one year's residence.
In addition to the requirement of domicile within the Town, at the time
of making application the applicant for a gold star parent's tax credit or
exemption must have been a resident of the Town for a period of one year
ending with the date of the assessment for the year for which the tax credit
or exemption is claimed.
§ 227-20 CHARTER § 227-21
C:485

ARTICLE VII
Veterans Tax Credit
[Adopted 6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 595 as Secs. 21-111 to 21-113 of
the 1993 Code; amended 10-10-1996 by Ord. No. 634; 8-18-2003 by
Ord. No. 736; 8-28-2006 by Ord. No. 772; 8-24-2009 by Ord. No.
803; 9-27-2010 by Ord. No. 808; 9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 816;
5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 821; 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 827]
§ 227-22. Tax credit granted. [Amended 4-27-2015 by Ord. No.
84188]
The property of each person, a citizen and resident of the Town, who served
in the military or naval service of the United States in any war or conflict
listed in R.I.G.L. § 44-3-4, as amended, and who was honorably discharged
therefrom, or who was discharged therefrom under conditions other than
dishonorable, or who, if not discharged, served honorably, or the unmarried
widow or widower of such person, shall receive a tax credit in the amount
of $110 on real estate or $4,850 in valuation on tangible personal property;
provided, however, that such tax credit shall not be allowed in favor of any
person who is not a legal resident of the state, or unless the person entitled
to such tax credit shall have presented to the Assessor, on or before the last
day on which sworn statements may be filed with the Assessor for the year
for which the tax credit is claimed, evidence that he or she is so entitled,
which evidence shall stand so long as his or her legal residence remains
unchanged; and provided, further, that the tax credit provided for in this
section, to the extent that it shall apply in the Town, shall be applied in
full to the total tax due or total valuation of such person's real or tangible
personal property located in the Town.
§ 227-23. Tax credit for totally disabled veterans. [Amended
4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 841]
Further, in addition to the tax credit provided heretofore, any veteran of the
military or naval service of the United States of America who is a resident
and citizen of the Town and who shall be determined, under applicable
federal law by the Veterans' Administration of the United States of America,
to be totally disabled through service-connected disability, and who owns
real or personal property, may receive a tax credit in the following amount:
A. Totally disabled: $300.
B. Paraplegic: $300.
C. Specially adaptive housing [per R.I.G.L. § 44-3-4(i)]: fully exempt from
taxation for real estate.
D. Widow or widower of a veteran: $110.
88.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 227-22 CHARTER § 227-24
C:487
§ 227-24. Determination of widow or widower of veteran.
In determining whether or not a person is a widow or widower of a veteran
for the purpose of this article, the remarriage of the widow or widower shall
not bar the furnishing of the benefits of this article if the remarriage is void,
has been terminated by death, has been annulled or dissolved by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
§ 227-24 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 227-24
C:488
ARTICLE VIII
Blind Persons Tax Credit
[Adopted 6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 595 as Secs. 21-126 to 21-127 of
the 1993 Code; amended 10-10-1996 by Ord. No. 634; 8-18-2003 by
Ord. No. 736; 8-28-2006 by Ord. No. 772; 8-24-2009 by Ord. No.
803; 9-27-2010 by Ord. No. 808; 9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 816;
5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 821; 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 827]
§ 227-25. Tax credit granted. [Amended 4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 841]
The property of each person, a resident and citizen of the Town, who has
permanent impairment of both eyes of the following status: central visual
acuity of 20/200 or less in the better eye with corrective glasses, or central
visual acuity of more than 20/200 if there is a field defect in which the
peripheral field has contracted to such an extent that the widest diameter of
visual field subtends an angular distance no greater than 20° in the better
eye, shall receive a tax credit in the amount of $861 on real estate; provided,
however, that such tax credit shall not be allowed in favor of any person
who is not a legal resident of the state, or unless the person entitled to such
tax credit shall have presented to the Assessor, on or before the last day
on which sworn statements may be filed with the Assessor for the year for
which the tax credit is claimed, due evidence that he or she is so entitled,
which evidence shall stand so long as his or her legal residence remains
unchanged; and provided, further, that the tax credit provided for in this
section, to the extent that it shall apply to the Town, shall be applied in full
to the total tax amount of such person's real property. Such tax credit shall
be in addition to any other tax credit provided by law.
§ 227-26. Prerequisite of one year's residence.
In addition to the requirement of domicile within the Town, at the time of
making application the applicant for a blind person's tax credit must have
been a resident of the Town for a period of one year ending with the date of
the assessment for the year for which the tax credit is claimed.
§ 227-25 CHARTER § 227-26
C:489

ARTICLE IX
Prisoners of War Tax Credit
[Adopted 6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 595 as Secs. 21-141 to 21-142 of
the 1993 Code; amended 10-10-1996 by Ord. No. 634; 8-18-2003 by
Ord. No. 736; 8-28-2006 by Ord. No. 772; 8-24-2009 by Ord. No.
803; 9-27-2010 by Ord. No. 808; 9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 816;
5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 821; 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 827; 4-27-2015 by
Ord. No. 841]
§ 227-27. Tax credit granted.
Every person, a citizen and resident of the Town, who has been or shall
be classified as or determined to be a prisoner of war by the Veterans'
Administration of the United States is hereby granted, on property claim
being made therefor, a tax credit from taxation on any ratable property of
$745.
§ 227-28. Prerequisite of one year's residence.
In addition to the requirement of domicile within the Town, at the time
of making application, the applicant for a tax credit from taxation on the
ground of having been a prisoner of war must have been a resident of the
Town for a period of one year ending with the date of assessment for the
year for which the tax credit is claimed.
§ 227-27 CHARTER § 227-28
C:491

ARTICLE X
Historic Residence Tax Credit
[Adopted 6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 595 as Secs. 21-161 to 21-169 of
the 1993 Code]
§ 227-29. Findings of fact.
The Town Council finds that preservation of the Town's historic residences
enhances an understanding of the Town's and state's heritage, improves
property values, fosters civic beauty and promotes education, pleasure and
welfare.
§ 227-30. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CERTIFIED MAINTENANCE OR REHABILITATION — Any maintenance or
rehabilitation of an historic residence consistent with the character of
that property or district, as determined in accordance with Commission
guidelines.
COMMISSION — The State Historical Preservation Commission created
pursuant to R.I.G.L. § 42-45-2.
HISTORIC RESIDENCE — An historic residential property which is not of a
character subject to federal depreciation allowance pursuant to Section 167
or 168 of the Internal Revenue Code and which is:
§ 227-31. Property tax reduction.
In order to further the purpose of this article, the Town will provide up to a
twenty-percent reduction in property tax liability each year for a period of
up to five years to an owner of an historic residence who incurs substantial
maintenance or rehabilitation costs in accordance with this article. The
reduction in property tax liability each year shall equal 4% of the total costs
of such maintenance or rehabilitation, as certified by the Commission, up to
A. Listed individually in the state register of historic places;
Located in a district listed in the state register of historic places and
certified by the Commission as contributing to the historic character of
that district;
B.
Located in a local historic district zone as designated by a city or
town under R.I.G.L. § 45-24.1-1 and certified by the Commission as
contributing to the character of that historic district zone; or
C.
Designated by a city or town as an individual structure subject to
regulation by a local historic district commission under R.I.G.L.
§ 45-24.1-1.
D.
§ 227-29 CHARTER § 227-31
C:493
a maximum of 20% of the total property tax bill for each year, subject to the
provisions of § 227-32.
§ 227-32. Limitation of tax reduction.
The property tax reduction available under the provisions of § 227-31 shall
not exceed the sum of $8,000 for any historic residence with respect to
the property tax assessed as of December 31, 1988; thereafter, the Town
Council may establish a new maximum amount of reduction for each year
that this program is in existence.
§ 227-33. Completion of maintenance or rehabilitation;
certification. [Amended 8-28-2006 by Ord. No. 772]
Upon completion of maintenance or rehabilitation for which the owner
of an historic residence seeks property tax reduction, the owner shall
apply to the Commission for relief under this article. Upon receiving such
application, the Commission shall notify the Assessor when all work has
been completed and approved by the Commission. The Commission shall
inspect the maintenance or rehabilitation of the historic residence and
make a recommendation to the Town Assessor, who shall comply with
the Commission's guidelines. The Commission may establish a schedule
of reasonable fees for the processing of inspection of maintenance and
rehabilitation. The property tax reduction shall commence in the year
subsequent to the inspection by which the maintenance or rehabilitation
was approved. An owner who receives a property tax reduction pursuant to
this article shall, upon completion of further maintenance or rehabilitation
which again fulfills the necessary requirements of this article, receive a new
five-year property tax reduction commencing on the approval of the most
recent application.
§ 227-34. Restrictive covenant required.
No historic residence maintained or rehabilitated may benefit from the
provisions of this article unless the owner of such historic residence grants
a restrictive covenant to the Commission, agreeing that the historic
residence shall retain its use and be maintained in a manner which
preserves the historic residence's rehabilitated portions and the historic
residence's historic character for a period equal to the length of the
property tax reduction, or until title to the property is transferred.
§ 227-35. Forfeiture of tax reduction.
In the event of the failure of the owner to keep the property nondepreciable
or to maintain the property according to the Commission's guidelines
during the period of the tax reduction, the owner shall forfeit the property
tax reduction retroactive to the date the reduction commenced. All
differences in the amount of taxes that were paid and those that would have
been due but for the reduction shall be payable, together with interest of
12% per annum, from the respective dates that the payments would have
§ 227-31 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 227-35
C:494
been due and shall be a lien against the historic residence. If the property is
transferred to a new owner within the period that the tax reduction applies,
the original owner shall similarly forfeit the tax reduction.
§ 227-36. Administrator of program.
The Tax Assessor shall promulgate all application and certification forms.
The Commission shall establish guidelines for the maintenance and
rehabilitation of historic residences.
§ 227-37. Appeal of decisions.
Appeal of decisions of the Tax Assessor shall be to the Tax Appeal Board for
a full hearing de novo.
§ 227-35 CHARTER § 227-37
C:495

ARTICLE XI
Payment of Taxes, Liens and Assessments
[Adopted 8-29-1991 by Ord. No. 569 (Sec. 10-2 of the 1993 Code);
amended in its entirety 8-25-2014 by Ord. No. 837]
§ 227-38. Permits and licenses not to be granted.
§ 227-39. Verification of payment required.
All applicants seeking licenses or permits must submit, with their
application, verification from the proper tax or assessment collection
agency of the Town that all Town taxes, liens and assessments are paid.
A. No license or permit which the Town Council is empowered to grant will
be issued or renewed to any person who is currently in arrears in any
tax, lien or assessment levied by the Town.
B. No license or permit which the Town Council is empowered to grant will
be issued or renewed to any person renting, letting, leasing or
otherwise hiring premises in the Town for the purpose of carrying on
the licensed activity from an owner or landlord who is in arrears in any
tax, lien or assessment levied by the Town; provided, however, that in
the event that the owner or landlord is not affiliated with the person
seeking the license or permit, then the Town Council shall be
empowered to grant such license or permit. For purposes of the
foregoing sentence, the term "affiliated" shall mean a person who has
either:
(1) A direct ownership interest in the subject premises; or
(2) An indirect ownership interest in the subject premises, e.g., an
equity interest in an entity which owns the subject premises.
§ 227-38 CHARTER § 227-39
C:497

ARTICLE XII
Wholesaler's Inventory
[Adopted 7-26-1994 by Ord. No. 616 (Sec. 21-26 of the 1993 Code)]
§ 227-40. Exemption granted.
In accordance with the terms of General Laws of Rhode Island § 44-3-29, the
stock-in-trade or inventory of any wholesaler located within the Town shall
be exempt from taxation for a period of 25 years from the date of passage
of this article.
§ 227-41. "Wholesaler" defined.
The term "wholesaler" shall mean and include a person, partnership,
corporation or other business entity engaged in the business of selling
goods for subsequent resale by its customers.
§ 227-40 CHARTER § 227-41
C:499

ARTICLE XIII
Inventory Tax Phase-Out
[Adopted 9-14-1999 by Ord. No. 679 (Sec. 21-181 of the 1993
Code)]
§ 227-42. Rate schedule for phase-out period.
In accordance with R.I.G.L. § 44-3-29.1, the inventory tax of wholesalers and
retailers shall be phased out in accordance with the terms of said statute.
The East Greenwich rate schedule for the phase-out period shall be as
follows:
Year Tax Rate
FY 1999 $23.70 per $1,000 of assessed valuation
FY 2000 90% of FY 1999 rate
FY 2001 80% of FY 1999 rate
FY 2002 70% of FY 1999 rate
FY 2003 60% of FY 1999 rate
FY 2004 50% of FY 1999 rate
FY 2005 40% of FY 1999 rate
FY 2006 30% of FY 1999 rate
FY 2007 20% of FY 1999 rate
FY 2008 10% of FY 1999 rate
FY 2009 No tax authorized
§ 227-42 CHARTER § 227-42
C:501

ARTICLE XIV
Tax Increase Deferral Program for Senior Resident Homeowners
[Adopted 7-10-2006 by Ord. No. 769]
§ 227-43. Deferral of payment of tax increases.
The payment of any increases in property taxes on the primary residence
owned and occupied by a person or persons who are 65 years of age or older
may be deferred, interest free, by eligible taxpayers until such time as the
property is disposed of by reason of death of all owners who are 65 years of
age or older, or by reason of transfer or conveyance, at which time the total
deferred taxes will be paid to the Town.
§ 227-44. Eligibility.
An "eligible taxpayer" is defined as an individual who is a resident of the
Town of East Greenwich for income tax purposes, is 65 years of age or
older, and has resided in the primary residence located in the Town of East
Greenwich for which the deferral is claimed for a minimum of five years.
There is no income or means test for eligibility. In the case of a married
couple, at least one spouse must be 65 years of age or older. The deferral
is optional, to be made at the request of the eligible taxpayer to the Tax
Assessor.
§ 227-45. Lien created.
Any taxes so deferred will become a lien on the property. The eligible
taxpayer may remove the lien at any time by paying the total taxes due,
interest free.
§ 227-46. Effect on other exemptions.
This deferral is in addition to any and all other exemptions which the
taxpayer may be entitled by law. The Town Council of the Town of East
Greenwich shall establish the requirements and application and/or
verification procedures for taxpayers to avail themselves of this deferment.
§ 227-43 CHARTER § 227-46
C:503

ARTICLE XV
Exemption for Renewable Energy Systems
[Adopted 5-22-2017 by Ord. No. 86989]
§ 227-47. Findings and authority.
Pursuant to Section 44-3-21 of the Rhode Island General Laws, as amended,
renewable energy systems may be exempt from taxation. The Town Council
finds that it would be in the public interest to exempt from taxation
renewable energy systems as provided for in § 227-48.
§ 227-48. Exemptions granted.
There is hereby exempted from taxation:
§ 227-49. Application for exemption.
An application for a renewable energy system tax exemption must be made
to the Town Tax Assessor no later than March 15 each year on forms to be
provided by the Tax Assessor.
§ 227-50. Rules and regulations for Commercial Renewable Energy
Systems' Tangible Tax Value.
A. The additional cost or value of any renewable energy device which is
being utilized as a primary or auxiliary power system for the purpose of
heating or otherwise supplying the energy needs of the property on
which it is located, not to exceed 250KW.
B. The additional cost or value of any renewable energy system in excess
of 250KW primarily utilized to produce energy for sale beyond the
property may be exempted only if a contractual agreement is approved
by the Town Council for the amount of property value to be exempt.
A. Purpose.
(1) The purpose of these regulations is to provide consistent and
foreseeable tax treatment of renewable energy to facilitate and
promote installation of grid-connected generation of renewable
energy. The Office of Energy Resources shall adopt a statewide
tangible tax value and formula, which shall be used by all
municipalities utilizing ordinances and resolutions for commercial
renewable energy systems proposed within their respective
municipalities beginning on January 1, 2017.
(2) All existing municipal renewable energy ordinances and/or
resolutions will need to be amended by town and city councils to
reflect the requirements of the regulation and the associated tax
value and associated formula. Municipalities that plan on adopting
89.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it shall be effective as of 1-1-2017.
§ 227-47 CHARTER § 227-50
C:505
first-time ordinances and/or resolutions for renewable energy will
need to reflect the requirements of the regulation and the
associated tax value and associated formula in their respective
ordinances and/or resolutions.
(3) For any renewable energy systems that are installed on residential
and manufacturing properties, the renewable energy equipment is
exempt from local taxation per RIGL 44-3-3, Subsections (48) and
(49).
B. Scope. These rules and regulations apply to towns and cities collecting
tangible taxes from commercial renewable energy systems pursuant to
RIGL § 44-5-3. These rules and regulations only apply to towns and
cities and do not apply to any other entities or instrumentalities that
may have tax-collecting authority but are not authorized to tax
renewable energy systems under RIGL § 44-5-3.
C. Applicability. The adopted tangible tax value and formula shall take
effect on January 1, 2017. Any renewable energy resource projects that
have executed interconnection service agreements with the electric
distribution company as of December 31, 2016, shall not be subject to
the rules developed under § 44-5-3(c) and shall maintain the tax status
applicable before the rules are adopted, unless otherwise agreed
pursuant to § 44-3-9(a).
D. Authority. These regulations arc promulgated pursuant to Chapter
44-57, and in accordance with Chapter 42-35 of the Rhode Island
General Laws of 1956, as amended, and grant the Office of Energy
Resources the authority to adopt, amend and implement such rules as
may be necessary to desirable to effectuate the purposes of this
chapter.
E. Definitions. For the purposes of these regulations, the following terms
shall have the following meanings:
A/C — Alternating current for the nameplate capacity of the commercial
renewable energy system.
ELIGIBLE RENEWABLE ENERGY RESOURCES — Those technologies
defined under RIGL 39-26-5.
$/PER kW — The kilowatt/dollar/kilowatt amount adopted through the
regulations that municipalities will be compensated from a commercial
renewable energy system annually.
OFFICE — The Rhode Island Office of Energy Resources.
REG PROGRAM — The Renewable Energy Growth Program where a
renewable energy system sells electricity through a fifteen- or twentyyear
tariff with National Grid.
NET METERING — A renewable energy system installed on a property
that is offsetting electric bills pursuant to RIGL § 39-26.4-1 et seq.
§ 227-50 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 227-50
C:506
VIRTUAL NET METERING — A renewable energy system that is
installed on private or public property where the off-taker of the
electricity is a municipality, public school, state or quasi-state public
entity pursuant to RIGL § 39-26.4-1 et seq.
F. Tangible tax value for commercial renewable energy systems.
The following formula and associated $5.00 per kW is adopted by the
Office in establishing the tangible tax value for commercial renewable
energy systems to provide reasonable compensation to a municipality
effective January 1, 2017. All such municipal ordinances and
resolutions assessing tangible tax on commercial renewable energy
systems must apply the following dollar value and formula.
$ 5.00 kW x _Kilowatt AIC Capacity of the Commercial
Renewable Energy System =
$______
Example 1: A two-megawatt ground-mount solar system that will be
receiving a twenty-year tariff under the REG program and selling the
electricity back to National Grid.
$5 kW X 2,000 kW AIC capacity of the commercial renewable energy
system =
$10,000 annual revenue to the municipality
$200,000 total revenue over the twenty-year REG Program tariff
to the municipality
Example 2: A one-and-five-tenths-megawatt wind-turbine system that
will be receiving a twenty-year tariff under the REG Program and
selling the electricity back to National Grid.
$5 kW X 1,500 kW AIC capacity of the commercial renewable energy
system =
$7,500 annual revenue to the municipality
$150,000 total revenue over the twenty-year REG Program tariff
to the municipality
G. Municipal tax waiver option for renewable systems not selling power.
(1) Pursuant to § 44-3-21, a town or city council may elect not to assess
a tangible tax on all commercial renewable energy systems or
specifically on net-metered systems that are strictly designed to
offset and reduce electricity bills on a property and not developed
for commercial revenue purposes. A town or city council would
need to enact an ordinance to waive tangible taxes on those types
of renewable systems.
(2) For any renewable energy systems that are installed on residential
and manufacturing properties, the renewable energy equipment is
exempt from local taxation per RIGL § 44-3-3, Subsections (48) and
(49).
§ 227-50 CHARTER § 227-50
C:507
H. Reporting. All commercial renewable energy systems shall be required
to provide the municipality and respective tax assessor with a copy of
the initial interconnection application and formal interconnection
service agreement and any documentation of program enrollment (e.g.,
renewable energy growth or net metering enrollment forms), indicating
whether the commercial renewable energy system is either a REG, netmetered,
or virtual net-metered installation.
I. Severability. If any provision of these regulations or the application
thereof, to any person or circumstance, is held invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the validity of the remainder of the regulations
shall not be affected thereby.
J. Application. The terms and provisions of these regulations shall be
liberally construed to permit the Office to effectuate the purposes of
state law, goals, and policies.
K. Effective date.
(1) The foregoing regulations, after due notice, are hereby adopted
and filed with the Secretary of State this November 16 of 2016, to
become effective January 1. 2017, in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 44-57, and in accordance with Chapter 42-35
of the Rhode Island General Laws of 1956, as amended.
(2) The adopted regulations and associated commercial renewable
energy system tangible tax value shall remain in effect from
January 1, 2017, through January 1, 2022, and the Town Council
shall have the authority to review and update these regulations if
deemed warranted.
§ 227-50 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 227-50
C:508
ARTICLE XVI
Tiered Tax Classification Plan
[Adopted 6-10-2019 by Ord. No. 882]
§ 227-50.1. Creation of plan.
Pursuant to the authority vested in the Town Council under RIGL §
44-5-11.8, as amended, the Council is hereby empowered to create a tiered
tax classification plan as authorized by that section of the General Laws.
The tiered tax classification plan may be adopted or amended by the Council
annually as part of the annual budget process.
§ 227-50.1 CHARTER § 227-50.1
C:509

ARTICLE XVII
Small Business Tangible Property Tax Exemption
[Adopted 6-10-2019 by Ord. No. 882]
§ 227-51. Creation of exemption.
Pursuant to the authority vested in the Town Council under RIGL § 44-3-65,
as amended, the Council is hereby empowered to create a tangible business
property tax exemption for local small business owners in an amount not
to exceed $35,000, as authorized by that section of the General Laws. The
exemption may be adopted or amended by the Council annually as part of
the annual budget process.
§ 227-52. (Reserved)
§ 227-51 CHARTER § 227-52
C:511

ARTICLE XVIII
Exemption for vehicles of persons with disabilities
[Adopted 8-26-2019 by Ord. No. 88690]
§ 227-53. Exemption
The Town exempts from taxation 50% of the value of any motor vehicle that
is necessary to transport a family member with a disability or where the
vehicle has been specially adapted to meet the specific needs of the person
with a disability. This exemption shall apply to not more than one motor
vehicle owned and registered for personal, noncommercial use. After the
Assessor has allowed an exemption under this section, no further evidence
of the existence of the facts required by this section shall be required in any
subsequent year. RIGL § 44-34-13.
90.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it would be effective 7-1-2019.
§ 227-53 CHARTER § 227-53
C:513
Chapter 235
TOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 244. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 248.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Towing Storage Act — See R.I.G.L. § 39-12.1-1
et seq.
§ 235-1. Impoundment authority; vehicle release.
A. A police officer is authorized to impound and remove a vehicle and its
contents from a street or other public area under any of the
circumstances enumerated in this section:
(1) When a vehicle upon a street is so disabled as to constitute an
obstruction to traffic and the person in charge of the vehicle is, by
reason of physical injury or otherwise, incapacitated to such an
extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal;
(2) When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street or other public
area and is so parked or placed illegally as to constitute a hazard or
obstruction to the normal movement of traffic or to the full use or
access to that area or to any fire hydrant or other emergency
apparatus by authorized emergency vehicles or personnel;
(3) When any vehicle which has been involved in two or more
violations of this chapter for which citation tags have been issued
and not presented as required is parked in violation of any
provision of this chapter;
(4) When any vehicle has been parked longer than 48 hours in any
Town-owned or -controlled parking area;
(5) When any vehicle has been parked or placed in front of a public or
private driveway so as to obstruct or interfere with the proper use
thereof;
(6) When any vehicle is impeding or is likely to impede the normal flow
of vehicular or pedestrian traffic; or
(7) When any vehicle is creating an unsafe condition.
B. The Town may contract the services of one or more competent towing
service firms for the removal and storage of motor vehicles taken into
custody of the Town for any reason. Such contract shall provide for a
§ 227-53 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 235-1
C:514
§ 235-2. Impoundment notice; vehicle disposition.
schedule of maximum charges for towing, storage and related expenses
of impounding vehicles and their contents.
C. Impounded vehicles and their contents shall be delivered back to the
owner or other authorized person only after all fees, costs and charges
for towing, hauling, storage and notice have been paid to the Town and
a receipt issued therefor; or, in the event towing and storage services
are provided by contract with the Town, upon the direction of the Police
Department, after payment of all of the fees, costs and charges that are
due.
A. Not later than 48 hours after a vehicle and its contents have been
impounded by the Town, excluding holidays and weekends, the Police
Department shall cause a notice to be given to the owner of record of
such vehicle as indicated in the motor vehicle records of the State of
Rhode Island Division of Motor Vehicles or the corresponding agency of
any other state. Notice shall also be given to any lien holder of record as
indicated on the motor vehicle records. The notice shall describe the
vehicle and its contents, give the date the vehicle was impounded, state
the grounds for impoundment, the location of the place of
impoundment, and state that, unless the vehicle is redeemed within 30
days after the date of notice, the vehicle and its contents will be sold or
otherwise disposed of as provided by law. The notice shall also state
that, if requested within five days after the date of the notice, a hearing
will be conducted to review the impoundment of the vehicle. The right
to a hearing shall be deemed waived if not timely requested. Any
hearing under this section shall be conducted in the manner provided
hereafter.91
B. The notice referred to in Subsection A of this section shall be given
either by personal delivery to the person to be notified or by registered
or certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the person at
his address as shown on the motor vehicle records. Notice by personal
delivery shall be complete upon delivery, and notice by mail shall be
deemed complete upon the return of the receipt or upon return of the
notice as undeliverable, refused or unclaimed. Proof of the giving of
notice in either manner may be made by affidavit of the person giving
notice by personal delivery or by mail, naming the person to whom the
notice was given and specifying the time, place and manner of giving
notice. No notice shall be required if the vehicle is redeemed within 48
hours of the impoundment.
C. Vehicles impounded by the Town shall be redeemed only by the
registered owner, a person authorized by the registered owner, a
person entitled to possession, or one who has purchased the vehicle
91.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 235-1 CHARTER § 235-2
C:515
§ 235-3. Administrative hearing.
from the registered owner, who produces proof of ownership,
authorization or entitlement and signs a receipt therefor.
A. Upon written request of the legal owner or the person entitled to
possession of the vehicle delivered to the Town Clerk, an administrative
hearing shall be held before a hearing officer. The hearing officer shall
conduct the hearing in an informal manner and shall not be bound by
technical rules of evidence. The hearing shall be set and conducted
within five regular business days of the receipt of the request, holidays,
Saturdays and Sundays not included. The hearing can be set for a later
date if the owner or person entitled to possession so requests. At the
hearing, the following may be contested:
(1) The validity of the action of the law enforcement officer in taking
the vehicle into custody; and
(2) The creation and amount of the lien attached to the vehicle.
B. The Town shall have the burden of showing there was probable cause to
impound the vehicle.
C. At any time prior to the requested hearing, the owner or the person
entitled to possession of the vehicle may regain possession of the
vehicle by posting with the Town security in the form of cash in an
amount sufficient to cover costs of removing and storage.
D. If the hearing officer finds that:
(1) The action of the Town in taking the vehicle into custody was
proper, then the hearing officer shall enter an order supporting the
removal and ordering the costs of removal and storage to be paid
before redemption of the vehicle.
(2) The action of the law enforcement officer in taking the vehicle into
custody was invalid, then the hearing officer shall:
(a) Order the vehicle released to the owner;
(b) Find that the owner is not liable for any towing or storage
charges occasioned by the taking; and
(c) Order the Town to satisfy the towing and storage lien. If the
owner or person entitled to possession of the vehicle does not
redeem it promptly, then any subsequent charges shall be paid
by the owner or person entitled to possession.
(3) The creation and amount of the towing and storage lien is correct,
the hearing officer shall order the lien satisfied before release of
the vehicle.
§ 235-2 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 235-3
C:516
§ 235-4. Hearing officers.
Two hearing officers shall be designated by the Town Manager. The hearing
officers shall be persons other than the person who directed the impounding
and storage of the vehicle. The issues before the hearing officers shall be
whether there was probable cause to impound the vehicle in question and
the creation and amount of the lien attached to the vehicle. "Probable cause
to impound" shall mean such a state of facts as would lead a person of
ordinary care and prudence to believe that there was sufficient breach of
local, state or federal law to grant legal authority for the removal of the
vehicle.
§ 235-5. Alternate hearing officer.
The Town Manager shall also designate an alternate hearing officer who
will serve in the place of any hearing officer who is unable to serve in that
capacity.
Chapter 239
TRAILERS AND TRAILER PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Animals — See Ch. 23.
Building construction — See Ch. 38.
Fees — See Ch. 93, Art. I.
Construction in flood hazard areas — See Ch.
113.
Solid waste management — See Ch. 212.
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Licensing of trailer coach parks — See Public
Laws of 1954, Ch. 3330.
Licensing of recreational facilities — See
R.I.G.L. § 23-21-1 et seq.
Recreational Vehicle Parks and Campgrounds
Act — See R.I.G.L. § 32-7-1 et seq.
(4) The creation and amount of the towing and storage lien is not
correct, the hearing officer shall correct the amount of the lien and
order the corrected lien satisfied before release of the vehicle.
E. If the person requesting the hearing does not appear at the scheduled
hearing, then the hearing officer may enter an order supporting the
removal and assessment of towing and storage costs and apply any
security posted against such costs.
F. The action of the hearing officer pursuant to this section is final.
§ 235-3 CHARTER § 235-5
C:517

ARTICLE I
Parking License
[Adopted 6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 595 as Secs. 22-1 to 22-8 of the
1993 Code]
§ 239-1. Definitions.
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following words and terms in this
article are used in the sense given them in the following definitions:
TRAILER — Any portable structure, mobile home, so-called, or vehicle
designed to be drawn by vehicles, or self-propelled and occupied as a
dwelling or used for sleeping purposes. Notwithstanding the removal of
wheels from, or any other alteration of, any such structure, mobile home or
vehicle, or the installation thereof on a foundation, such structure, mobile
home or vehicle shall remain a trailer for all purposes hereof.
TRAILER PARK — Any parcel of land upon which two or more trailers,
occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located under Article II of
this chapter, whether or not a charge is made therefor.
§ 239-2. Permission to park trailer and license required.
No person shall locate any trailer either for storage or for use as living
quarters on any land in the Town, except in a trailer or automobile tourist
park, without first obtaining the written permission of the owner of the land
and a parking license from the Town Council.
§ 239-3. License conditions.
A parking license required by this article will be issued by the Town Council,
subject to the following terms and conditions:
A. Where an owner of such a trailer desires to use his trailer for storage
purposes, such a license may be issued for a period not to exceed one
year. The license may be renewed, provided that there has been no
violation of state law or any ordinance of the Town.
B. Where an owner of such a trailer desires to use the trailer for
occupancy or living quarters, such a license will be issued for a period
not to exceed 90 days for the following reasons:
(1) Where the owner desires to use the trailer as temporary living
quarters while building a home in the Town for his personal use; or
(2) To a resident of the Town where his living quarters have become
uninhabitable as a result of fire, flood, windstorm or some other
disaster.
§ 239-1 CHARTER § 239-4
C:519
§ 239-4. Parking license fee.
The Town Council shall establish fees for licensing the parking of such
trailers.92
§ 239-5. Approval of sanitary facilities; revocation of license for
failure to maintain.
No parking license will be issued for a trailer to be used for occupancy
or living quarters until the sanitary facilities and conveniences have been
approved by the Department of Health of the state, and the license shall
be immediately revoked upon the occupants failing to maintain sanitary
facilities satisfactory to the State Department of Health or upon refusing
the Department of Health of the state an opportunity for inspection.
§ 239-6. Site requirements.
No trailer used for occupancy or living quarters shall be located within 15
feet of a house or other building located on land or premises, nor within 10
feet of any property line, nor within 50 feet of a street.
§ 239-7. One trailer per lot.
No more than one trailer shall be permitted on any one lot, as defined by
the zoning laws of the Town.93
§ 239-8. Violations and penalties.
Every person violating the provisions of this article shall be fined not more
than $100, and each day's continuance of a violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
92.Editor's Note: See Ch. 93, Fees, Art. I.
93.Editor's Note: See Ch. 260, Zoning.
§ 239-4 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 239-8
C:520
ARTICLE II
Trailer Parks
[Adopted 6-22-1993 by Ord. No. 595 as Secs. 22-31 to 22-63 of the
1993 Code]
§ 239-9. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall be defined as follows:
EXISTING PARK — A trailer park in existence on June 24, 1954.94
NATURAL OR ARTIFICIAL BARRIER — Any river, pond, lake, canal,
railroad, levee, embankment, fence or hedge.
PARK — Trailer coach park.
TRAILER COACH OR MOBILE HOME — Any portable structure or vehicle
designed to be drawn by automobiles or other vehicles and occupied as
a dwelling or used for sleeping purposes by one or more persons. Also
included in this definition is any automobile, truck, bus or other vehicle
designed, built, altered or adapted to be occupied as a dwelling or used for
sleeping purposes by one or more persons.
TRAILER COACH PARK — Any plot of ground or parcel of land upon which
two or more trailer coaches, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes,
are located, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such
accommodation.
TRAILER COACH SPACE or TRAILER PARKING SITE or TRAILER PARKING
LOT — A parcel or plat of land within a trailer coach park occupied or
designed to be occupied by one trailer coach.
§ 239-10. Prosecution of complaints.
All complaints pursuant to this article shall be brought and prosecuted by
the Building Inspector and the Chief of Police.
§ 239-11. License required.
It shall be unlawful to operate a trailer park without first obtaining a license
from the Town Council.
§ 239-12. License application.
All applications for a license to operate trailer parks shall be made to
the Town Council in writing on blanks provided for this purpose and shall
contain the applicant's name, date, legal address, the maximum number
of trailer coach spaces in the park, the maximum number of trailer coach
spaces to be operated and all other information requested by the Town
Council.
94.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 239-9 CHARTER § 239-13
C:521
§ 239-13. Submission of plan; limitation of spaces.
A complete up-to-date plan of the entire trailer park layout shall accompany
any application for a license to operate a trailer park. The plan shall be
used by the Town Council to determine the number of trailer coaches for
which the applicant may be licensed. The license required by this article
to operate a trailer coach park shall state the maximum number of trailer
coach spaces to be operated in the park.
§ 239-14. Application investigation; report.
After receiving an application for a license to operate a trailer park, the
Town Council shall order the Building Inspector to inspect the trailer park
and report his findings and advice to it before the license required by this
article is granted.
§ 239-15. Conformity to law.
All violations of this or any other applicable codes or laws must be corrected
before a trailer park license required by this article or a renewal is granted.
§ 239-16. Report of past violations.
The Building Inspector shall submit records of all warnings issued by him to
the operator and records of all violations of this or any other applicable law
and their correction or disposition to the Town Council before the trailer
park license required by this article may be granted.
§ 239-17. Duration of license.
The trailer park license required by this article shall be good for one year
from January 1 of each year at 12:01 a.m. and shall expire at 12:00 midnight
on December 31 of the same year.
§ 239-18. License fees.
The fee for a license to operate a trailer park shall be set from time to
time and may be found in the comprehensive fee schedule in Chapter 93,
Fees, whether occupied or not. The fee shall be due and payable upon the
granting of the license to operate, payable in advance for one year. This fee
is payable whether the trailer park is occupied or not.
§ 239-19. Posting license.
The license certificate shall be conspicuously posted in the office or on the
premises of the trailer coach park at all times.
§ 239-13 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 239-20
C:522
§ 239-20. Construction or alteration permit required.
It shall be unlawful to construct, change, alter or add to any existing trailer
park without first obtaining a construction or alteration permit from the
Town Council.
§ 239-21. Alteration permit application; plans; conformity with law;
authority of Council.
§ 239-22. Keeping and inspection of records.
§ 239-23. Well-drained site required.
The park shall be located on a well-drained site, properly graded to ensure
rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water.
A. A proposed complete trailer coach park plan, showing streets, lots,
boundaries, location of utility buildings, electric power or light poles,
recreational areas, walkways, office, stores, service stations, and all
other buildings connected with the operation of a trailer park, shall
accompany any application to locate and construct, change, alter or add
to any existing trailer park.
B. Applications for the construction or alteration permit required by this
article shall be submitted to and granted by the Town Council.
C. The proposed plans required by this article shall be inspected by and
receive the approval of the Town Engineer and Building Inspector
before a permit shall be granted.
D. The proposed plans shall comply with all provisions of this chapter and
all other applicable laws and shall be filed and kept in the office of the
Building Inspector.
E. The Town Council may require any further information it may deem
necessary to enable it to arrive at a decision to grant or not grant the
permit.
A. All trailer park operators shall keep a record containing the following:
The name of the legal owner of the trailer coach and the lessee's name,
if any; names of all occupants; number of school-age children; trailer
coach license number, make, size, year and model of same; dates of
arrival and departure and the number of the trailer coach lot where the
trailer coach is berthed; registration number of any and all motor
vehicles in possession of the trailer coach owner and occupants. Entries
are to be made the day a trailer coach is berthed in the park. The record
must be signed by the owner or lessee of the trailer park.
B. The records shall be open for inspection by all proper authorities.
§ 239-20 CHARTER § 239-24
C:523
§ 239-24. Recreation area required.
An area for recreational purposes, within or adjoining the boundaries of a
trailer coach park, shall be provided by the operator and shall be equal to
at least 5% of the total land area contained in the park. The shape of such
area shall be that usual for such purposes. The condition of this area and the
equipment thereof shall be maintained in good repair and in a safe condition
at all times by the operator.
§ 239-25. Lot requirements.
Individual trailer coach parking lots shall consist of a minimum of 1,500
square feet and be at least 30 feet wide and 50 feet long, clearly defined
and permanently numbered.
§ 239-26. Position of trailer.
Trailer coaches shall be harbored on each lot so that there will be at least a
ten-foot clearance between all trailer coaches.
§ 239-27. Street requirements.
§ 239-28. Parking requirements.
Parking of all vehicles shall be off-street parking, unless the streets are of
sufficient width to provide for curb parking with a lane at least 12 feet in
width between the parked vehicles.
§ 239-29. Walkway requirements.
Each trailer coach parking lot shall have an all-weather, hard-surfaced
or wooden walk extending from the street a distance sufficient to permit
access to all doors on one side of any trailer coach parked on that lot, and
the walk shall have a minimum width of 24 inches.
§ 239-30. Electrical requirements; standards; inspection.
A. All trailer coach spaces shall abut upon a street of not less than 20 feet
in width, which shall have unobstructed access to a public street or
highway.
B. All streets and parking spaces shall be constructed of not less than six
inches of compacted gravel and shall be oiled or treated in such a
manner as to make them dustless.
C. All streets shall be well marked in the daytime and well lighted at night.
D. All streets shall be maintained in good repair at all times.
A. An electrical outlet supplying at least 110 AC volts and individually
fused shall be provided for each trailer space and shall be located at
least six feet above the ground.
§ 239-24 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 239-30
C:524
§ 239-31. Water requirements.
§ 239-32. Fire protection requirements.95
Every trailer coach park shall be equipped at all times with one fire
extinguisher kept in good working order and which is approved by the Fire
Department of the Town, for every 10 trailer coach spaces and located not
farther than 200 feet from each trailer coach lot. No open fires shall be
permitted except as provided in Chapter 47, Burning, Open, of the Code of
the Town of East Greenwich. No fires shall be left unattended at any time.
§ 239-33. Sewage disposal.
B. Service wires from individual outlets to each trailer coach shall be
elevated at least eight feet above the ground along their entire distance
except where service wires leave the outlet at the meter box and where
they enter the trailer coaches, unless the service is by conduit or
underground cable.
C. All electrical wiring, apparatus or appliances for furnishing light, heat
or power shall be in strict conformity with approved methods and
practices for safety to life and property. Compliance with the National
Electrical Code, as published by the National Board of Fire
Underwriters, shall be prima facie evidence of approved methods.
Inspection of wiring, apparatus or appliances shall be made by the
Electrical Inspector of the Town.
A. Each trailer lot shall have an individual underground water supply
controlled by an underground nonfreezing shutoff.
B. The quality of the water supply, if from other than a public supply, shall
be subject to state inspection and approval.
C. An adequate supply of hot water and cold running water shall be
provided at all times in the utility buildings for bathing, washing and
laundry purposes.
A. Unless connected with community sewers, each trailer coach lot shall
have a cesspool or a septic tank conforming with the regulations of the
State Health Department.
B. Cesspool or septic tanks for all buildings connected with the operation
of the park shall be of sufficient size and construction so that no
seepage from such cesspools or septic tanks shall ever appear above or
on the ground around the cesspools or septic tanks, and they shall
comply with the local Building Code.
95.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 239-30 CHARTER § 239-33
C:525
§ 239-34. Garbage and rubbish requirements.
§ 239-35. Service buildings and facilities requirements.
§ 239-36. Animals.
C. Each individual trailer coach lot cesspool, septic tank or sewer shall be
provided with an entrance to it, constructed in accordance with the
local Building Code.
D. All connections between the trailer coach and the cesspool shall be
properly vented and shall be made by or under the direction of the
operator of the trailer park.
A. Tightly covered metal garbage and rubbish containers shall be provided
in quantities adequate to permit the depositing of all garbage and
rubbish. Such receptacles shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all
times.
B. Garbage and rubbish shall be collected and removed from the premises
as frequently as may be necessary to ensure that they do not overflow,
give off offensive odors or become a menace to the health of the
community or park.
A. Each trailer park shall provide suitably equipped service buildings; the
buildings shall be permanent structures complying with all applicable
laws regulating buildings, electrical installation, plumbing, heating and
sanitation systems. The buildings shall be well lighted at all times and
well ventilated. The buildings shall be constructed of such
moistureproof material, including painted woodwork, as shall permit
repeated cleaning and washing. The buildings shall be properly heated
at all times. The floors of all service buildings shall be of impervious
material and shall slope to a floor drain connected with the sewer
system or cesspool. Toilet, shower and lavatory facilities for men and
women shall be either in separate buildings or shall be separated, if
they are in the same building, by a soundproof wall. All toilets and
showers shall be in separate compartments.
B. Toilet facilities for men shall consist of not less than one flushable toilet
and one flushable urinal, one hot and cold water shower, and one hot
and cold water lavatory.
C. Toilet facilities for women shall consist of not less than one flushable
toilet, one hot and cold water shower, and one hot and cold water
lavatory.
D. Laundry facilities shall consist of not less than one double laundry tub
with hot and cold water connections, a wringer attachment or
automatic laundry facilities sufficient to meet the needs of the park.
Drying spaces shall be provided sufficient to accommodate the laundry
of the trailer park occupants.
§ 239-33 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 239-36
C:526
§ 239-37. Maintenance.
The premises and buildings of all trailer coach parks shall be maintained
in a neat, clean, orderly, safe, well-repaired condition and kept free of any
condition that will menace the health or safety of any occupant or the public
or constitute a nuisance.
§ 239-38. Regulations required; notice.
Trailer coach parks shall be governed by a complete set of rules and
regulations drawn up and enforced by the operator. Copies of these rules
are to be posted conspicuously in all buildings of the trailer coach park and
a copy thereof given to each trailer coach owner.
§ 239-39. Operator as constable.
Upon application to the Town Council, the operator of a trailer coach park
may be vested with the powers of a town constable.
§ 239-40. Inspection; violations; correction; revocation of license.
A. No owner or person in charge of any dog or cat shall permit it to run at
large or commit any nuisance within the limits of any trailer coach park.
B. No chickens, cows, goats, horses, ponies or other animals, except dogs
and cats, shall be housed or maintained within the premises of the park.
A. It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to inspect each trailer
coach park at least once during each year and at any other time as
ordered by the Town Council. He shall inspect the register records and
see that they are in proper order; he shall inspect all buildings, as well
as the grounds, of each trailer park. He shall order any and all
violations of this article to be corrected within a time limit set by him. If
correction of a violation is not made within the time limit, the Building
Inspector shall notify the Town Council to that effect, which shall order
the trailer coach park operator before it for a hearing on action to
cancel the operator's license to operate a trailer coach park.
B. After hearing thereon, the Town Council may revoke any license to
operate a trailer coach park for any violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter, irrespective of whether or not the licensee shall have been
found guilty of such violation in any prosecution in the District Court.
C. A trailer park license required by this article may also be revoked for
the following reasons:
(1) Selling or permitting to be sold on the premises any intoxicating
liquor, wine or beer.
(2) Permitting prostitution or any offense against the morals of the
community on the premises.
§ 239-36 CHARTER § 239-40
C:527
§ 239-41. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be fined not
less than $2 nor more than $20 for each violation, and each day a violation
shall be permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(3) Committing or maintaining a nuisance.
§ 239-40 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 239-41
C:528
Chapter 244
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 93, Art. I.
Junkyards — See Ch. 138.
Towing — See Ch. 235.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 248.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Abandoned motor vehicles — See R.I.G.L.
§ 31-42-1 et seq.
§ 244-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
A VEHICLE LEGALLY OR PHYSICALLY INCAPABLE OF BEING OPERATED
— Includes one which has not been duly registered according to law or
which lacks the equipment in good operating condition as required by law
to enable it to be registered.
DISMANTLED, JUNKED OR ABANDONED VEHICLES — Includes major
parts thereof including bodies, engines, transmissions, rear ends, etc.
PREMISES — Includes public or private property, Town streets and public
highways.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Includes property owned by the Town or state,
property acquired by the Town at tax sales, and all streets and highways
within the Town, whether or not they are public highways.
§ 244-2. Unregistered vehicle deemed abandoned.
An unregistered vehicle on premises not owned or occupied by the owner
of the vehicle may be deemed to be abandoned for the purposes of this
chapter.
§ 244-3. Storage license required.
No person shall deposit, store, keep or permit to be deposited, stored
or kept in the open upon public or private property a dismantled,
unserviceable, junked or abandoned vehicle, or one legally or physically
incapable of being operated, unless a license for such storage has
theretofore been obtained from the proper authority.
§ 244-4. Duty to remove vehicle upon notice.
§ 239-41 CHARTER § 244-4
C:529
§ 244-5. Failure to remove vehicle.
Upon failure to remove any vehicle within the time limits provided in
this chapter, the owner, lessee, occupant of the premises or the Police
Department shall forthwith remove or cause the vehicle to be removed from
the premises to a location to be provided for the purpose by the Town.
§ 244-6. Redemption of vehicle.96
The owner of any vehicle removed as provided in this chapter may regain
possession thereof from the Town by making application therefor within
two months after its receipt by the Town upon payment to the Town of all
reasonable costs of removal, which shall be repaid to the person who paid
or incurred such charges, plus an additional charge for storage charges of
the vehicle while in possession of the Town.
§ 244-7. Sale of vehicle upon failure to redeem.
If no claim for a vehicle removed as provided in this chapter is made within
two months after receipt thereof, the Town may sell the vehicle for the best
price obtainable as junk or otherwise, and the proceeds thereof shall be
available to pay the reasonable charges of delivering the vehicle to the Town
if a claim therefor be made by the person who paid the charges, and the
expense of keeping and disposing of the vehicle, and any balance shall be
paid into the general fund.
A. Notice by owner, lessee, occupant of premises. The owner of any vehicle
described in § 244-1 shall remove the vehicle within seven days after
being ordered so to do in writing by the owner, lessee or occupant of the
premises where the vehicle shall be found. If the owner of any such
vehicle is not known or cannot readily be ascertained, notice to remove
may be given by attaching such notice to such vehicle. The Police
Department upon request therefor shall assist in ascertaining the name
and address of the owner of any such vehicle.
B. Notice by police. If the owner of any such vehicle is also the owner,
lessee or occupant of the premises, notice to remove as stated in
Subsection A of this section shall be given by the Police Department.
C. Notice as to vehicle on street, highway. If the vehicle is on a Town street
or public highway, 48 hours' notice to remove the vehicle shall be given
by the Police Department, provided that, if the vehicle constitutes a
present hazard or unduly obstructs traffic ingress to or egress from
private or public property, the vehicle may be removed by the Police
Department without any prior notice.
96.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 244-4 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 244-8
C:530
§ 244-8. Liability for loss or damage to vehicle.
Neither the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises from which any
vehicle described in this chapter shall be removed, his servant or agent,
or the Town shall be liable for any loss or damage to such vehicle while
being removed, or while in the possession of the Town, or as a result of any
subsequent sale or other disposition.
Chapter 248
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fee for residential parking permit — See
§ 93-1A.
Towing — See Ch. 235.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 244.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Powers of local authorities — See R.I.G.L.
§ 31-12-12.
Traffic control devices on local
highways — See R.I.G.L. § 31-13-3.
Local control of speed limits — See R.I.G.L.
§§ 31-14-5 to 31-14-8.
§ 244-8 CHARTER § 244-8
C:531

ARTICLE I
In General
§ 248-1. Definitions.
Except as otherwise provided, whenever in this chapter the following terms
are used, they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this
section:
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE — Vehicles of the Fire Department,
police vehicles and ambulances.
CROSSWALK — That portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the
prolongation of curb and property lines at intersections, or any other
portion of a roadway clearly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or
other markings on the surface.
DRIVEWAY — Every road or way not open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.
INTERSECTION — The area embraced within the prolongation of the lateral
curblines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines, of two or more streets
or highways which join one another at an angle, whether or not one such
street or highway crosses the other.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNS — All signs, markings and devices not
inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority of a public
body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of guiding, directing,
warning or regulating traffic.
OPERATOR — Any person who operates a vehicle.
OWNER — Any person, legal entity, other than a lienholder, having title to a
vehicle.
PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, attended
or unattended, upon a street, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose
of and while expeditiously taking on or leaving passengers or loading or
unloading merchandise then in readiness for immediate loading or delivery,
or otherwise than in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or
signals.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The privilege of the immediate use of the street or
highway.
ROADWAY — That portion of a street or highway between the regularly
established curblines or that part devoted to vehicular traffic.
STOP — Complete cessation of movement. When prohibited, it shall not be
construed to include bringing a vehicle to a standstill in case of emergency
or for no longer time than is necessary to take on or leave passengers.
STREET or HIGHWAY — Every way set apart for public travel, except
footpaths.
§ 248-1 CHARTER § 248-1
C:533
TAXICAB — Every automobile, motorcar or other power-driven vehicle
which shall be set up, used or driven upon the public highways in the Town
for the conveyance of persons for hire shall be deemed a taxicab.
TRAFFIC — Pedestrians, ridden animals, herded animals, vehicles and other
conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street for purposes
of travel.
VEHICLE — Every device or means in, upon or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, except
carriages propelled by hand for the conveyance of children.
§ 248-2. Violations and penalties.97
Unless another penalty is specifically prescribed by statute or elsewhere in
this Code, every person violating any of the provisions of any ordinance of
the Town relating to traffic shall be liable to pay a fine of $20 for each such
offense.
§ 248-3. Police to enforce.
It shall be the duty of the Police Department of the Town to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 248-4. Police authority to direct traffic.
Officers of the Police Department are hereby authorized to direct all traffic
either in person or by means of visible or audible signal in conformance with
the provisions of this chapter, provided that, in the event of a fire or other
emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, officers of the
Police Department may temporarily direct traffic as conditions may require,
notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter.
§ 248-5. Obedience to police officers.
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to comply with any order,
signal or direction of a police officer, either in uniform or displaying any
official police badge.
§ 248-6. Applicability to all vehicle operators.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the operator of any vehicle
owned by or used in the service of the United States government, this state
or the Town, and it shall be unlawful for any such operator to violate any of
the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter.
97.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV). See also Chapter 152, § 152-13, Violations and penalties relating to traffic.
§ 248-1 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 248-7
C:534
§ 248-7. Exemption for authorized emergency vehicles.
The provisions of this chapter regulating the movement, parking and
standing of vehicles shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles while
the driver of such vehicle is operating the vehicle in an emergency in the
necessary performance of public duties. This exemption shall not, however,
protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequence of a reckless
disregard of the safety of others.
§ 248-8. When signs required.
No provisions of this chapter for which signs are specifically required shall
be enforceable against an alleged violator, if at the time and place of the
alleged violation the sign required by this chapter is not in proper position
and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.
Whenever a particular section does not state that signs are required, such
section shall be effective without signs being erected to give notice thereof.
§ 248-9. Obedience to signs and signals.
It shall be unlawful for an operator of any vehicle to disobey the instructions
of any official traffic sign or signal placed in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
§ 248-10. Type, erection, maintenance and uniformity of signs and
signals.
The Town Council shall determine and designate the character or type of
all official traffic signs and signals. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized,
and as to signs and signals required pursuant to this chapter, it shall be his
duty, to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained all official
traffic signs and signals. All signs and signals required pursuant to this
chapter for a particular purpose shall be, insofar as practicable, uniform
throughout the Town.
§ 248-11. Unauthorized signs.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain or to display upon
or in view of any street any unofficial sign or device which purports to be
or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic sign or which attempts
to direct the movement of traffic, other than signs denoting construction
or obstructions in the street, or which hides from view any official traffic
signs. Every such prohibited sign or device is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance, and the Chief of Police is hereby empowered to remove such sign
or device or cause it to be removed without notice.
§ 248-12. Damaging and interfering with signs and signals.
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to willfully deface, injure,
move, obstruct or interfere with any official traffic sign or signal.
§ 248-7 CHARTER § 248-13
C:535
§ 248-13. Designation and marking of crosswalks.
The Director of Public Works is hereby authorized to establish and to
designate and shall thereafter maintain or cause to be maintained, by
appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway,
crosswalks at intersections where in his opinion there is particular danger
to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as he may
deem necessary.
§ 248-14. Riding bicycles and velocipedes.
§ 248-15. Prima facie evidence.
In any prosecution or proceeding under this chapter, the registration plate
displayed on the motor vehicle shall constitute prima facie evidence that the
owner of such vehicle was responsible for such violation.
A. No person shall ride a bicycle or velocipede on any footpath or sidewalk
in the Town.
B. Every person riding a bicycle or velocipede upon any street in the Town
shall, during the day, carry a whistle or bell and, after dark, in addition
to a whistle or bell, a light with which to warn foot passengers.
§ 248-13 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 248-15
C:536
ARTICLE II
Operation
§ 248-16. Throughways designated. [Amended 6-27-1991 by Ord.
No. 564; 5-11-1993 by Ord. No. 594; 9-28-1993 by Ord. No. 598;
9-24-1992 by Ord. No. 581; 12-22-1992 by Ord. No. 588; 4-25-1996
by Ord. No. 633; 12-19-1996 by Ord. No. 641; 2-25-1997 by Ord. No.
642; 3-11-1997 by Ord. No. 643; 12-8-1998 by Ord. No. 663;
5-9-2000 by Ord. No. 689; 6-27-2000 by Ord. No. 694; 7-22-2002 by
Ord. No. 725]
The following streets and parts of streets are hereby declared to constitute
throughways for the purpose of this chapter:
Name of Street At Intersection With
Adirondack Drive Monroe Drive
Allen Drive Hanaford Drive
Allen Drive Nicholas Lane
Allen Drive Winthrop Road
Ann Drive Lynn Circle
Ayrault Road Pequot Trail
Birchwood Way Bayberry Lane
Birchwood Way Lafayette Drive
Bow Street Tamarack Drive
Bow Street Devon Court
Bridge Street Lincoln Street
Canonicus Trail King Philip Trail
Carrs Pond Road Middle Road
Carrs Pond Road Waterford Drive
Cedar Avenue Dalehill Drive
Cedar Avenue Friendly Road
Cedar Avenue Overfield Road
Cedar Avenue Wanton Shippee Road
Chestnut Drive Elm Court
Chestnut Drive Franklin Road
Chestnut Drive Hamilton Drive
Chestnut Drive Jefferson Drive
Chestnut Drive Misty Oak Drive
Chestnut Drive Sycamore Drive
Chestnut Drive Walnut Drive
Church Street Brayton Street
§ 248-16 CHARTER § 248-16
C:537
Name of Street At Intersection With
Church Street Pearl Street
Church Street Rector Street
Church Street West Street
Cindyann Drive Apple Tree Court
Cindyann Drive Crestridge Drive
Cindyann Drive Great Road
Cindyann Drive Red Barn Lane
Cindyann Drive Tall Pine Drive
Clearview Drive [Added
12-15-2003 by Ord. No.
741]
South Road
Clemente Drive Edward Road
Clemente Drive Winchester Drive
Cresthill Drive Gladridge Drive
Cresthill Drive Pricewood Drive
Crestridge Drive Hanaford Drive
Crompton Avenue Rocky Hollow Road
Crossways Road Friendly Road
Crossways Road Overfield Road
Crossways Road Wanton Shippee Road
Crystal Drive Crystal Court
Dalehill Drive Blueberry Drive
Dalehill Drive Cresthill Drive
Dalehill Drive Oakwood Drive
Deerfield Drive Falcon Circle
Division Street Bicknell Avenue
Division Street Brayton Street
Division Street Duke Street
Division Street Kenyon Avenue
Division Street Overbrook Lane
Division Street Rector Street
Division Street West Street
Duke Street Long Street
Duke Street Queen Street
Duke Street Wine Street
Eldredge Avenue Church Street
§ 248-16 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 248-16
C:538
Name of Street At Intersection With
Fairfield Avenue Lillian Street
Fairfield Avenue Pettine Street
Fairfield Avenue Power Street
Fairfield Avenue Tucker Street
Fairfield Avenue Vicory Street
Fernwood Drive Lynn Circle
Fox Run Watch Hill
Frenchtown Road Adirondack Drive
Frenchtown Road Bear Swamp Road
Frenchtown Road Forest Lane
Frenchtown Road High Hawk Road
Frenchtown Road Hugenot Drive
Frenchtown Road Jodie Beth Drive
Frenchtown Road Kirker Drive
Frenchtown Road Tillinghast Road
Friendship Street Cliff Street
Grand View Road Red Oak Drive
Grasslands Road Overfield Road
Granite Drive Limerock Drive
Great Road [Added
10-12-2004 by Ord. No.
749; repealed 3-13-2017 by
Ord. No. 865]
Hanaford Drive Atherton Road
Hanaford Drive Gould Place
Hanaford Drive Mayflower Drive
Hemlock Drive Balsam Drive
Hemlock Drive Alder Court
Hemlock Drive Blueberry Drive
High Hawk Road Squirrel Lane
High Hawk Road Arrowhead Trail
High Hawk Road Cardinal Lane
High Hawk Road Deerfield Drive
Howland Road Barrows Drive
Howland Road Dalehill Drive
Howland Road Hemlock Drive
§ 248-16 CHARTER § 248-16
C:539
Name of Street At Intersection With
Howland Road Kent Drive
Howland Road Nichols Road
Howland Road Old Greenwich Drive
Howland Road Pegwin Drive
Howland Road Winthrop Road
Hugenot Drive Monroe Drive
Jodie Beth Drive Kirker Drive
Kent Drive [Repealed
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 865]
Kent Drive Great Road
Kent Drive Mayflower Drive
Kenyon Avenue Harwood Road
Kenyon Avenue [Repealed
10-24-2016 by Ord. No.
862]
Kenyon Avenue Knollwood Avenue
Kenyon Avenue Ledge Road
Kenyon Avenue Spring Street
King Street Crop Street
King Street Duke Street
King Street Exchange Street
King Street Marlborough Street
Landover Drive Lillibridge Drive
LeBaron Drive Bayberry Lane
LeBaron Drive Lafayette Drive
LeBaron Drive Ridgefield Drive
LeBaron Drive Westwood Drive
Liberty Street [Repealed
3-14-2016 by Ord. No.
E-56; 4-11-2016 by Ord.
No. 851]
Liberty Street [Repealed
3-14-2016 by Ord. No.
E-56; 4-11-2016 by Ord.
No. 851]
Lion Street Castle Street
London Street Crompton Avenue
London Street Fish Street
§ 248-16 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 248-16
C:540
Name of Street At Intersection With
London Street Lion Street
London Street Marlborough Street
Long Street Castle Street
Long Street Lion Street
Long Street Marlborough Street
Lynn Circle Darl Court
Maplewood Drive Hickory Drive
Mayflower Drive Bunker Hill Lane
Mayflower Drive John Alden Road
Middle Road Allen Drive
Middle Road Atherton Road
Middle Road Avenger Road
Middle Road Balsam Drive
Middle Road Cindyann Drive
Middle Road Crestridge Drive
Middle Road Glen Drive
Middle Road Howland Road
Middle Road Moosehorn Road
Middle Road North Gate
Middle Road Shippeetown Road
Middle Road South Pierce Road
Middle Road Spring Valley Drive
Middle Road Stone Ridge Drive
Middle Road Tanglewood Drive
Miss Fry Drive Corr Way
Moosehorn Road Miss Fry Drive
Pequot Trail King Philip Trail
Peirce Street Church Street
Peirce Street Melrose Street
Peirce Street Montrose Street
Peirce Street Revolution Street
Phillips Road Birchwood Way
Phillips Road Woodland Road
Post Road Franklin Road
Proctor Avenue Friendship Street
Proctor Avenue Hyland Avenue
§ 248-16 CHARTER § 248-16
C:541
Name of Street At Intersection With
Proctor Avenue Ledge Road
Prospect Street Greene Street
Prospect Street Somerset Street
Queen Street Castle Street
Queen Street Marlborough Street
Reynolds Street Friendship Street
Rhodes Way Traveling westerly at its intersection of
Graham Way
River Farm Drive Jefferson Drive
River Run Traveling westerly at its intersection of
River Run running southerly
Rocky Hollow Road Crompton Avenue
Rocky Hollow Road Marlborough Street
Rocky Hollow Road Upland Avenue
Second Street Fifth Avenue
Second Street [Repealed
4-25-2016 by Ord. No. 852]
Second Street Second Avenue
Second Street Third Avenue
Shippee Road Tipping Rock Drive
Shippeetown Road Ann Drive
Shippeetown Road Aurora Drive
Signal Ridge Way Boulder Way
Signal Ridge Way Fox Run
Signal Ridge Way Watch Hill
Sixth Avenue [Repealed
4-25-2016 by Ord. No. 852]
Sixth Avenue Second Street
Sixth Avenue Sixth Street
South Pierce Road Cora Street
South Pierce Road Eugene Street
South Pierce Road Woodland Road
South Road Narrow Lane
South Road Tillinghast Road
Spring Street Eldredge Avenue
Spring Street Mawney Street
Spring Street Pearl Street
§ 248-16 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 248-16
C:542
Name of Street At Intersection With
Spring Street Peirce Street
Spring Street Proctor Avenue
Spring Street Prospect Street
Spring Street Rector Street
Spring Street West Street
Spring Valley Drive Holly Hill Court
Spring Valley Drive Oak Dell Circle
Spring Valley Drive Pine Hill Drive
Spring Valley Drive Sunset Drive
Stone Ridge Drive Boulder Way
Stone Ridge Drive Crystal Drive
Sycamore Drive Cypress Court
Sycamore Drive Hamilton Drive
Sycamore Drive Teakwood Court
Sylvan Drive Brookside Drive
Sylvan Drive Kenson Drive
Sylvan Drive Verndale Drive
Tanglewood Drive Larch Road
Tanglewood Drive Laurel Hill Road
Tanglewood Drive Red Oak Road
Tanglewood Drive Tory Lane
Tanglewood Drive Trappers Lane
Tillinghast Road Arrowhead Trail
Union Street Marlborough Street
Vine Street Marlborough Street
Water Street Division Street
Water Street Queen Street
Waterford Drive Diplomat Drive
West Street James Street
Westwood Drive Birchwood Way
Westwood Drive Woodland Road
§ 248-17. Full stop required; usual right-of-way rules apply.
Every operator of a motor vehicle or bus traveling upon any street
intersecting or joining any throughway designated in § 248-16 shall bring
such motor vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near the place where such
street meets the prolongation of the nearest property line of such
§ 248-16 CHARTER § 248-17
C:543
throughway; subject, however, to the direction of any traffic control sign or
signal or any police officer at such intersection or junction. The operator of
any vehicle who has come to a full stop as required in this section, upon
entering the throughway, as well as the operators of any vehicles on such
throughways, shall be subject to the usual right-of-way rule prescribed by
law and applicable to vehicles at intersections or junctions.
§ 248-18. Signs and markings at throughways.
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized and directed to place and maintain
or to cause to be placed and maintained on each and every street
intersecting any throughway designated in § 248-16 and at or near the
property line of such throughway appropriate signs upon the street and, in
addition thereto, may place and maintain any appropriate devices or marks
in the roadway, such signs, devices or marks to bear the word "Stop" and
to be located in such position and to be provided with letters of a size
to be clearly legible from a distance of at least 100 feet along the street
intersecting or joining the throughway. All such signs shall be illuminated at
night or so placed as to be illuminated by streetlights or by the headlights
of approaching motor vehicles.
§ 248-19. Multiway stop intersections. [Added 11-29-1990 by Ord.
No. 557; amended 6-27-1991 by Ord. No. 563; 10-29-1992 by Ord.
No. 584; 1-26-1993 by Ord. No. 589; 6-28-1994 by Ord. No. 612;
9-26-1996 by Ord. No. 635; 6-24-1997 by Ord. No. 649; 5-11-1999 by
Ord. No. 672; 9-14-1999 by Ord. No. 678; 5-5-2000 by Ord. No. 687;
3-11-2002 by Ord. No. 720; 6-10-2003 by Ord. No. 73398]
A. Generally. The operator of any motor vehicle or bus who has come to a
full stop as required in this section, upon entering the intersecting
street, as well as the operators of any vehicles on the intersecting
street, shall be subject to the usual right-of-way rule prescribed by law
and applicable to the vehicles at intersections or junctions.
B. Traffic control signs. The operator of any motor vehicle or bus who has
come to a full stop as required below shall be subject, however, to the
direction of any traffic control sign or signal or any police officer at such
intersection.
C. Specific multiway stop intersections are as follows:
(1) Queen Street and Duke Street. Every operator of a motor vehicle or
bus traveling upon Queen Street at its intersection with Duke
Street shall bring such vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near the
place where Queen Street meets the prolongation of the nearest
property line of Duke Street, and every operator of a motor vehicle
or bus traveling upon Duke Street at its intersection with Queen
Street shall bring such motor vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near
98.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 733 was to remain in effect for a period of one year unless
readopted.
§ 248-17 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 248-19
C:544
the place where Duke Street meets the prolongation of the nearest
property line of Queen Street.
(2) Friendship Street and Prospect Street. Every operator of a motor
vehicle or bus traveling upon Friendship Street at its intersection
with Prospect Street shall bring such vehicle or bus to a full stop at
or near the place where Friendship Street meets the prolongation
of the nearest property line of Prospect Street, and every operator
of a motor vehicle or bus traveling upon Prospect Street at its
intersection with Friendship Street shall bring such vehicle or bus
to a full stop at or near the place where Prospect Street meets the
prolongation of the nearest property line of Friendship Street.
(3) Friendship Street and Cliff Street. Every operator of a motor
vehicle or bus traveling upon Friendship Street at its intersection
with Cliff Street shall bring such vehicle or bus to a full stop at or
near the place where Friendship Street meets the prolongation of
the nearest property line of Cliff Street, and every operator of a
motor vehicle or bus traveling upon Cliff Street at its intersection
with Friendship Street shall bring such motor vehicle or bus to a
full stop at or near the place where Cliff Street meets the
prolongation of the nearest property line of Friendship Street
(three-way stop).
(4) Reynolds Street and Spring Street. Every operator of a motor
vehicle or bus traveling upon Reynolds Street at its intersection
with Spring Street shall bring such vehicle or bus to a full stop at or
near the place where Reynolds Street meets the prolongation of the
nearest property line of Spring Street, and every operator of a
motor vehicle or bus traveling upon Spring Street at its
intersection with Reynolds Street shall bring such vehicle or bus to
a full stop at or near the place where Spring Street meets the
prolongation of the nearest property line of Reynolds Street (threeway
stop).
(5) Frenchtown Road and Tillinghast Road. Every operator of a motor
vehicle or bus traveling upon Frenchtown Road at its intersection
with Tillinghast Road shall bring such vehicle or bus to a full stop at
or near the place where Frenchtown Road meets the prolongation
of the nearest property line of Tillinghast Road, and every operator
of a motor vehicle or bus traveling upon Tillinghast Road at its
intersection with Frenchtown Road shall bring such motor vehicle
or bus to a full stop at or near the place where Tillinghast Road
meets the prolongation of the nearest property line of Frenchtown
Road.
(6) Chestnut Drive and Grand View Road. Every operator of a motor
vehicle or bus traveling upon Chestnut Drive at its intersection with
Grand View Road shall bring such motor vehicle or bus to a full stop
at or near the place where Chestnut Drive meets the prolongation
of the nearest property line of Grand View Road; every operator of
§ 248-19 CHARTER § 248-19
C:545
a motor vehicle or bus traveling upon Grand View Road at its
intersection with Chestnut Drive shall bring such motor vehicle or
bus to a full stop at or near the place where Grand View Road meets
the prolongation of the nearest property line of Chestnut Drive.
(7) Middle Road and Tillinghast Road. Every operator of a motor
vehicle or bus traveling upon Middle Road at its intersection with
Tillinghast Road shall bring such motor vehicle or bus to a full stop
at or near the place where Middle Road meets the prolongation of
the nearest property line of Tillinghast Road, and every operator of
a motor vehicle or bus traveling upon Tillinghast Road shall bring
such motor vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near the place where
Middle Road meets the prolongation of the nearest property line of
Tillinghast Road (three-way stop). [Amended 1-9-2017 by Ord.
No. 864]
(8) Cedar Avenue, Sylvan Drive and Pricewood Drive. Every operator
of a motor vehicle or bus traveling upon Cedar Avenue at its
intersection with Sylvan Drive shall bring such motor vehicle or bus
to a full stop at or near the place where Cedar Avenue meets the
prolongation of the nearest property line of Sylvan Drive, and every
operator of a motor vehicle or bus traveling upon Sylvan Drive shall
bring such motor vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near the place
where Sylvan Drive meets the prolongation of the nearest property
line of Cedar Avenue. Every operator of a motor vehicle or bus
traveling upon Cedar Avenue at its intersection with Pricewood
Drive shall bring such motor vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near
the place where Cedar Avenue meets the prolongation of the
nearest property line of Pricewood Drive, and every operator of a
motor vehicle or bus traveling upon Pricewood Drive at its
intersection with Cedar Avenue shall bring such motor vehicle or
bus to a full stop at or near the place where Pricewood Drive meets
the prolongation of the nearest property line of Cedar Avenue (fourway
stop involving three differently named streets).
(9) Water Street and King Street. Every operator of a motor vehicle or
bus traveling in a northerly direction upon Water Street at its
intersection with King Street shall bring such motor vehicle or bus
to a full stop at or near the place where Water Street meets the
prolongation of the southerly property line of King Street (one-way
stop).
(10) Shippee Road and Frenchtown Road. Every operator of a motor
vehicle or bus traveling in an easterly direction upon Frenchtown
Road at its intersection with Shippee Road shall bring such motor
vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near the place where Frenchtown
Road meets the prolongation of the westerly property line of
Shippee Road; every operator of a motor vehicle or bus traveling in
a northerly direction upon Shippee Road at its intersection with
Frenchtown Road shall bring such motor vehicle or bus to a full
stop at or near the place where Shippee Road meets the
§ 248-19 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 248-19
C:546
prolongation of the southerly property line of Frenchtown Road
(two-way stop).
(11) Division Street and the Amtrak Railroad. Every operator of a motor
vehicle or bus traveling in an easterly and westerly direction upon
Division Street at its intersection with the Amtrak Railroad shall
bring such motor vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near the place
where Division Street meets the right-of-way of the Amtrak
Railroad (two-way stop).
(12) Cindyann Drive and Bunker Hill Lane. Every operator of a motor
vehicle or bus traveling in a southerly direction upon Cindyann
Drive at its intersection with Bunker Hill Lane shall bring such
motor vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near the place where
Cindyann Drive meets the prolongation of the northerly property
line of Bunker Hill Lane (one-way stop).
(13) Mawney Street and Friendship Street. Every operator of a motor
vehicle or bus traveling upon Mawney Street at its intersection
with Friendship Street shall bring such motor vehicle or bus to a
full stop at or near the place Mawney Street meets the prolongation
of the nearest property line of Friendship Street; every operator of
a motor vehicle or bus traveling upon Friendship Street at its
intersection with Mawney Street shall bring such motor vehicle or
bus to a full stop at or near the place where Friendship Street
meets the prolongation of the nearest property line of Mawney
Street.
(14) Misty Oak Drive and Grand View Road. Every operator of a motor
vehicle or bus traveling upon Misty Oak Drive at its intersection
with Grand View Road shall bring such motor vehicle or bus to a
full stop at or near the place Misty Oak Drive meets the
prolongation of the nearest property line of Grand View Road;
every operator of a motor vehicle or bus traveling upon Grand View
Road at its intersection with Misty Oak Drive shall bring such
motor vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near the place where Grand
View Road meets the prolongation of the nearest property line of
Misty Oak Drive.
(15) Grasslands Road and LeBaron Drive. Every operator of a motor
vehicle or bus traveling in a northwesterly direction on Grasslands
Road at its intersection with LeBaron Drive shall bring such motor
vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near the place where Grasslands
Road meets the prolongation of the northeasterly property line of
LeBaron Drive; every operator of a motor vehicle or bus traveling in
a southeasterly direction on LeBaron Drive shall bring such motor
vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near the place where LeBaron
Drive meets the prolongation of the northerly property line of
Phillips Road (two-way stop).
§ 248-19 CHARTER § 248-19
C:547
(16) Phillips Road and Reed Place. Every operator of a motor vehicle or
bus traveling in a northeasterly direction on Phillips Road at its
intersection with Reed Place shall bring such motor vehicle or bus
to a full stop at or near the place where Phillips Road meets the
prolongation of the westerly property line of Reed Place (one-way
stop).
(17) Ridgefield Drive and Middle Road. Every operator of a motor
vehicle or bus traveling in a northerly direction on Ridgefield Drive
at its intersection with Middle Road shall bring such motor vehicle
or bus to a full stop at or near the place where Ridgefield Drive
meets the prolongation of the southerly property line of Middle
Road; every operator of a motor vehicle or bus traveling in an
easterly direction on Middle Road at its intersection with Ridgefield
Drive shall bring such motor vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near
the place where Middle Road meets the prolongation of the
westerly property line of Ridgefield Drive, and every operator of a
motor vehicle or bus traveling in a westerly direction on Middle
Road at its intersection with Ridgefield Drive shall bring such
motor vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near the place where Middle
Road meets the prolongation of the easterly property line of
Ridgefield Drive (three-way stop).
(18)Kenyon Avenue, Cedar Avenue and Middle Road. Every operator of
a motor vehicle or bus traveling in a northerly direction on Cedar
Avenue at its intersection with Middle Road shall bring such motor
vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near the place where Cedar
Avenue meets the prolongation of the southerly property line of
Middle Road; every operator of a motor vehicle or bus traveling in
an easterly direction on Middle Road at its intersection with Cedar
Avenue shall bring such motor vehicle or bus to a full stop at or
near the place where Middle Road meets the prolongation of the
westerly property line of Cedar Avenue; every operator of a motor
vehicle or bus traveling in a westerly direction on Kenyon Avenue
at its intersection with Cedar Avenue shall bring such motor vehicle
or bus to a full stop at or near the place where Kenyon Avenue
meets the prolongation of the easterly property line of Cedar
Avenue, and every operator of a motor vehicle or bus traveling in a
southerly direction on Cedar Avenue at its intersection with Middle
Road shall bring such motor vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near
the place where Cedar Avenue meets the prolongation of the
northerly property line of Middle Road (four-way stop).
(19) Fourth Street and Fourth Avenue. Every operator of a motor
vehicle or bus traveling in a northerly direction upon Fourth Street
at its intersection with Fourth Avenue shall bring such motor
vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near the place where Fourth Street
meets the prolongation of the southerly property line of Fourth
Avenue (one-way stop).
§ 248-19 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 248-19
C:548
(20) South Road and Tillinghast Road. Every operator of a motor vehicle
or bus traveling upon South Road at its intersection with Tillinghast
Road shall bring such motor vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near
the place where South Road meets the prolongation of the nearest
property line of Tillinghast Road, and every operator of a motor
vehicle or bus traveling upon Tillinghast Road at its intersection
with South Road shall bring such motor vehicle or bus to a full stop
at or near the place where Tillinghast Road meets the prolongation
of the nearest property line of South Road (three-way stop).
(21) Stone Ridge Drive and Granite Drive. Every operator of a motor
vehicle or bus traveling in an easterly direction upon Stone Ridge
Drive at its intersection with Granite Drive shall bring such motor
vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near the place where Stone Ridge
Drive meets the prolongation of the westerly street line of Granite
Drive; and every operator of a motor vehicle or bus traveling in a
westerly direction upon Stone Ridge Drive at its intersection with
Granite Drive shall bring such motor vehicle or bus to a full stop at
or near the place where Stone Ridge Drive meets the prolongation
of the easterly street line of Granite Drive; and every operator of a
motor vehicle or bus traveling in a southerly direction upon Granite
Drive at its intersection with Stone Ridge Drive shall bring such
motor vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near the place where
Granite Drive meets the prolongation of the northerly street line of
Stone Ridge Drive (two-way stop). [Amended 7-13-2015 by Ord.
No. 843]
(22) Cindyann Drive and Great Road. Every operator of a motor vehicle
or bus traveling southerly upon Cindyann Drive at its intersection
with Great Road shall bring such vehicle or bus to a full stop at or
near the place where Cindyann Drive meets the prolongation of the
northerly street line of Great Road, and every operator of a motor
vehicle or bus traveling upon Great Road at its intersection with
Cindyann Drive shall bring such motor vehicle or bus to a full stop
at or near the place where Great Road meets the prolongation of
the easterly street line of Cindyann Drive, and every operator of a
motor vehicle or bus traveling northerly upon Cindyann Drive at its
intersection with Great Road shall bring such vehicle to a full stop
at or near the place where Cindyann Drive meets the prolongation
of the southerly street line of Great Road (three-way stop).
(23)Water Street and King Street. Every operator of a motor vehicle or
bus traveling southerly on Water Street at its intersection with King
Street shall bring such vehicle to a full stop on or near the place
where Water Street meets the prolongation of the northerly street
line of King Street, and every operator of a motor vehicle or bus
traveling upon King at its intersection with Water Street shall bring
such motor vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near the place where
King Street meets the prolongation of the westerly street line of
Water Street, and every operator of a motor vehicle or bus traveling
§ 248-19 CHARTER § 248-19
C:549
northerly upon Water Street at its intersection with King Street
shall bring such vehicle to a full stop at or near the place where
Water Street meets the prolongation of the southerly street line of
King Street (three-way stop).
(24) King Street and Duke Street. Every operator of a motor vehicle or
bus traveling upon King Street at its intersection with Duke Street
shall bring such vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near the place
where King Street meets the prolongation of the nearest property
line of Duke Street, and every operator of a motor vehicle or bus
traveling upon Duke Street at its intersection with King Street shall
bring such motor vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near the place
where Duke Street meets the prolongation of the nearest property
line of King Street (four-way stop).
(25) Signal Ridge Way and the northerly end of Watch Hill. Every
operator of a motor vehicle or bus traveling southerly on Signal
Ridge Way at its intersection with the northerly end of Watch Hill
shall bring such vehicle to a full stop on or near the place where
Signal Ridge Way meets the prolongation of the northerly street
line of the northerly end of Watch Hill, and every operator of a
motor vehicle or bus traveling upon the northerly end of Watch Hill
at its intersection with Signal Ridge Way shall bring such motor
vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near the place where the northerly
end of Watch Hill meets the prolongation of the westerly street line
of Signal Ridge Way (two-way stop).
(26) Fourth Avenue and Third Street. Every operator of a motor vehicle
or bus traveling in an easterly direction on Fourth Avenue at its
intersection of Third Street shall bring such motor vehicle or bus to
a full stop at or near the place where Fourth Avenue meets the
prolongation of the westerly property line of Third Street (one-way
stop).
(27) Fourth Avenue and Fourth Street. Every operator of a motor
vehicle or bus traveling in an easterly direction on Fourth Avenue
at its intersection with Fourth Street shall bring such motor vehicle
or bus to a full stop at or near the place where Fourth Avenue meets
the prolongation of the westerly property line of Fourth Street (oneway
stop).
(28) Fifth Avenue and Third Street. Every operator of a motor vehicle or
bus traveling in an easterly direction on Fifth Avenue at its
intersection with Third Street shall bring such motor vehicle or bus
to a full stop at or near the place where Fifth Avenue meets the
prolongation of the westerly property line of Third Street (one-way
stop).
(29) Chestnut Drive and Misty Oak Drive. Every operator of a motor
vehicle or bus traveling in an easterly direction on Chestnut Drive
at its intersection with Misty Oak Drive shall bring such motor
§ 248-19 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 248-19
C:550
vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near the place where Chestnut
Drive meets the prolongation of the westerly property line of Misty
Oak Drive; every operator of a motor vehicle or bus traveling in a
westerly direction on Chestnut Drive at its intersection with Misty
Oak Drive shall bring such motor vehicle or bus to a full stop at
or near the place where Chestnut Drive meets the prolongation of
the easterly property line of Misty Oak Drive; every operator of
a motor vehicle or bus traveling in a southerly direction on Misty
Oak Drive at its intersection with Chestnut Drive shall bring such
motor vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near the place where Misty
Oak Drive meets the prolongation of the northerly property line of
Chestnut Drive (three-way stop).
(30) Friendship Street and Reynolds Street. Every operator of a motor
vehicle or bus traveling upon Friendship Street at its intersection
with Reynolds Street shall bring such vehicle or bus to a full stop at
or near the place where Friendship Street meets the prolongation
of the nearest property line of Reynolds Street, and every operator
of a motor vehicle or bus traveling upon Reynolds Street at its
intersection with Friendship Street shall bring such motor vehicle
or bus to a full stop at or near the place where Reynolds Street
meets the prolongation of the nearest property line of Friendship
Street (four-way stop).
(31) South Pierce Road and Woodland Road. Every operator of a motor
vehicle or bus traveling upon South Pierce Road at its intersection
with Woodland Road shall bring such vehicle or bus to a full stop at
or near the place where South Pierce Road meets the prolongation
of the nearest property line of Woodland Road, and every operator
of a motor vehicle or bus traveling upon Woodland Road at its
intersection with South Pierce Road shall bring such motor vehicle
or bus to a full stop at or near the place where Woodland Road
meets the prolongation of the nearest property line of South Pierce
Road (three-way stop).
(32) Peirce Street and Dedford Street. Every operator of a motor vehicle
traveling southerly upon Peirce Street at its intersection with the
northerly street line of Dedford Street shall bring such vehicle or
bus to a full stop (one-way stop).
(33) High Hawk Road and Arrowhead Trail. Every operator of a motor
vehicle or bus traveling upon High Hawk Road at its intersection
with Arrowhead Trail shall bring such motor vehicle or buss to a
full stop at or near the place High Hawk Road meets the
prolongation of the nearest property line of Arrowhead Trail; every
operator of a motor vehicle or bus traveling upon Arrowhead Trail
at its intersection with High Hawk Road shall bring such motor
vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near the place where Arrowhead
Trail meets the prolongation of High Hawk Road (three-way stop).
§ 248-19 CHARTER § 248-19
C:551
(34) High Hawk Road and Deerfield Drive. Every operator of a motor
vehicle or bus traveling upon High Hawk Road at its intersection
with Deerfield Drive shall bring such motor vehicle or bus to a full
stop at or near the place High Hawk Road meets the prolongation
of the nearest property line of Deerfield Drive; every operator of a
motor vehicle or bus traveling upon Deerfield Drive at its
intersection with High Hawk Road shall bring such motor vehicle
or bus to a full stop at or near the place where Deerfield Drive
meets the prolongation of High Hawk Road (three-way stop).
(35) Fernwood Drive and Stone Ridge Drive. Every operator of a motor
vehicle or bus traveling upon Fernwood Drive at its intersection
with Stone Ridge Drive shall bring such motor vehicle or bus to a
full stop at or near the place Fernwood Drive meets the
prolongation of the nearest property line of Stone Ridge Drive;
every operator of a motor vehicle or bus traveling upon Stone
Ridge Drive at its intersection with Fernwood Drive shall bring
such motor vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near the place where
Fernwood Drive meets the prolongation of Stone Ridge Drive
(three-way stop).
(36) Peirce Street and Dedford Street. Every operator of a motor vehicle
traveling southerly upon Peirce Street at its intersection with the
northerly street line of Dedford Street shall bring such vehicle or
bus to a full stop (one-way).
(37) Proctor Avenue, Ledge Road and Friendship Street. Every operator
of a motor vehicle or bus traveling upon Proctor Avenue at its
intersection with Ledge Road and Friendship Street shall bring
such vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near the place where Proctor
Avenue meets the prolongation of the nearest street line of Ledge
Road or Friendship Street, and every operator of a motor vehicle or
bus traveling upon Ledge Road at its intersection with Proctor
Avenue shall bring such motor vehicle or bus to a full stop at or
near the place where Ledge Road meets the prolongation of the
nearest street line of Proctor Avenue. Every operator of a motor
vehicle or bus traveling upon Friendship Street at its intersection
with Proctor Avenue shall bring such vehicle or bus to a full stop at
or near the place where Friendship Street meets the prolongation
of the nearest street line of Proctor Avenue.
(38) Cedar Avenue and Dalehill Drive. Every operator of a motor vehicle
traveling northerly upon Cedar Avenue at its intersection with
Dalehill Drive shall bring such vehicle to a full stop at or near the
place where Cedar Avenue meets the prolongation of the nearest
street line of Dalehill Drive, and every operator of a motor vehicle
traveling upon Dalehill Drive at its intersection with Cedar Avenue
shall bring such motor vehicle to a full stop at or near the place
where Dalehill Drive meets the prolongation of the nearest street
line of Cedar Avenue (two-way stop).
§ 248-19 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 248-19
C:552
(39) Third Street and Fourth Avenue. Every operator of a motor vehicle
or bus traveling upon Third Street at its intersection with Fourth
Avenue shall bring such vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near the
place where Third Street meets the prolongation of the nearest
property line of Fourth Avenue, and every operator of a motor
vehicle or bus traveling upon Fourth Avenue at its intersection with
Third Street shall bring such motor vehicle or bus to a full stop at or
near the place where Fourth Avenue meets the prolongation of the
nearest property line of Third Street (four-way stop).
(40) Fourth Street and Fourth Avenue. Every operator of a motor
vehicle or bus traveling upon Fourth Street at its intersection with
Fourth Avenue shall bring such vehicle or bus to a full stop at or
near the place where Fourth Street meets the prolongation of the
nearest property line of Fourth Avenue, and every operator of a
motor vehicle or bus traveling upon Fourth Avenue at its
intersection with Fourth Street shall bring such motor vehicle or
bus to a full stop at or near the place where Fourth Avenue meets
the prolongation of the nearest property line of Fourth Street (fourway
stop).
(41) Duke Street and London Street. Every operator of a motor vehicle
or bus traveling upon Duke Street at its intersection with London
Street shall bring such vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near the
place where Duke Street meets the prolongation of the nearest
property line of London Street, and every operator of a motor
vehicle or bus traveling upon London Street at its intersection with
Duke Street shall bring such motor vehicle or bus to a full stop at or
near the place where London Street meets the prolongation of the
nearest property line of Duke Street (two-way stop).
(42) Division Street, Fairmount Drive, Kenyon Avenue. Every operator
of a motor vehicle or bus traveling upon Division Street at its
intersection with Kenyon Avenue shall bring such motor vehicle or
bus to a full stop at or near the place where Division Street meets
the prolongation of the nearest property line of Kenyon Avenue,
and every operator of a motor vehicle or bus traveling upon Kenyon
Avenue shall bring such motor vehicle or bus to a full stop at or
near the place where Kenyon Avenue meets the prolongation of the
nearest property line of Division Street. Every operator of a motor
vehicle or bus traveling upon Division Street at its intersection with
Fairmount Drive shall bring such motor vehicle or bus to a full stop
at or near the place where Division Street meets the prolongation
of the nearest property line of Fairmount Drive, and every operator
of a motor vehicle or bus traveling upon Fairmount Drive at its
intersection with Division Street shall bring such motor vehicle or
bus to a full stop at or near the place where Fairmount Drive meets
the prolongation of the nearest property line of Division Street
(four-way stop involving three differently named streets).
§ 248-19 CHARTER § 248-19
C:553
(43) Signal Ridge Way at the four-way intersection with Watch Hill
Drive. Every operator of a motor vehicle or bus traveling upon
Watch Hill Drive at its intersection with Signal Ridge Way shall
bring such vehicle or bus to a full stop at the place where Signal
Ridge Way meets the prolongation of the nearest property line of
Watch Hill Drive, and every motor vehicle or bus traveling upon
Signal Ridge Way at its intersection with Watch Hill Drive shall
bring such vehicle or bus to a full stop at the place where Watch
Hill Drive meets the prolongation of the nearest property line of
Signal Ridge Way, creating a four-way stop. [Added 12-15-2003
by Ord. No. 742]
(44) Sixth Avenue and Fourth Street. Every operator of a motor vehicle
or bus traveling upon Sixth Avenue at its intersection with Fourth
Street shall bring such vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near the
place where Sixth Avenue meets the prolongation of the nearest
property line of Fourth Street; and every operator of a motor
vehicle or bus traveling upon Fourth Street at its intersection with
Sixth Avenue shall bring such motor vehicle or bus to a full stop at
or near the place where Fourth Street meets the prolongation of
the nearest property line of Sixth Avenue (three-way stop). [Added
1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 760]
(45) Great Road and Kent Drive. Every operator of a motor vehicle or
bus traveling upon Great Road at its intersection with Kent Drive
shall bring such vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near the place
where Great Road meets the prolongation of the nearest property
line of Kent Drive, and every operator of a motor vehicle or bus
traveling upon Kent Drive at its intersection with Great Road shall
bring such motor vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near the place
where Kent Drive meets the prolongation of the nearest property
line of Great Road. [Added 9-11-2006 by Ord. No. 773;
amended 1-14-2013 by Ord. No. 825]
(46) Gould Place and Hanaford Drive. Every operator of a motor vehicle
or bus traveling upon Hanaford Drive at its intersection with Gould
Place shall bring such vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near the
place where Gould Place meets the prolongation of the nearest
property line of Hanaford Drive. [Added 11-5-2008 by Ord. No.
795]
(47) Silverwood and Maplewood Drives. Every operator of a motor
vehicle or bus traveling upon Maplewood Drive at its intersection
with Silverwood Drive shall bring such vehicle or bus to a full stop
at or near the place where Maplewood Drive meets the
prolongation of the nearest property line of Silverwood Drive, and
every operator of a motor vehicle or bus traveling upon Silverwood
Drive at its intersection with Maplewood Drive shall bring such
motor vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near the place where
Silverwood meets the prolongation of the nearest property line of
Maplewood Drive. [Added 1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 813]
§ 248-19 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 248-19
C:554
(48) Rector Street and Church Street. Every operator of a motor vehicle
or bus traveling upon Rector Street at its intersection with Church
Street shall bring such vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near the
place where Rector Street meets the prolongation of the nearest
property line of Church Street, and every operator of a motor
vehicle or bus traveling upon Church Street at its intersection with
Rector Street shall bring such motor vehicle or bus to a full stop at
or near the place where Church Street meets the prolongation of
the nearest property line of Rector Street. [Added 7-30-2012 by
Ord. No. 822]
(49) Liberty Street at Union Street and Somerset Street. Every operator
of a motor vehicle or bus traveling upon Liberty Street at its
intersection with Somerset Street shall bring such vehicle or bus to
a full stop at or near the place where Liberty Street meets the
prolongation of the nearest property line of Somerset Street, and
every operator of a motor vehicle or bus traveling upon Somerset
Street at its intersection with Liberty Street shall bring such motor
vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near the place where Somerset
Street meets the prolongation of the nearest property line of
Liberty Street. Every operator of a motor vehicle or bus traveling
upon Liberty Street at its intersection with Union Street shall bring
such vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near the place where Liberty
Street meets the prolongation of the nearest property line of Union
Street, and every operator of a motor vehicle or bus traveling upon
Union Street at its intersection with Liberty Street shall bring such
motor vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near the place where Union
Street meets the prolongation of the nearest property line of
Liberty Street. [Added 3-14-2016 by Ord. No. E-56; amended
4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 851]
(50) Liberty Street at Spring Street and Peirce Street. Every operator of
a motor vehicle or bus traveling northerly upon Liberty Street at its
intersection with Spring Street and Peirce Street shall bring such
vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near the place where Liberty
Street meets the prolongation of the nearest property line of Peirce
Street, and every operator of a motor vehicle or bus traveling upon
Peirce Street at its intersection with Liberty Street and Spring
Street shall bring such motor vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near
the place where Peirce Street meets the prolongation of the nearest
property line of Spring Street. Every operator of a motor vehicle or
bus traveling easterly upon Spring Street at its intersection with
Liberty Street and Peirce Street shall bring such vehicle or bus to a
full stop at or near the place where Spring Street meets the
prolongation of the nearest property line of Liberty Street. [Added
3-14-2016 by Ord. No. E-56; amended 4-11-2016 by Ord. No.
851]
(51) Second Street at Fourth Avenue. Every operator of a motor vehicle
or bus traveling upon Second Street at its intersection with Fourth
§ 248-19 CHARTER § 248-19
C:555
§ 248-20. Signs at multiway stop intersections.
§ 248-21. One-way streets designated. [Amended 6-24-1997 by Ord.
No. 648; 5-11-1999 by Ord. No. 673; 2-25-2002 by Ord. No. 719]
Upon the following streets vehicular traffic shall move only in the following
specified directions:
Avenue shall bring such vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near the
place where Second Street meets the prolongation of the nearest
property line of Fourth Avenue. Every operator of a motor vehicle
or bus traveling upon Fourth Avenue at its intersection with Second
Street shall bring such vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near the
place where Fourth Avenue meets the prolongation of the nearest
property line of Second Street (four-way stop). [Added 4-25-2016
by Ord. No. 852]
(52) Hyland Avenue and Kenyon Avenue. Every operator of a motor
vehicle or bus traveling upon Hyland Avenue at its intersection with
Kenyon Avenue shall bring such motor vehicle or bus to a full stop
at or near the place where Hyland Avenue meets the prolongation
of the nearest property line of Kenyon Avenue, and every operator
of a motor vehicle or bus traveling upon Kenyon Avenue shall bring
such motor vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near the place where
Kenyon Avenue meets the prolongation of the nearest property line
of Hyland Avenue (three-way stop). [Added 10-24-2016 by Ord.
No. 862]
(53)Kent Drive and Allen Drive. Every operator of a motor vehicle or
bus traveling upon Kent Drive at its intersection with Allen Drive
shall bring such motor vehicle or bus to a full stop at or near the
place where Kent Drive meets the prolongation of the nearest
property line of Allen Drive, and every operator of a motor vehicle
or bus traveling upon Allen Drive shall bring such motor vehicle or
bus to a full stop at or near the place where Kent Drive meets the
prolongation of the nearest property line of Allen Drive (three-way
stop). [Added 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 865]
A. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized and directed to place and
maintain, or cause to be placed and maintained, on all of the streets
named in § 248-19, at or near the property lines of the intersecting
streets, appropriate signs, and in addition thereto may place and
maintain any appropriate devices or marks in the roadway, such signs,
devices or marks to bear the word "Stop" and to be located in such a
position and to be provided with letters of a size to be clearly legible
from a distance of at least 100 feet along the street.
B. The signs described in Subsection A of this section shall be illuminated
at night or so placed as to be illuminated by streetlights or by the
headlights of approaching motor vehicles.
§ 248-19 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 248-21
C:556
Street Direction Location
Cedar Avenue Northerly Beginning at a point, said point
being 35 feet southerly from the
southerly Highway Line #207 on
RI Route 401 (Division Street)
northerly to Division Street
Laurel Wood Starting
southeasterly,
traveling a circular
direction ending in a
westerly direction at
the starting point
Beginning at a point, said point
being 800 feet easterly from the
intersection of Tillinghast Road
with Laurel Wood, in a general
southeasterly direction and
traveling in a circular direction,
terminating westerly at a point
and place of the beginning.
Lincoln Street Southerly Union Street to Bridge Street
Marlborough
Street
Southerly Bridge Street to Rocky Hollow
Road
Marlborough
Street
Southerly King Street to London Street
Peirce Street Southerly Division Street to Spring Street
§ 248-22. Motor vehicles prohibited on certain streets and in
certain places. [Amended 10-28-1992 by Ord. No. 572; 1-26-1999 by
Ord. No. 668; 2-23-1999 by Ord. No. 670]
A. Violations generally. Any person violating this section shall be deemed
guilty of an offense.
B. Ayrault Road. The use of motor trucks in and upon Ayrault Road at any
time is hereby prohibited, and the Chief of Police is hereby authorized
and directed forthwith to cause conspicuous signs to be placed on such
street giving notice of such prohibition; provided, however, that nothing
contained in this subsection shall affect the use of the street by any fire
truck, Town Public Works Department truck, police vehicle, ambulance,
school bus or other motor truck using such street in any emergency or
engaged in delivering goods, wares, merchandise or materials to or
from any residence, building or lot within the Town bordering on the
street.
C. Crompton Road and Shippeetown Road. The use of motor trucks
weighing more than five tons in and upon Shippeetown Road from the
northerly line of Division Street to Crompton Road and upon Crompton
Road to the Coventry town line at any time is hereby prohibited, and the
Chief of Police is hereby authorized and directed forthwith to cause
conspicuous signs to be placed on such streets giving notice of such
prohibition; provided, however, that nothing contained in this
subsection shall affect the use of such street by any fire truck, Town
Public Works Department truck, police vehicle, ambulance, school bus
§ 248-21 CHARTER § 248-22
C:557
or other motor truck using such streets in any emergency or engaged
in delivering goods, wares, merchandise or materials to or from any
residence, building or lot within the Town bordering on the streets.
D. The emergency accessways at the high school premises. The use of a
motor vehicle at any time in and upon the emergency access ways on
the easterly and northerly sides of the high school, leading respectively
to Chestnut Drive and to Tamarack Drive, is hereby prohibited, and the
Chief of Police is hereby authorized and directed forthwith to cause
conspicuous signs to be placed on the access ways giving notice of such
prohibition; provided, however, that nothing in this subsection shall
affect the use of the access ways by any fire truck, Town Public Works
Department truck, police vehicle, ambulance, school bus or other motor
vehicle using either access way in any emergency or any Department of
Public Works vehicle in connection with maintenance of the ways.
E. School premises. The use at any time of motor vehicles, motorcycles,
motor scooters, minibikes, mopeds and like motor vehicles in and upon
the premises of any Town school facility is hereby prohibited; provided,
however, that nothing contained in this subsection shall affect the use
of motor vehicles in and upon paved ways and parking areas.
F. Town property. The use at any time of motor vehicles, motorcycles,
motor scooters, minibikes, mopeds and like motor vehicles in and upon
Town-owned real property is hereby prohibited; provided, however, that
nothing contained in this subsection shall affect the use of motor
vehicles in and upon graveled or paved ways for motor vehicles and
parking areas for motor vehicles; and provided further, however, that
nothing contained in this subsection shall affect the use of motor
vehicles by employees or independent contractors of the Town for the
purpose of maintaining or improving Town-owned real property.
G. Cedar Avenue. The use of motor trucks in and upon Cedar Avenue at
any time is hereby prohibited, and the Chief of Police is hereby
authorized and directed forthwith to cause conspicuous signs to be
placed on said street giving notice of such prohibition; provided,
however, that nothing contained herein shall affect the use of said
street by any fire truck, Town Public Works Department truck, police
vehicle, ambulance, school bus, pickup truck, van or other motor truck
using said street in any emergency or engaged in delivering goods,
wares, merchandise or materials to or from any residence, building or
lot within the Town bordering on said street.
H. Division Street. The use of motor trucks with a gross vehicle weight of
10,000 pounds or more in and upon Division Street from First Avenue to
Post Road at any time is hereby prohibited, and the Chief of Police is
hereby authorized and directed forthwith to cause conspicuous signs to
be placed on such streets giving notice of such prohibition; provided,
however, that nothing contained in this subsection shall affect the use
of such street by any fire truck, Town Public Works Department truck,
police vehicle, ambulance, school bus or other motor truck using such
§ 248-22 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 248-22
C:558
§ 248-23. Driving over fire hose.
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the Fire
Department when laid down on any street or driveway, unless directed so to
do by some authorized officer.
§ 248-24. Left-hand turns. [Added 4-12-1994 by Ord. No. 606]
No vehicle, with the exception of a public safety vehicle, shall make a lefthand
turning movement at the following locations:
streets in any emergency or engaged in delivering goods, wares,
merchandise or materials to or from any residence, building or lot
bordering on Division Street.
I. Howland Road. The use of motor trucks with a gross vehicle weight of
10,000 pounds or more in and upon Howland Road from Division Road
to Middle Road at any time is hereby prohibited, and the Chief of Police
is hereby authorized and directed forthwith to cause conspicuous signs
to be placed on such streets giving notice of such prohibition; provided,
however, that nothing contained in this subsection shall affect the use
of such street by any fire truck, Town Public Works Department truck,
police vehicle, ambulance, school bus or other motor truck using such
streets in any emergency or engaged in delivering goods, wares,
merchandise or materials to or from any residence, building or lot
bordering on Howland Road.
J. South Road. The use of motor trucks with a gross weight of 12,000
pounds or more in and upon South Road from Route 2 to the border of
North Kingstown at any time is hereby prohibited, and the Chief of
Police is hereby authorized and directed forthwith to cause conspicuous
signs to be placed on such streets giving notice of such prohibition;
provided, however, that nothing contained in this subsection shall affect
the use of such street by any fire truck, Town and State of Rhode Island
trucks, police vehicle, ambulance, school bus or other motor truck
using such streets in any emergency or engaged in delivering goods,
wares, merchandise or materials to or from any residence, building or
lot bordering on South Road. [Added 3-26-2007 by Ord. No. 782]
K. Clearview Drive. The use of motor trucks with a gross weight of 12,000
pounds or more in and upon Clearview Drive from South Road to the
border of North Kingstown at any time is hereby prohibited, and the
Chief of Police is hereby authorized and directed forthwith to cause
conspicuous signs to be placed on such streets giving notice of such
prohibition; provided, however, that nothing contained in this
subsection shall affect the use of such street by any fire truck, Town and
State of Rhode Island trucks, police vehicle, ambulance, school bus or
other motor truck using such streets in any emergency or engaged in
delivering goods, wares, merchandise or materials to or from any
residence, building or lot bordering on Clearview Drive. [Added
3-26-2007 by Ord. No. 782]
§ 248-22 CHARTER § 248-24
C:559
Name of Street Location
Crompton Road 710 feet easterly of the promulgation of the
stone bound marking the location of the Town
lines of East Greenwich, West Warwick, and
Coventry
§ 248-25. Right-hand turns. [Added 4-12-1994 by Ord. No. 607]
No vehicle, with the exception of a public safety vehicle, shall make a righthand
turning movement at the following locations:
Name of Street Location
Crompton Road 710 feet easterly of the promulgation of the
stone bound marking the location of the Town
lines of East Greenwich, West Warwick, and
Coventry
§ 248-24 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 248-25
C:560
ARTICLE III
Parking, Stopping and Standing
§ 248-26. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
PARKING LOT — Any outdoor space, plot, lot, parcel, yard or enclosure, or
any portion thereof, where more than two motor vehicles may be parked,
stored, serviced, housed or kept. "Parking lot" includes but is not limited
to the driving and parking areas of drive-in restaurants, drive-in banks,
shopping centers, gasoline stations, grocery store parking lots, factory
parking lots, and all other parking areas used in connection with the
operation of a business. "Parking lot" shall also include Town-owned, -
operated and -leased off-street parking lots.
PUBLIC PORTIONS OF A PARKING LOT — The parking areas and the
ingress and egress to the parking lot areas designated by the parking
lot owners or agents of the owners for off-street parking of automotive
or other vehicles, driveways, sidewalks, malls, arcades, service areas and
entranceways into stores and buildings.
SHOPPING CENTER — Any combination of retail stores and services
contained within one or more parcels of land united to form a general
shopping area and upon which site there are located public areas for the
nonexclusive use of members of the general public and occupants, visitors
and customers of such retail stores and services.
§ 248-27. Residential overnight parking. [Amended 11-29-1990 by
Ord. No. 558; 8-10-1993 by Ord. No. 596; 11-9-1993 by Ord. No.
601; 11-9-1993 by Ord. No. 603; 9-14-1995 by Ord. No. 626;
7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 676; 6-27-2000 by Ord. No. 693]
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following meanings shall apply:
DWELLING UNIT — A unit of living area arranged, intended or
designed to be occupied by a family or group of not more than five
unrelated individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit.
RESIDENT — Any person, firm or corporation who or which lives,
resides or pay property taxes to the Town on real estate or on a
structure approved for residential occupancy and who or which is the
owner of such structure or a tenant therein or who or which can
demonstrate some other indication of exclusive right of occupancy.
RESIDENTIAL OVERNIGHT PARKING STREET — A street or portion
thereof where curbside parking is limited to vehicles properly
displaying a residential overnight parking permit authorized by this
chapter. Designated streets will be enumerated in this chapter as
amended from time to time by the procedures set forth herein.
§ 248-26 CHARTER § 248-27
C:561
B. Designation of residential overnight parking streets.
(1) The Town Council of the Town of East Greenwich may designate a
street or a portion of a street within a residential overnight parking
district as a residential overnight parking street upon
recommendation of the Town Manager.
(2) After advertisement and notice to all landowners whose property
abuts the proposed residential overnight parking street, such
proposed residential overnight parking street shall be placed on
the docket at a regular Town Council meeting. At that meeting, the
Council shall render a decision on the designation of the proposed
residential overnight parking street, provided that the Town
Council makes a finding that it has sufficient information to make
such decision.
C. Withdrawal of designation. The Town Council may, at any time, on its
own motion, withdraw the designation of an existing residential
overnight parking street in the same manner that an ordinance is
amended. Such withdrawal shall become effective 30 days after Town
Council votes thereon. Notice of such action shall also be made by
advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation within the Town.
D. Erection of signs.
(1) Following the Town Council's affirmative vote to designate a
residential overnight parking street, parking signs shall be erected
on such residential overnight parking street identifying the street
or portion of that street which has been so designated.
(2) The sign shall inform a vehicle operator that curbside parking on
the street is restricted unless the vehicle displays a valid
residential overnight parking permit.
E. Residential overnight parking permits.
(1) Application.
(a) Any resident over the age of 16 may apply for a residential
overnight parking permit for a noncommercial vehicle by
completing an application therefor prescribed by the Town
Clerk, which application shall be designed to provide the
following information:
[1] The name and residence of the owner of the vehicle.
[2] The name, residence and driver's license of the principal
operator of the vehicle.
[3] The make, model, color and registration number of the
vehicle.
§ 248-27 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 248-27
C:562
(b) A driver's license and proof of being a registered voter in East
Greenwich or a copy of a lease shall be presented with the
application.
(2) Upon determination by the Town Clerk that the applicant qualifies
for a residential overnight parking permit for the vehicle described
in the application, the Town Clerk will cause to be issued a
residential overnight parking permit in the form of a sticker or
other method prescribed by the Town Clerk. The fee for a
residential overnight parking permit shall be per year and payable
at the time of submission of the application for the permit.99
(3) Permits may be issued to automobiles and trucks not greater than
1 1/2 tons.
(4) Permits are for personal use of residents living at the address to
which the overnight parking permit was issued.
(5) The vehicle overnight parking sticker is to be permanently affixed
on the rear window, driver side, lower left corner. On station
wagons and convertibles, the resident sticker should be
permanently affixed on the glass on the left side of the vehicle as
far back as possible.
F. Effective period and hours or restriction; renewal or transfer of
permits.
(1) The restriction on parking provided for in this chapter shall be in
effect from May 1 through April 30 of the following year from the
hours of 1:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m., except for the third Friday of each
month for street sweeping between the hours of 2:00 a.m. to 7:00
a.m.
(2) A holder of a valid permit from a previous year shall be entitled to a
new residential overnight parking permit for a current year upon
payment of the annual fee and submission of evidence to the Town
Clerk that the holder still qualifies for the permit.
(3) The holder of a valid residential overnight parking permit shall
receive a new residential overnight parking permit for the purpose
of transferring the same to another qualifying vehicle upon
surrender of the holder's existing residential overnight parking
permit and completion of a new application or evidence that the
parking permit previously issued has been destroyed.
G. Use of permits.
(1) A parking permit shall not guarantee or reserve a parking space
nor shall it excuse the observance of any traffic or parking
regulations.
99.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 248-27 CHARTER § 248-27
C:563
(2) No holder of a residential overnight parking permit shall use such
permit when such holder no longer fulfills one or more of the
applicable provisions of this chapter controlling the issuance of
permits.
(3) No person shall represent, in any fashion, that a vehicle is entitled
to a parking permit authorized by this chapter when it is not so
entitled. No person shall cause a parking permit to be displayed on
a vehicle which does not qualify for such permit.
(4) No person shall duplicate or attempt to duplicate a residential
overnight parking permit or display in any vehicle a duplicate
parking permit.
(5) A parking permit shall not be in effect during a snowstorm parking
restriction.
(6) Designated residential parking streets. The following streets are
hereby designated as residential overnight parking streets, except
in areas on these streets in front of driveways, entrances and
opposite garage entrances on the other side of the street:
[Amended 8-28-2006 by Ord. No. 771; 10-30-2006 by Ord.
No. 777; 5-14-2007 by Ord. No. 785]
(a) King Street, north side, beginning at point 80 feet from the
easterly street line of Main Street, thence running to
Marlborough Street; north side, between Marlborough Street
and Duke Street; north side, between Duke Street and Crop
Street.
(b) Marlborough Street, east side, beginning at the intersection of
the northerly street line of King Street and the easterly street
line of Marlborough Street, running northerly a distance of 190
feet; east side, between King Street and Queen Street; east
side, between Queen Street and Long Street; east side,
between Long Street and London Street.
(c) Peirce Street. [Amended 3-9-2009 by Ord. No. 801]
[1] Peirce Street, east side, between Dedford Street and
Spring Street; east side beginning at a point 35 feet
southerly of the southerly street line of Armory Street to a
point 60 feet from the northerly street line of Dedford
Street, and east side, between Division Street and Melrose
Street.
[2] Peirce Street, east side, from Church Street north to the
southerly property line of Town Hall.
(d) Queen Street, north side, between Duke Street and
Marlborough Street.
§ 248-27 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 248-27
C:564
(e) Queen Street, north side, beginning at the intersection of the
northerly street line of Queen Street and the easterly street
line of Duke Street, running a distance of 98 feet.
(f) Exchange Street, easterly side, from King Street to a point 60
feet north of the northerly street line of Queen Street.
(g) Vine Street, northerly side, from Main Street to Marlborough
Street.
(h) Revolution Street, south side, beginning at a point 165 feet
westerly of the westerly street line of Peirce Street, and
running westerly 80 feet.
(i) Peirce Street, easterly side, between a point 10 feet southerly
of the southerly street line of Melrose Street and 10 feet
northerly of the northerly street line of Montrose Street.
(j) Prospect Street, easterly side, between a point 30 feet
southerly of the southerly street line of Spring Street and 20
feet northerly of the northerly street line of Somerset Street.
(k) Crop Street, westerly side, from King Street to a point 55 feet
southerly from the southerly street line of Wine Street.
(l) Marlborough Street, easterly side, beginning at a point 33 feet
southerly of the southerly street line of London Street to a
point 175 feet southerly of the southerly street line of London
Street.
H. Violations and penalties.
(1) No person shall park a vehicle in violation of the residential
overnight parking provisions established in this chapter, and any
person who does so shall be in violation of this article subject to
such fines and penalties as are set forth in the ordinances of the
Town of East Greenwich.
(2) No person shall use any residential overnight parking permit in a
manner contrary to any of the provisions of this chapter. Any
person who does so shall be in violation of this article and subject
to such fines and penalties as shall be set forth in the ordinances of
the Town of East Greenwich.
I. Revocation of permits. In addition to the penalties set forth in the
ordinances of the Town of East Greenwich, the Town Clerk shall have
the responsibility and authority to revoke the residential overnight
parking permit of any resident for the abuse of a residential overnight
parking permit or for the use of the same in a manner contrary to any of
the provisions of this chapter. Revocation of the residential overnight
parking permit of a resident or conviction of a resident of a violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be considered just cause for
denial of a future residential overnight parking permit to such resident.
§ 248-27 CHARTER § 248-27
C:565
§ 248-28. Manner of parking.
Except when necessary in case of an accident to a vehicle or in obedience to
traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals, the operator of a vehicle shall
not park such vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the
roadway, headed in the direction of traffic, and with the curbside wheels of
the vehicle within one foot of the edge of the roadway.
§ 248-29. Stopping at left curb.
No vehicle shall stop with its left side to the curb except on a one-way street
or in an emergency or to allow another vehicle or pedestrian to cross its
way.
§ 248-30. Stopping so as to obstruct traffic or pedestrians.
It shall be unlawful for any operator or owner of a vehicle to place the
vehicle in any street, crosswalk, footpath or sidewalk so as to prevent or
obstruct the passing of other vehicles or pedestrians unless for a reasonable
time when necessary, but not exceeding five minutes at a time.
§ 248-31. Stopping, standing and parking prohibited in specified
places.
It shall be unlawful for the operator or owner of a vehicle to stop, stand
or park such vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary
to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or traffic control sign:
J. Penalty. Violators of this section shall be subject to a fine of $10 for a
first offense, $25 for a second offense and up to $100 for subsequent
offenses.
A. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street.
B. On a sidewalk.
C. Within an intersection.
D. On or within 10 feet of a crosswalk.
E. Within 10 feet of a point where, if curblines were extended, they would
intersect at a street corner.
F. In any place where the use of any public or private driveway will be
obstructed.
G. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such
standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
H. Within 10 feet of a fire hydrant.
§ 248-27 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 248-31
C:566
§ 248-32. Standing near bus stops prohibited.
No vehicle shall remain standing within 10 feet of any white pole or sign
indicating a motor bus stop on the side from which passengers board or
alight, except that, in lieu of this regulation, the Police Department may
where deemed necessary indicate by proper signs spaces which will provide
proper access to motor buses at such stops.
§ 248-33. Parking in school zones.
I. Upon or within 50 feet of any bridge or other elevated structure upon a
highway or within a highway tunnel.
J. On any railroad track and within 50 feet of the nearest railroad
crossing.
K. Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal located at the
side of a roadway.
L. At angles in streets and at or near intersections where the standing,
stopping or parking of vehicles would obstruct the free movement of
traffic and on Main Street immediately south of the intersection with
Long Street for a distance of 30 feet, which shall be designated as
exclusive parking for Fire Department use.
M. Within the area marked and specifically reserved for handicapped
parking except for those vehicles displaying handicapped plates issued
by the Division of Motor Vehicles. The Chief of Police is authorized to
designate and erect signs in those areas reserved for the
handicapped.100
N. Within any area designated as a right-of-way to Greenwich Bay by the
Rhode Island Coastal Resources Management Council. The RI CRMC is
charged with ensuring that public access to the shore is protected and
maintained, per state law. The CRMC has designated six rights-of-way
in East Greenwich serving Greenwich Cove. Parking within the
following described right-of-way shall be prohibited, and any person
found to be parking in said described area shall be in violation of this
chapter and subject to such fines and penalties as are set forth herein:
[Added 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 836]
(1) "H4" - King Street access at Water Street, located at Map 85, Plat 1,
between Lots 91 and 403 and Lot 94.
A. The Chief of Police is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking
upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school property,
public or private, when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere
with traffic or create a hazardous situation.
100. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 248-31 CHARTER § 248-33
C:567
§ 248-34. Stopping, standing and parking prohibited on specified
streets. [Amended 9-24-1992 by Ord. No. 582; 9-24-1992 by Ord.
No. 583; 11-10-1992 by Ord. No. 585; 11-10-1992 by Ord. No. 586;
8-10-1993 by Ord. No. 597; 11-9-1993 by Ord. No. 602; 5-10-1994 by
Ord. No. 610; 6-28-1994 by Ord. No. 613; 8-23-1994 by Ord. No.
617; 9-13-1994 by Ord. No. 618; 6-28-1994 by Ord. No. 613;
8-23-1994 by Ord. No. 617; 9-13-1994 by Ord. No. 618; 4-13-1995 by
Ord. No. 621; 8-24-1995 by Ord. No. 625; 12-21-1995 by Ord. No.
627; 4-25-1996 by Ord. No. 632; 10-14-1997 by Ord. No. 650;
10-14-1997 by Ord. No. 651; 5-11-1999 by Ord. No. 674; 9-26-2000
by Ord. No. 700; 2-12-2001 by Ord. No. 707; 2-25-2002 by Ord. No.
718; 3-11-2002 by Ord. No. 722]
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop, stand or park any
such vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police
officer or traffic control sign:
Name of Street Side Location
Armory Street North From Main Street to Peirce Street
Bennett Street North,
South, West
and East
From Lion Street to Castle Street
Bicknell Avenue East 40 feet from the southerly street line
of Division Street, running southerly,
to a point 40 feet northerly of the
northerly street line of Wine Street
Bicknell Avenue West and
East
From Wine Street to Division Street
Bridge Street
[Amended
9-24-2012 by Ord.
No. 824]
North From a point 125 feet easterly from
the east line of Main Street to Lincoln
Street
B. When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon either side of
a street adjacent to any school property, as authorized in this section,
no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place.
C. No person shall park a vehicle in any place marked as a school bus
loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones
are in effect. The zones are specifically for the use of school buses
engaged in the loading and unloading of schoolchildren.
D. The driver of a vehicle may stop temporarily at a place marked as a
school bus loading zone for the purpose of, and while engaged in, the
loading or unloading of passengers, when such stopping does not
interfere with any school bus which is waiting to enter or leave such
zones.
§ 248-33 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 248-34
C:568
Name of Street Side Location
Bridge Street South From Main Street to Marlborough
Street
Carrs Pond Road Easterly and
Westerly
1,000 feet northerly and 1,000 feet
southerly of Middle Road including
the paved travel way and the unpaved
area between the paved travel way to
the limits of the Town right-of-way.
Any motor vehicle illegally parked on
Carrs Pond Road shall be towed, and
the owner or operator of said motor
vehicle shall pay the cost of towing,
plus the violation fee.
Carrs Pond Road East and
West
From pole 28 to pole 105
Carrs Pond Road East and
West
From Frenchtown Road to Middle
Road, between pole 1 and pole 105
Castle Street West and
East
From Bennett Street to Queen Street
Church Street North From Main Street to a point 40 feet
westerly from the west line of Main
Street
Church Street South From Main Street to Rector Street
Circular drive on
high school premises
Both Full length of the circular drive
located off Avenger Drive on the west
side of the high school, located on lot
393 on Assessor's Plat 11-G of the
records of the Tax Assessor of the
Town as of December 31, 1978, and
such circular drive being a part of the
high school premises owned by the
Town
Clemente Drive South From Post Road to Edwards Drive
Clemente Drive South From Post Road to a point 305 feet
easterly of the easterly street line of
Post Road
Cliff Street West From Friendship Street to a point 28
feet northerly from the intersection of
the west line of Cliff Street and the
north line of First Avenue
Court House Lane
[Amended
3-14-2016 by Ord.
No. 849]
North and
south
From the foot of Peirce Street to Main
Street
§ 248-34 CHARTER § 248-34
C:569
Name of Street Side Location
Crompton Avenue East Rocky Hollow to Bridge Street
Crompton Avenue East From a point 610 feet northerly, from
Bridge Street running to the
prolongation of the westerly street
line of Lion Street
Crompton Avenue West From Rocky Hollow Road to London
Street
Crop Street
[Amended
5-14-2007 by Ord.
No. 785]
East From King Street to Wine Street
Crop Street
[Repealed
8-28-2006 by Ord.
No. 771]
Crop Street [Added
5-14-2007 by Ord.
No. 785; amended
11-5-2018 by Ord.
No. 878]
West From Wine Street to a point 101 feet
southerly from Wine Street
Crossways Road South From Friendly Road to Landover
Drive
Dedford Street North and
south
From Post Road to Peirce Street
Division Road
[Added 6-13-2005
by Ord. No. 756]
North and
south
From Route 2 westerly for 1,320 feet
Division Street — Overlook at the end of the street at
the cove, one-hour parking
Division Street North From Main Street to Duke Street
Division Street North and
south
From Bicknell Avenue to Water Street
Division Street North From Main Street to Hall Street
Division Street South From Duke Street to a point 110 feet
westerly from the west line of Duke
Street
Division Street South From Main Street to a point 56 feet
easterly from the east line of Main
Street
Division Street South From Peirce Street to Rector Street
§ 248-34 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 248-34
C:570
Name of Street Side Location
Duke Street East From Division Street to a point 32
feet southerly from the south line of
Division Street
Duke Street East From King Street to the intersection
of the west line of Exchange Street
and the east line of Duke Street
Duke Street North and
south
40 feet on either side of Long Street
intersection
Duke Street West From London Street to Queen Street
Duke Street West From King Street to Division Street
Exchange Street East From Queen Street to a point 60 feet
north of the intersection of Exchange
Street and Queen Street
Exchange Street West From King Street to the intersection
of the west line of Exchange Street
and the east line of Duke Street
Fifth Avenue
[Amended
10-24-2016 by
Ord. No. 863]
South From Fourth Street and northerly to
the road's end and from the edge of
paving of Second Street at Fifth
Avenue, approximately 94 feet west
First Avenue North From Mawney Street to Proctor
Avenue
Fourth Avenue North From Post Road to Second Street
Fourth Avenue North From Third Street to Fourth Street,
Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to
4:30 p.m.
Fourth Avenue South From Post Road to Reilly Avenue
Fourth Street East From Fourth Avenue to Second
Avenue, Monday through Friday, 7:00
a.m. through 4:30 p.m.
Fourth Street West From Fifth Avenue to Fourth Avenue
Frenchtown Road Both In front of the Frenchtown School
property, weekdays between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
Friendship Street South From Cliff Street to Prospect Street
Greene Street Southwest From Main Street to the entrance or
driveway of Lot No. 11 on Assessor's
Plat No. 3
Justin Road East and
west
From Division Street northerly 200
feet
§ 248-34 CHARTER § 248-34
C:571
Name of Street Side Location
King Street North From the easterly side of the railroad
bridge easterly 75 feet
King Street South From Main Street to Marlborough
Street
King Street South From the railroad bridge 40 feet
easterly and 135 feet westerly of the
railroad bridge
King Street South From Water Street to a point 35 feet
westerly from the west line of Water
Street
Landover Drive East From Crossways Road to a point 221
feet southwesterly of Crossways Road
Laurel Wood Both Beginning at the intersection of
Tillinghast Road with Laurel Wood
and ending 800 feet from the easterly
line of Tillinghast Road; outer side of
the full length of the circular portion
of Laurel Wood, beginning 800 feet
from the intersection of Tillinghast
Road with Laurel Wood
LeBaron Drive North From the westerly street line to the
easterly street line
Liberty Street East From Spring Street to Greene Street
Lincoln Street West and
east
From Bridge Street to Union Street
Lion Street East From London Street to Long Street
Lion Street West From London Street to Long Street
Lion Street West From Long Street to a point 62 feet
southerly from the south line of Long
Street
Lion Street West 62 feet southerly from the
intersection with Long Street
London Street North From Duke Street to a point 52 feet
westerly from the west line of Duke
Street
London Street South From Main Street to the railroad
crossing
London Street South From the railroad crossing to Lion
Street
§ 248-34 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 248-34
C:572
Name of Street Side Location
London Street South and
north
From Lion Street to the east end of
London Street; on the west side of
and along the railroad crossing from
the north line of London Street to the
south line of London Street
Long Street North From Main Street to the railroad
crossing
Long Street North and
south
From the railroad crossing easterly to
Water Street
Long Street North and
south
From the westerly street line of Lion
Street easterly to Water Street
Marion Street
[Amended
3-14-2016 by Ord.
No. 849]
West From Revolution Street to Melrose
Street
Marlborough Street East 40 feet southerly from Long Street
Marlborough Street West From Rocky Hollow Road to Division
Street
Mawney Street East From First Avenue to Spring Street
Melrose Street North From Main Street to Marion Street
Middle Road North and
south
From Moosehorn Road to Carrs Pond
Road including the paved travel way
and the unpaved area between the
paved travel way to the limits of the
Town right-of-way. Any motor vehicle
illegally parked on Middle Road shall
be towed, and the owner or operator
of said motor vehicle shall pay the
cost of towing, plus the violation fee.
Montrose Street North From Main Street to Marion Street
Peirce Street East From Dedford Street to a point 60
feet northerly from the north line of
Dedford Street
Peirce Street West From Division Street to Main Street
Queen Street South From Main Street to Marlborough
Street
Queen Street South From the railroad crossing to a point
96 feet easterly from the railroad
crossing
Rector Street
[Added 9-26-2011
by Ord. No. 817]
East From Spring Street to Church Street
§ 248-34 CHARTER § 248-34
C:573
Name of Street Side Location
Reilly Avenue
[Added 6-9-2008
by Ord. No. 790]
North From Fourth Street to the entrance of
Cragan Field, from April 1 through
Octobert 31, prohibited 8:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m.
Revolution Street North From Marion Street to Peirce Street
Revolution Street South Beginning at a point 105 feet westerly
of the westerly street line of Peirce
Street, and running westerly 60 feet
Revolution Street South From Peirce Street running westerly
60 feet
Rocky Hollow Road North From Crompton Avenue to the
shoreline of Greenwich Cove
Rocky Hollow Road North From Main Street easterly to a point
100 feet easterly of Main Street
Rocky Hollow Road South From Main Street to Crompton
Avenue
Second Street
[Added 10-24-2016
by Ord. No. 863]
West From the corner of Fifth Avenue and
Second Street southward
approximately 70 feet to the end of
the property of #97 Second Street
Sixth Avenue North From Main Street to Second Avenue
Sixth Avenue
[Added 8-28-2006
by Ord. No. 772.1]
South From Fifth Street to 300 Sixth Avenue
Sixth Avenue South From Main Street to a point 66 feet
westerly from the west line of Main
Street
Spring Street Northerly From Main Street to Peirce Street
Spring Street Northerly From the Spring Street entrance of
the Town House Complex to the
easterly street line of West Street
Spring Street Southerly From Liberty Street to Mawney Street
Tamarack Drive Northerly
and
Southerly
From the center line of the fire lane
between Tamarack Drive and East
Greenwich High School property,
westerly a distance of 180 feet and
easterly a distance of 236 feet,
weekdays between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 4:30 p.m.
Third Street Easterly From Fifth Avenue 75 feet southerly
§ 248-34 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 248-34
C:574
Name of Street Side Location
Third Street Westerly From Fourth Avenue running
northerly to its terminus, Monday
through Friday 8:00 a.m. through
4:30 p.m.
Union Street Both Easterly from Main Street to Liberty
Street
Union Street North From Main Street to the east end of
Union Street
Upland Avenue East From the southerly line of Rocky
Hollow Road to a point 193 feet south
of Rocky Hollow Road
Upland Avenue West From Main Street to Rocky Hollow
Road
Vine Street Both From Marlborough Street to the east
end of Vine Street
Vine Street South From Main Street to Marlborough
Street
Water Street East and
South
From King Street to the east end of
London Street
Water Street East and
West
From King Street to Division Street
Water Street West From King Street to a point 44 feet
southerly from the south line of King
Street
Water Street West and
North
From King Street to the east end of
London Street
Wine Street Both From Bicknell Avenue to the east end
of Wine Street
Wine Street South Entire length (Duke Street to the
railroad tracks)
§ 248-35. Time limit parking. [Amended 6-27-1991 by Ord. No. 562;
12-21-1995 by Ord. No. 627; 10-10-1996 by Ord. No. 636; 8-22-2000
by Ord. No. 698; 11-14-2000 by Ord. No. 702]
A. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park the vehicle on
the streets and places designated in this section for any one
consecutive period of time longer than the period of time designated in
this section and on the days and during the hours in this section
designated.
§ 248-34 CHARTER § 248-35
C:575
Name of
Street Side
Time Limit/
Hours/Days Location
Chestnut Drive Northerly
and
Southerly
8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m. and
2:00 p.m. to
4:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Grand View Road
westerly to the
Meadowbrook Farms
School
Church Street
[Amended
8-28-2006 by
Ord. No. 771]
Northerly 2 hours/9:00
a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Peirce Street to a
point 240 feet westerly
of the westerly street
line of Peirce Street
Cliff Street East 2 hours/9:00
a.m. to 7:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From First Avenue to
Friendship Street
King Street North — From Main Street to a
point 80 feet east of
Main Street
King Street North 2 hours/Monday
through
Sunday/7:00
a.m. through
9:00 p.m.
From a point 75 feet
easterly of the easterly
side of the King Street
railroad bridge running
easterly to Water Street
Lion Street West Prohibited from
9:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m./May,
June, July and
August
From a point 62 feet
southerly to the
intersection with Long
Street to London Street
Main Street Both 2 hours/9:00
a.m. to 7:00
p.m./Monday
through
Saturday
Between Division Street
and First Avenue on
Queen Street, between
Main Street and a point
80 feet east of Main
Street and on King
Street, between Main
Street and a point 80
feet just east of Main
Street
Main Street
[Amended
8-28-2006 by
Ord. No. 771]
Both 2 hours/9:00
a.m. to 7:00
p.m./Monday
through
Saturday
From Division Street to
First Avenue
§ 248-35 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 248-35
C:576
Name of
Street Side
Time Limit/
Hours/Days Location
Peirce Street — 2 hours/9:00
a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Armory Street to
Dedford Street
Peirce Street East 30 minutes/
10:00 a.m. to
9:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
and between
10:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m. on
Saturdays
From Church Street to
Armory Street
Peirce Street East 2 hours/9:00
a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Montrose Street
to the northerly street
line of Courthouse Lane
Peirce Street Easterly 30 minutes/9:00
a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Church Street to
northerly street line of
Courthouse Lane
Queen Street North 2 hours/9:00
a.m. to 7:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Main Street to a
point 130 feet east of
Main Street
B. If a vehicle remains so parked, after being tagged for an additional
consecutive period of time longer than permitted by this section, it shall
be considered a second violation. If the vehicle remains so parked after
a second violation, and after having been tagged a second time, for an
additional consecutive period of time longer than permitted by this
section, it may be removed, conveyed by or under the direction of a
member of the Police Department by means of towing the vehicle or
otherwise to a public garage in the Town. Such removal shall be at the
risk and expense of the owner, and before the owner or person in
charge of such vehicle shall be permitted to remove the vehicle from
the custody of the Police Department, he shall furnish evidence of his
identity and ownership or right to possession of and shall sign a receipt
for the vehicle and shall pay such towing fees and storage fees as may
be reasonably charged by the towing agency or storage facility;
provided, however, that a police officer may, in lieu of towing such
vehicle to a public garage, serve upon the owner or operator of such
vehicle or attach to such vehicle a notice directing the owner or
operator thereof to appear at police headquarters of the Town at the
time specified in such notice.
§ 248-35 CHARTER § 248-36
C:577
§ 248-36. Town parking lots. [Amended 12-21-1995 by Ord. No. 627;
4-14-1998 by Ord. No. 656]
A. Generally. The following regulations shall apply to any and all Townowned,
-leased, -used or -controlled areas where parking is allowed or
regulated, including but not limited to the Town house lot, school
parking areas, etc.
B. Signs; reserved or restricted spaces. The Chief of Police is hereby
authorized to designate by appropriate signage the method and manner
of parking and traffic flow on all such areas, and he shall designate
reserved and restricted parking as appropriate. No person except those
allowed to use restricted or reserved spaces shall be allowed to use
such spaces.
C. Parking time limit. It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any
motor vehicle to park the vehicle on any parking areas of the Town for a
period of time longer than 48 hours, unless so authorized by the Chief
of Police. Whenever any vehicle shall be found parked on the parking lot
beyond the period of legal parking time, such vehicle may be removed
or conveyed by or under the direction of a member of the Police
Department by means of towing the vehicle or otherwise to a public
garage in the Town, and such removal shall be at the risk of the owner.
To remove the vehicle from the custody of the Police Department, he
shall furnish evidence of his identity and ownership or right to
possession of, shall sign a receipt for the vehicle, and shall pay the East
Greenwich Municipal Court a fee of $30, plus towing charges and
storage. It is prohibited to park on any Town property unless otherwise
designated. In any prosecution or proceeding under this section, the
registration plate displayed on the motor vehicle shall constitute prima
facie evidence that the owner of such vehicle was the person who
parked such vehicle at the place where such violation occurred. Any
violation or failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall be
an offense. [Amended 7-9-2007 by Ord. No. 786]
D. Old Kent County Courthouse parking lot. It shall be unlawful for the
owner or operator of any motor vehicle to park his or her vehicle in the
Old Kent County Courthouse parking lot for a period of time longer than
30 minutes, Monday through Friday, from 9:00 a.m. through 4:00 p.m.
During all other times it shall be unlawful to park longer than three
hours unless the owner or operator is present in the courthouse.
E. Municipal parking lot. It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of
any motor vehicle to park his or her vehicle in the municipal parking lot
on the easterly side of Main Street: for a period of time longer than two
hours, Monday through Saturday, from 9:00 a.m. through 6:00 p.m. on
the southerly and northerly sides from Main Street to a point 70 feet
easterly of Main Street, and for not more than 48 hours from that point
to Marlborough Street. Motor vehicle repairs shall not be allowed.
[Amended 8-28-2006 by Ord. No. 771]
§ 248-36 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 248-36
C:578
§ 248-37. Fire lanes established.
§ 248-38. All-night parking.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any vehicle, except a taxicab, to cause
or permit such vehicle to be parked on any street for a period of time longer
than two hours between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any day.
§ 248-39. Designation of taxicab stands.
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to establish taxicab stands on such
streets, in such places and in such number as shall be determined to be of
the greatest benefit and convenience to the public, and every such stand
shall be designated by appropriate signs. He may revoke, alter or amend
any established stand or any assignment to any established stand.
F. Municipal Land Trust lots and easements. It shall be unlawful for the
owner or operator of any motor vehicle to park his or her vehicle within
the area known as the "access easement for the Hunt River Preserve,"
which is a twenty-five- to thirty-five-foot-wide ingress, egress and utility
easement running east from Route 2, beginning roughly across from the
Route 4 ramp in the vicinity of 3100 South County Trail. Said access
easement is located across Map 17, Plat 17, Lots 272, 274, and 275,
leading to the East Greenwich Land Trust parcel located at Map 18,
Plat 17, Lot 16. It shall further be unlawful for any owner or operator of
a motor vehicle to park in the six-space parking easement to the East
Greenwich Land Trust located at the northern side of the described
easement area on Map 17, Plat 17, Lot 274, for any period of time
longer than two hours, Monday through Sunday, from 7:00 a.m. through
9:00 p.m. The designated parking area is reserved for use by persons
utilizing the Hunt River Preserve natural area, and parking for other
than that purpose is prohibited. [Added 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 836]
A. The Police Chief is hereby authorized to establish fire lanes on all public
property and private property devoted to public use. The designation of
such fire lanes shall never be held to make the Town responsible for the
maintenance of the fire lanes, but the owner of such property shall
continue to be responsible for the maintenance of such area.
B. Parking of motor vehicles or otherwise obstructing fire lanes shall be
prohibited at all times.
C. Upon the designation of a fire lane pursuant to this article, the Police
Chief shall give notice of such designation to the owner of such area,
directing the owner to cause signs to be posted, at the expense of the
owner, at designated locations, lettered "Fire Lane – No Parking
Anytime." Such signs shall be of a standard size and color, lettering and
mounting, conforming to specifications of the Police Chief.
D. The official record of the designation and location of fire lanes shall be
kept in the office of the Police Chief.
§ 248-36 CHARTER § 248-40
C:579
§ 248-40. Use of taxicab stands.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle other than a taxicab to
park in an officially established taxicab stand. It shall be unlawful for any
taxicab to park in any other established taxicab stand than that assigned to
it.
§ 248-41. Taxicabs to park only at stands.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any taxicab to park upon any street
at any place other than at an officially designated taxicab stand except while
under actual hire.
§ 248-42. Parking prohibited, except for loading. [Amended
10-12-1999 by Ord. No. 681; 5-9-2000 by Ord. No. 688]
No vehicle, except one engaged in loading or unloading, shall be parked in
any of the following designated zones:
Name of Street Side Location
Duke Street Westerly From the northerly street line of London
Street and running 75 feet northerly
Long Street Southerly Beginning at a point 115 feet westerly of
the westerly street line of Duke Street
and running westerly 30 feet
Main Street Westerly Beginning at the northerly extension of
Court House Lane, running northerly 46
feet
§ 248-43. Moving vehicle to avoid provisions prohibited.
The moving of vehicles from one location to another to avoid the provisions
of this article shall be deemed a violation hereof.
§ 248-44. Standing or parking on one-way streets.
The Town Council shall authorize the erection of signs upon any one side of
any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles, and when
such signs are in place, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon such
side in violation of any such sign.
§ 248-45. Stopping, standing or parking near hazardous or
congested places.
A. The Chief of Police shall designate by proper signs, places not
exceeding 100 feet in length in which the stopping, standing or parking
of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would
cause unusual delay to traffic.
§ 248-40 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 248-45
C:580
§ 248-46. Payment in lieu of prosecution for parking violations.
[Amended 12-8-1992 by Ord. No. 587; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. 683;
7-9-2007 by Ord. No. 786; 6-13-2016 by Ord. No. 857]
B. When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as
authorized in this section, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle
in any such designated place.
A. Whenever a person is charged with a violation of a provision of any
ordinance of the Town relating to parking, except the Parking Meter
Ordinance, or as otherwise provided in this section, such person may
pay to the East Greenwich Municipal Court the sum of $25 for each
violation by mail addressed to East Greenwich Municipal Court, 125
Main Street, East Greenwich, Rhode Island 02818, and, upon payment
of such amount, a prosecution under this article for the violation in
question shall be barred; provided, however, that if the sum of $25 is
not paid to the East Greenwich Municipal Court or mailed to the East
Greenwich Municipal Court within 14 days after the violation in
question, a notice of violation shall be given to the owner of the vehicle
in question.
B. Whenever a person is charged with a second overtime parking
violation, as defined in § 248-35, such person shall pay the sum of $25
to the East Greenwich Municipal Court for each such violation and,
upon payment of this amount, a prosecution under this chapter for the
violation in question shall be barred; provided, however, that if said sum
of $25 is not paid to the East Greenwich Municipal Court or mailed to
the East Greenwich Municipal Court within 14 days after the violation
in question, a notice of violation shall be given to the owner of the
vehicle in question.
C. When any such owner shall receive a notice of violation from the East
Greenwich Municipal Court in accordance with Subsection A or B of
this section, such owner may pay to the East Greenwich Municipal
Court the sum of $50 for each violation of Subsection A and the sum of
$50 for each violation of Subsection B, or such owner may send the
required sum by check, money order or cash for each violation by mail
addressed to the East Greenwich Municipal Court, 125 Main Street,
East Greenwich, Rhode Island 02818, and upon payment of such
amount, a prosecution under this article for the violation in question
shall be barred; provided, however, that if the required sum is not paid
to the East Greenwich Municipal Court within 28 days after the
violation in question, the owner of the vehicle in question shall be
brought before the court and prosecuted in accordance with the Town's
ordinances.
D. Whenever a person is charged with a violation of parking within five
feet of any fire hydrant, such person may pay to the East Greenwich
Municipal Court the sum of $25 for each violation, or such person may
send the sum of $25 by check, money order or cash for each violation by
mail addressed to East Greenwich Municipal Court, 125 Main Street,
§ 248-45 CHARTER § 248-46
C:581
East Greenwich, Rhode Island 02818, and upon payment of such
amount, a prosecution under this chapter for the violation in question
shall be barred; provided, however, that if the sum of $25 is not paid to
the East Greenwich Municipal Court or mailed to the East Greenwich
Municipal Court within 14 days after the violation in question, a notice
of violation shall be given to the owner of the vehicle in question.
E. When any such owner shall receive a notice of violation from the East
Greenwich Municipal Court for parking within five feet of any fire
hydrant, such owner may pay to the East Greenwich Municipal Court
the sum of $50 for each violation, or such owner may send the sum of
$50 by check, money order or cash for each violation by mail addressed
to the East Greenwich Municipal Court, 125 Main Street, East
Greenwich, Rhode Island 02818, and upon payment of such amount, a
prosecution under this article for the violation in question shall be
barred; provided, however, that if the sum of $50 is not paid to the East
Greenwich Municipal Court or mailed to the East Greenwich Municipal
Court within 28 days after the violation in question, the owner of the
vehicle in question shall be brought before the court and prosecuted in
accordance with the Town's ordinances.
F. Whenever a person is charged with a violation of a provision of any
ordinance of the Town relating to parking, which violation results in the
person's vehicle being towed by or at the request of the Town's Police
Department, such person may pay to the East Greenwich Municipal
Court the sum of $45 for each violation, or such person may send the
sum of $45 by check, money order or cash for each violation by mail
addressed to East Greenwich Municipal Court, 125 Main Street, East
Greenwich, Rhode Island 02818, and upon payment of such amount, a
prosecution under this chapter for the violation in question shall be
barred; provided, however, that if the sum of $45 is not paid to the East
Greenwich Municipal Court or mailed to the East Greenwich Municipal
Court within 14 days after the violation in question, a notice of violation
shall be given to the owner of the vehicle in question.
G. When any such owner shall receive a notice of violation from the East
Greenwich Municipal Court in accordance with Subsection F of this
section, such owner may pay to the East Greenwich Municipal Court the
sum of $90 for each violation, or such owner may send the sum of $90
by check, money order or cash for each violation by mail addressed to
the East Greenwich Municipal Court, 125 Main Street, East Greenwich,
Rhode Island 02818, and upon payment of such amount, a prosecution
under this article for the violation in question shall be barred; provided,
however, that if the sum of $90 is not paid to the East Greenwich
Municipal Court or mailed to the East Greenwich Municipal Court
within 28 days after the violation in question, the owner of the vehicle
in question shall be brought before the court and prosecuted in
accordance with the Town's ordinances.
§ 248-46 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 248-47
C:582
§ 248-47. Removal of violating vehicles. [Amended 3-14-2016 by
Ord. No. 849]
Any police officer in uniform, in his discretion, may remove any vehicle left
upon any street, not in the apparent charge of any driver or other person
and in violation of the provisions of this article, to another place on such
street, from such street to some other street, or to a police station, and
there leave the vehicle.
§ 248-48. Designation of bus stops.
The following areas located in the Town are hereby designated as bus stops
and are reserved exclusively for the parking of buses: Cliff Street, from a
point at the intersection of Cliff Street and First Avenue to a point 28 feet
northerly from the intersection.
§ 248-49. Loading zones.
§ 248-50. Standing zones.
A. It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop, stand or park
such vehicle in any place designated as a loading zone place, except for
the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise, packages and other
articles, providing that such loading or unloading shall be done as
expeditiously as possible.
B. The following places are hereby designated as loading zone places:
Main Street.
Name of Street Side Location
Main Street West Beginning at the northwest corner of
Main Street and Court Street and
running northerly for a distance of 47
feet
C. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized and directed to place and
maintain or cause to be placed and maintained at all loading zone
places appropriate signs to bear the words "Loading Zone – No
Parking."
A. It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stand or park such
vehicle in any place designated in this section as a standing zone for a
period of time longer than 10 minutes between the hours of 10:00 a.m.
and 10:00 p.m. on Mondays through Saturdays.
B. The following places are hereby designated as standing zone places:
§ 248-47 CHARTER § 248-50
C:583
§ 248-51. Snowstorm parking restrictions.
Name of Street Side Location
Main Street West Beginning at the northwest corner of
Main Street and Court House Lane and
running northerly for a distance of 47
feet
C. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized and directed to place and
maintain or cause to be placed and maintained at all standing zone
places appropriate signs to bear the words "Standing Zone – 10 minutes
parking."
D. The provisions of § 248-35 shall not apply to any place designated by
this section as a standing zone place.
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle to
park the motor vehicle on any public street in the Town:
(1) At any time during an ice storm;
(2) At any time during severe icing conditions; or
(3) During any snowstorm after a snowfall of one inch has occurred
and during a period of 12 hours after the end of the snowfall of at
least one inch.
B. Whenever any motor vehicle shall be found parked on any public street
in the Town in violation of this section, such motor vehicle may be
removed or conveyed by or under the direction of the Chief of Police to
a public garage or any other convenient place, provided that the
Director of Public Works requests such removal, and provided, further,
that the motor vehicle found so parked interferes with the work of
removing or plowing snow or removing ice from or controlling ice on
the public street. The Chief of Police, within one week after such
removal of a motor vehicle, shall give notice thereof to the registered
owner of such motor vehicle.
C. The owner of any motor vehicle removed as provided in this section may
regain possession thereof from the Town by first establishing his
ownership of such motor vehicle and paying to the Town Treasurer the
sum of $20 for each violation of this section and also paying the cost of
removal and reasonable charges resulting from such storage to either
the Town Treasurer or the keeper of the place of storage of such motor
vehicle. Upon payment of the amount of $20 to the Town Treasurer,
prosecution under this section for a violation thereof shall be barred;
provided, however, that if the sum of $20 is not paid to the Town
Treasurer within seven days after the violation in question, a notice of
violation shall be given to the owner of the motor vehicle in question.
[Amended 7-9-2007 by Ord. No. 786]
§ 248-50 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 248-51
C:584
§ 248-52. Tow zones. [Added 10-24-1997 by Ord. No. 637; amended
6-13-2005 by Ord. No. 757]
Any motor vehicle in violation of any section of this Chapter 248, Vehicles
and Traffic, easterly of Main Street between Division Street and Rocky
Hollow Road, and on Division Road westerly 1,320 feet from Route 2, shall
be towed, and the owner or operator of said motor vehicle shall pay the cost
of said tow, plus the violation fee.
D. This section shall not apply to state highways in the Town.
§ 248-51 CHARTER § 248-52
C:585
Chapter 260
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Board — See Ch. 34, Art. IV.
Building construction — See Ch. 38.
Flood hazard areas — See Ch. 113.
Junkyards — See Ch. 138.
Land Trust — See Ch. 143.
Noise — See Ch. 152.
Sewers — See Ch. 197.
Trailers and trailer camps — See Ch. 239.
Development and subdivision review
regulations — See Ch. A263.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Freshwater wetlands — See R.I.G.L. § 2-1-18
et seq.
Fire Safety Code — See R.I.G.L. § 23-28.1-1 et
seq.
State Building Code — See R.I.G.L.
§ 23-27.3-100.1 et seq.
Facilities for people with disabilities — See
R.I.G.L. § 40.1-24-1 et seq.
Licensing of child-care providers — See
R.I.G.L. § 42-72.1-1 et seq.
Planning Board — See R.I.G.L. § 45-22-1 et
seq.
Development Review Act — See R.I.G.L.
§ 45-23-25 et seq.
Zoning Enabling Act — See R.I.G.L. § 45-24-27
et seq.
Historical area zoning — See R.I.G.L.
§ 45-24.1-1 et seq.
State Housing Maintenance and Occupancy
Code — See R.I.G.L. § 45-24.3-1 et seq.
Low and Moderate Income Housing Act — See
R.I.G.L. § 45-53-1 et seq.
Water pollution — See R.I.G.L. § 46-12-1 et
seq.
Groundwater protection — See R.I.G.L.
§ 46-13.1-3 et seq.
§ 248-52 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 248-52
C:586
ARTICLE I
Purpose and Intent
§ 260-1. Purpose.
The zoning regulations and districts herein set forth have been made in
accordance with the goals and policies articulated in the East Greenwich
Comprehensive Community Plan (as amended) for the purpose of promoting
the public health, safety and general welfare of the Town. They are designed
to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, flood, panic
and other dangers; to control nuclear and toxic wastes; to provide adequate
light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue
concentration of population; and to facilitate the adequate provision of
transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public
requirements. They are made with reasonable consideration, among other
things, of the character of each district and its peculiar suitability for
particular uses and with a view to conserving the value of property and
encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the Town.
§ 260-2. Authority; effectiveness; applicability.
§ 260-3. Interpretation and conflict.
A. Authority. This chapter of the Code of the Town of East Greenwich is
adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by Rhode Island General
Law § 45-24-27 et seq.
B. Effectiveness. This chapter shall take effect immediately upon passage.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this chapter are
repealed.
C. Applicability. No structure or land shall be used, and no structure shall
be erected, enlarged or relocated, unless it conforms to the provisions
of this chapter. No lot shall be created unless it conforms to the
provisions of this chapter. Uses and structures lawfully existing on the
effective date of this chapter, however, which are nonconforming to the
provisions of this chapter, shall be permitted to continue in existence.
A. Interpretation. When the provisions of this chapter are interpreted or
applied they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public safety, health and general welfare.
B. Conflict. The provisions of this chapter are not intended to interfere
with or abrogate or annul any ordinance, rule, regulation or permit
previously adopted or issued and not in conflict with any provision of
this chapter, or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law
relating to the use of land or building or ordinance not in conflict with
this chapter; nor is it intended by this chapter to interfere with or
abrogate or annul any easement, covenant or other agreement between
parties; except when this chapter imposes a greater restriction, this
chapter shall control.
§ 260-1 CHARTER § 260-4
C:587
§ 260-4. Sovereignty.
Notwithstanding any section to the contrary, use of land or buildings
constructed by or on behalf of the United States of America, the State of
Rhode Island and the Town of East Greenwich shall be exempted from the
regulations contained herein.
§ 260-5. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter or of any rule, regulation or determination
made thereunder, or the application thereof to any person, agency or
circumstances, is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder of the ordinance, rule, regulation, or determination and the
application of such provisions to other persons, agencies or circumstances
shall not be affected thereby. The invalidity of any section or sections of this
chapter shall not affect the validity of the remainder of the chapter.
§ 260-4 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-5
C:588
ARTICLE II
Zoning Definitions
§ 260-6. Terms defined.101 [Amended 8-13-2002 by Ord. No. 726]
Words and phrases used in this chapter shall have their plain and ordinary
meaning unless otherwise specifically defined below or in other sections
within this chapter. Section headings or captions are for reference purposes
only and shall not be used in the interpretation of this chapter.
ABUTTER — One whose property abuts, that is, adjoins at a border,
boundary or point, with no intervening land.
ABANDONMENT — Abandonment of a nonconforming use shall consist of
some overt act, or failure to act, which would lead one to believe that the
owner of the nonconforming use neither claims nor retains any interest
in continuing the nonconforming use unless the owner can demonstrate
an intent not to abandon the use. An involuntary interruption of a
nonconforming use, such as by fire and natural catastrophe, does not
establish the intent to abandon the nonconforming use. However, if any
nonconforming use is halted for a period of one year, the owner of the
nonconforming use will be presumed to have abandoned the nonconforming
use, unless that presumption is rebutted by the presentation of sufficient
evidence of intent not to abandon the use.
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — A second dwelling unit either in or added
to an existing single-family detached dwelling for use as a complete,
independent living facility. The accessory apartment provides for separate
cooking, eating, sanitation and sleeping facilities with a separate means of
egress from the primary dwelling unit.
ACCESSORY FAMILY DWELLING UNIT — An accessory dwelling unit for
the sole use of one or more members of the family of the occupant or
occupants of the principal residence, but need not have a separate means of
ingress and egress. (Yearly certification by the Building Official is required.)
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure detached from a principal building
on the same lot and customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal
building or use.
ACCESSORY USE — A use of land or of a building, or portion thereof,
customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or
building. Such accessory use is restricted to the same lot as the principal
use. Such accessory use shall not be permitted without the principal use to
which it is related.
AGGRIEVED PARTY — An aggrieved party, for purposes of this chapter,
shall be:
101. Editor's Note: For additional definitions applicable to signs, see § 260-27; to Historic
Districts, see § 260-57; and to telecommunications towers, see § 260-69.
§ 260-6 CHARTER § 260-6
C:589
ALTERATION — Any change, addition or modification in construction or
occupancy of an existing structure.
AMUSEMENT GAMES — See "electronic amusement games."
APPLICANT — An owner or authorized agent of the owner submitting an
application or appealing an action of any official, board or agency.
APPLICATION — The completed form or forms and all accompanying
documents, exhibits and fees required of an applicant by the Town of
East Greenwich Planning Director for development review, approval or
permitting purposes.
ASSISTED LIVING — A residential facility for four or more elderly persons,
within which is provided living and sleeping facilities, meal preparation
and laundry and room cleaning services. Such facilities may provide for
the transitional residency of elderly persons progressing from independent
living to assisted living, including the care of memory-impaired individuals
where residents share common meals and may also include the provision of
other services such as transportation for routine services.
AUTOMOBILE SALES — The use of any building, land area and other
premises for the display and sale of new or used automobiles, panel trucks,
vans, trailers or recreation vehicles and including any warranty or repair
work and other repair conducted as an accessory use.
AUTOMOBILE GAS/SERVICE STATION — Any building, land area or other
premises, or portions thereof, used or intended to be used for the retail
dispensing or sales of vehicular fuels; and including as an accessory use the
sale and installation of lubricants, tires, batteries and similar accessories;
automotive and truck repair, rental, leasing and parking service to the
general public. Further accessory and clearly secondary activities may
include minor automobile repair and maintenance, car wash service and the
sale of food and other convenience items.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR FACILITY — An establishment primarily engaged
in the repair or maintenance of motor vehicles, trailers and/or similar
equipment, including paint, body and fender, brake and muffler, engines,
batteries, tires and transmission, provided the activities are conducted
within a completely enclosed building.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST HOME — An owner-occupied single-family house
where short-term lodging rooms (guest rooms), with or without breakfast,
are provided for compensation.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST USE — A portion of an owner-occupied single-family
house dedicated solely to the bed-and-breakfast home operation, including,
but not limited to, short-term lodging rooms (guest rooms), bathrooms and
common areas.
Any person or persons or entity or entities who can demonstrate that
their property will be injured by a decision of any officer or agency
responsible for administering this chapter.
A.
B. Anyone requiring notice pursuant to this chapter.
§ 260-6 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-6
C:590
BUFFER — Land which is maintained in either a natural or landscaped
state and is used to screen and/or mitigate the impacts of development on
surrounding areas, properties or rights-of-way. A buffer may also include
opaque fencing, provided the fencing is adequate to prevent noise, glare
and similar impacts from affecting surrounding property. Impervious or
pervious areas used for parking shall not be considered buffers.
BOARDING — The keeping of animals other than your own for purposes of
compensation.
BREWERY — An establishment where beer or other malt beverages are
made on the premises. There are three categories of breweries in East
Greenwich: large breweries, microbreweries and farm breweries. A
manufacturer's license to make alcoholic beverages under R.I.G.L. § 3-6-1
shall be required and such establishments must meet all local dimensional
and parking regulations per Article VI and Table 2 of the Town's Zoning
Code.[Added 5-9-2016 by Ord. No. 853]
BREWPUB — An establishment where beer and malt beverages are made
on the premises in conjunction with a restaurant or bar, and where 40% or
more of the product made on site is sold on site. Brewpubs may distribute
to off-site accounts or sell beer to take away in accordance with state
law.[Added 5-9-2016 by Ord. No. 853]
BUILDING — Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering
any use or occupancy.
BUILDING ENVELOPE — The three-dimensional space within which a
structure is permitted to be built on a lot and which is defined by
regulations governing building setbacks, maximum height, bulk or other
regulations, and/or any combination thereof.[Amended 3-14-2016 by
Ord. No. 849]
BUILDING HEIGHT — For a vacant parcel of land, building height shall be
measured from the average, existing-grade elevation where the foundation
of the structure is proposed. For an existing structure, building height shall
be measured from average grade taken from the outermost four corners of
the existing foundation. In all cases, building height shall be measured to
the top of the highest point of the existing or proposed roof or structure.
This distance shall exclude spires, chimneys, flagpoles, and the like. For any
property or structure located in a special flood hazard area, as shown on the
official FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMS), building height shall be
measured from base flood elevation, and where freeboard, as defined in this
section, is being utilized or proposed, such freeboard area, not to exceed
five feet, shall be excluded from the building height calculation; provided,
however, that the Rhode Island Coastal Resources Management Council
design elevation maps may be used by an owner or applicant to establish
a base flood elevation for a property that is higher than the official FEMA
FIRMS.[Amended 5-22-2006 by Ord. No. 765; 4-22-2019 by Ord. No.
880]
CAPACITY OF LAND — The ability of the land, as defined by geology,
soil conditions, topography and water resources, to support proposed
§ 260-6 CHARTER § 260-6
C:591
development. Land capacity may be modified by provision of facilities and
services.
CAPACITY OCCUPANCY — For places of public assembly, the following
maximum capacities shall apply based on net floor area designated to the
public:
Fixed seats 1 person per 15 net square feet
Without fixed seats 1 person per 7 net square feet
Standing room 1 person per 3 net square feet
Tables and chairs 1 person per 15 square feet
Bars 1 person per 18 linear inches
Booths 1 person per 24 linear inches
CLUSTER — A site planning technique that concentrates buildings in
specific areas on the site to allow the remaining land to be used for
recreation, common open space and/or preservation of environmentally,
historically or other sensitive features and/or structures. The techniques
used to concentrate buildings shall be specified in the ordinance and may
include, but are not limited to, reduction in lot areas, setback requirements
and/or bulk requirements, with the resultant open land being devoted by
deed restrictions for one or more uses. Under cluster development there
is no increase in the number of lots that would be permitted under
conventional development except where ordinance provisions include
incentive bonuses for certain types or conditions of development.
COMMERCIAL PARKING LOT — A parking area privately owned and
operated.
COMMERCIAL RECREATION — Amusement businesses, including, but not
limited to, driving ranges, batting cages, go-carts and miniature golf.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — Land within or related to a cluster which is
prohibited from development as identified in § 260-43D of this chapter. This
land is designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the
residents of the cluster subdivision of which it is a part. The common open
space may include complementary structures that are necessary and/or
appropriate as determined by this chapter.
COMMON OWNERSHIP — Either: 1) ownership by one or more individuals
or entities in any form of ownership of two or more contiguous lots; or
2) ownership by any association (such ownership may also include a
municipality) of one or more lots under specific development techniques.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE — A home or residential facility where children
and/or adults reside in a family setting and may or may not receive
supervised care. This shall not include halfway houses or substance abuse
treatment facilities. This shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
Wherever six or fewer retarded children or adults reside in any type
of residence in the community, as licensed by the state pursuant to
Chapter 40.1-24 of Rhode Island General Laws. All requirements
A.
§ 260-6 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-6
C:592
COMPASSION CENTER — As defined in R.I.G.L. § 21-28.6-3, a not-for-profit
corporation, subject to the provisions of Chapter 6 of Title 7, and registered
under § 21-28.6-12, that acquires, possesses, cultivates, manufactures,
delivers, transfers, transports, supplies or dispenses marijuana, and/or
related supplies and educational materials, to patient cardholders and/or
their registered caregiver cardholder, who have designated it as one of their
primary caregivers.[Added 1-11-2016 by Ord. No. 846]
COMPREHENSIVE COMMUNITY PLAN — The Comprehensive Community
Plan of East Greenwich, as may be amended, adopted and approved
pursuant to Chapter 45-22.2 of the Rhode Island General Laws (R.I.G.L.)
and to which any zoning adopted pursuant to Chapter 45-24 shall be in
compliance.
CONVENIENCE STORE — A retail operation for the sale of prepackaged
goods, reading material, nonprescription drugs, and some food items.
CRAFT DISTILLERY — A commercial establishment duly operating with a
manufacturer' s license issued by the State of Rhode Island per RIGL § 3-6-1
wherein potable alcoholic liquors obtained by the process of distillation are
made and sold. The distillation process shall take place wholly inside a
building and shall result in products for sale that may include but not be
limited to whiskey, vodka, rum and gin but which shall expressly exclude
fermented and malted liquors like beer or wine. Craft distilleries (as
distinguished from large distilleries or micro-distilleries) shall produce
greater than 20,000 but less than 50,000 gallons of liquor per year.
Distilleries producing greater than 50,000 gallons of liquor per year are not
permitted. All provisions of § 260-24 of this Zoning Code, Off-street storage
and loading, shall apply, and no greater than 30% of total gross floor area
pertaining to local zoning are waived for these community residences
by Rhode Island General Law.
A group home, providing care or supervision, or both, to not more
than eight mentally disabled or mentally handicapped or physically
handicapped persons, and licensed by the state pursuant to Chapter
40.1-24.
B.
A residence for children, providing care or supervision, or both, to not
more than eight children including those of the caregiver, and licensed
by the state pursuant to Chapter 42-72.1.
C.
A community transitional residence providing care or assistance, or
both, to no more than six unrelated persons or no more than three
families, not to exceed a total of eight persons, requiring temporary
financial assistance and/or to persons who are victims of crimes, abuse
or neglect, and who are expected to reside in such residence not less
than 60 days nor more than two years. Residents will have access to
and use of all common areas, including eating areas and living rooms,
and will receive appropriate social services for the purpose of fostering
independence, self-sufficiency and eventual transition to a permanent
living situation.
D.
§ 260-6 CHARTER § 260-6
C:593
associated with the distillery can be devoted to tasting room or direct-toconsumer
sales.[Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 881]
DAY CARE; DAY-CARE CENTER — Any other child day-care center which
is not a family day-care home and is appropriately licensed by the State of
Rhode Island.[Amended 1-10-2011 by Ord. No. 812]
DENSITY, RESIDENTIAL — The number of dwelling units per unit of land.
DEVELOPMENT — The construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any structure. This definition shall
also include any mining, excavation, landfill or land disturbance activity, any
change in use, or alteration or extension of the use of land.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW — The process whereby authorized local
officials review the site plans, maps and other documentation of a
development to determine the compliance with the stated purposes and
standards of the ordinance. (See also Chapter A263, Development and
Subdivision Review Regulations.)
DISTRICT — See "zoning use district."
DRAINAGE SYSTEM — A system for the removal of water from land by
drains, grading or other appropriate means. Such techniques may include
runoff controls to minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after
construction or development, the means for preserving surface and ground
waters and the prevention and/or alleviation of flooding.
DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY — The provision of a service window where
the customer remains in vehicle while being served. Typically found in
conjunction with banks and restaurants.
DWELLING UNIT — A structure or portion thereof providing complete,
independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation, and
containing a separate means of ingress and egress.
DUPLEX — A structure containing two dwelling units, each of which is
totally separated from the other by a single unpierced wall.
EASEMENT — That portion of a lot or lots reserved for present or future
use by a person or agency other than the legal owners of the property.
ELECTRIC POWER SUBSTATION — A structure designed to reduce the
amount of volts of electricity passing through a particular conduit.
ELECTRONIC AMUSEMENT GAMES — Video games, arcade games and
the like.
ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY SCHOOL — Education programs that are
defined by and are subject to R.I.G.L. § 16-1-5 et seq.[Added 1-10-2011 by
Ord. No. 812]
ENVIRONMENTAL DAMAGE — Damage suffered to any portion of land
due to the removal of vegetation, soil, wetlands and/or water bodies or the
existence of any hazardous materials underground.[Amended 3-14-2016
by Ord. No. 849]
§ 260-6 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-6
C:594
EXTENDED-CARE FACILITY — A long-term care facility or a distinct part of
a facility licensed as a nursing home, infirmary unit of a home for the aged
or a governmental medical institution. This shall include hospices.
EXTRACTIVE INDUSTRY — The extraction of minerals including solids,
such as coal and ores; liquids, such as crude petroleum; and gases, such
as natural gases. The term also includes quarrying; well operation; milling,
such as crushing, screening, washing and flotation; and other preparation
customarily done at the extraction site or as part of the extractive activity.
FAMILY — See "household."
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — Any home other than the child's home in which
day care in lieu of parental care and/or supervision is offered at the same
time to six or less children who are not relatives of the care giver, but
not containing more than a total of eight children receiving such care, and
which is licensed by the State Department of Children, Youth and Families
subject to the Department's regulations.[Amended 1-10-2011 by Ord.
No. 812]
FARM BREWERY — An establishment located on a farm-zoned property
of no less than two acres that produces beer or other malt beverages
manufactured with at least one primary ingredient (hops or grains) grown
on premises and whose annual production does not exceed 150,000 gallons
of beer. A farm brewery must have all appropriate state licenses and may
sell beer at wholesale to retailers consistent with said licenses. Similarly,
direct sales to on-site customers for consumption on or off site shall be in
accordance with state law.[Added 5-9-2016 by Ord. No. 853]
FARM or FARMLAND — The legal production, keeping or maintenance,
for sale, lease or personal use, of plants and animals useful to people,
including but not limited to forages and sod crops; grains and seed crops;
dairy animals and dairy products; poultry and poultry products; livestock,
including any hoofed animals and any animals not bred as household pets.
Such animals may be kept and maintained for commercial production, sale
or lease, and/or food, education or recreation. Farm animals identified by
these categories include beef cattle, sheep, swine, horses, ponies, mules,
chicken, turkeys, chinchilla or goats, or any mutations/hybrids thereof,
including the breeding and grazing of any or all such animals; bees and
apiary products; fur animals; trees and forest products; fruits of all kinds,
including grapes, nuts and berries; vegetables; nursery, floral, ornamental
and greenhouse products; or lands devoted to soil conservation or forestry
management program. This definition shall not be construed so as to
prohibit the use of land for limited home gardening purposes. Farming does
not include the boarding of animals.
FIXED ZONE — A land-use zone, the boundaries of which are clearly
denoted on the Zoning Map and which serves as the underlying zone for any
overlay zones or floating zones.
FLOATING ZONE — An unmapped zoning district adopted within the
ordinance, which is established on the Zoning Map only when an application
§ 260-6 CHARTER § 260-6
C:595
for development, meeting the zone requirements, is approved by the Town
Council.
FLOODPLAINS or FLOOD HAZARD AREA — An area that has a one-percent
or greater chance of inundation in any given year, as delineated by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency pursuant to the National Flood
Insurance Act of 1968, as amended (P.L. 90-448).
FOOD SERVICE FACILITY — A lunch room, luncheonette, restaurant,
cafeteria, cafe, coffee house, or other place for the service of food for onpremises
consumption and whose principal business is the sale of foods
or beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state. Such
establishments may also sell foods or beverages for carry-out or
delivery.[Added 5-9-2011 by Ord. No. 814]
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety expressed in feet above the base flood
elevation of a flood hazard area for purposes of floodplain management.
Freeboard compensates for the many unknown factors that could contribute
to flood heights, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological
effect of urbanization of the watershed.[Added 4-22-2019 by Ord. No.
880]
GOLF FACILITY — A recreation area/operation including a miniature golf
course and/or a driving range but not including a traditional nine-hole or
eighteen-hole golf course.
GROUNDWATER — Groundwater and associated terms as defined in
§ 46-13.1-3 of the Rhode Island General Laws.
HARDSHIP — See administration and procedures of the Zoning Board of
Review, § 260-91C.[Amended 3-14-2016 by Ord. No. 849]
HALFWAY HOUSES — A residential facility for adults or children who have
been institutionalized for criminal conduct and who require a group setting
to facilitate the transition to a functional member of society.
HEALTH/FITNESS CENTER — An indoor facility including uses such as
game courts, exercise equipment, locker rooms, pool, Jacuzzi®, sauna and/
or proshop.
HEIGHT — See "building height."
HISTORIC DISTRICTS — Specific divisions of the Town of East Greenwich
as designated by the Historic Zoning Ordinance, Article XI, which shall act
as overlay zones. A historic district may include one or more structures.
(See also Article XI, § 260-57, for definitions related to historic zoning.)
HOME OCCUPATION — Any activity customarily carried out for gain by a
resident, conducted as an accessory use in the resident's dwelling unit.
HOSPITAL — An institution providing health services primarily for human
inpatient medical or surgical care for the sick or injured, and including
related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient departments, training
facilities, central services facilities and staff offices that are an integral part
of the facilities.
§ 260-6 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-6
C:596
HOTEL — A structure designed, used or offered for residential occupancy
for any period less than one month, including motels, but not including
hospitals or nursing homes. Such a structure may also include ancillary uses
such as a restaurant, meeting rooms and theater/projection room(s).
HOUSEHOLD — One or more persons living together in a single dwelling
unit, with common access to, and common use of, all living and eating areas
and all areas and facilities for the preparation and storage of food within the
dwelling unit. The term "household unit" shall be synonymous with the term
"dwelling unit" for determining the number of such units allowed within
any structure on any lot in a zoning district. An individual household shall
consist of any one of the following:
HOUSEHOLD PETS — Animals that are customarily kept for personal use
or enjoyment within the home. Household pets shall include domestic dogs
and domestic cats and may include other animals such as rabbits and caged
birds. Such animals are to be kept for noncommercial family purposes. The
keeping of all such pets shall comply with all relevant local laws pertaining
to leashes and confinement, licensing, etc., and shall not constitute a public
safety hazard or public nuisance.
HOUSE OF WORSHIP — A tax-exempt institution that people attend to
participate in or hold religious services, meetings and other activities
related to the religion.
IMPROVEMENT — Any man-made, immovable item which becomes part of,
is placed upon, or is affixed to real estate.
IN-LAW APARTMENT — One-bedroom apartment located within the
principal structure for use by parent(s), in-law parent(s), or grandparent(s)
of occupant(s) of the principal residence. (Yearly certification by the
Building Official is required.)
INFRASTRUCTURE — Facilities and services needed to sustain residential,
commercial, industrial, institutional and other activities, including but not
limited to sewer, gas, electric, cable and water lines.
KENNEL — A shelter for or a place where four or more animals are bred,
boarded and/or trained, whether for compensation or not.
KINDERGARTEN — Education programs that are defined by and are subject
to R.I.G.L. § 16-1-5 et seq.[Added 1-10-2011 by Ord. No. 812]
LAND DEVELOPMENT AND SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE — A code
requiring review and approval of subdivisions and site plans prior to
construction and/or development.102
A family, which includes one or more persons related by blood,
marriage or adoption and which may also include domestic employees
living with the family.
A.
A person or group of no more than three unrelated persons living
together.
B.
102. Editor's Note: See Ch. A263, Development and Subdivision Review Regulations.
§ 260-6 CHARTER § 260-6
C:597
LAND DEVELOPMENT PROJECT — A project in which one or more lots,
tracts or parcels of land are to be developed or redeveloped as a
coordinated site for a complex of uses, units or structures, including but not
limited to planned development and/or cluster development for residential,
commercial, institutional, recreational, open space and/or mixed uses as
provided for in this chapter.
LARGE BREWERY — An establishment where beer or malt beverages are
made on premises at an annual production rate of 10,000 barrels or more.
A barrel is equivalent to roughly 31 gallons.[Added 5-9-2016 by Ord. No.
853]
LARGE DISTILLERY — A commercial establishment duly operating with a
manufacturer's license issued by the State of Rhode Island per RIGL § 3-6-1
wherein potable alcoholic liquors obtained by the process of distillation are
made and sold. The distillation process shall take place wholly inside a
building and shall result in products for sale that may include but not be
limited to whiskey, vodka, rum and gin but which shall expressly exclude
fermented and malted liquors like beer or wine. Craft distilleries ( as
distinguished from large distilleries or micro-distilleries) shall produce
greater than 20,000 but less than 50,000 gallons of liquor per year.
Distilleries producing greater than 50,000 gallons of liquor per year are not
permitted. All provisions of § 260-24 of this Zoning Code, Off-street storage
and loading, shall apply, and no greater than 30% of total gross floor area
associated with the distillery can be devoted to tasting room or direct-toconsumer
sales.[Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 881]
LAUNDROMAT — A place where patrons wash, dry or dry-clean clothing
and other fabrics in machines operated by the patron.
LIGHT INDUSTRY — A use engaged in the manufacture, predominantly
from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including
processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental storage,
sales and distribution of such projects, but excluding basic industrial
processing which requires the use of one-hundred-percent raw materials.
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL PARK — A park designed as a coordinated
environment for a variety of industrial and related activities. The project is
developed or controlled by one proprietary interest. It has an enforceable
master plan and/or covenants, conditions and restrictions. The development
may be on one parcel, may be subdivided, may have condominium
ownerships, or a combination of these types.
LOT — Either: 1) the basic development unit for determination of lot area,
depth and other dimensional regulations; or 2) a parcel of land whose
boundaries have been established by some legal instrument, such as a
recorded deed or recorded map, and which is recognized as a separate legal
entity for purposes of transfer of title.
LOT, CORNER — Where a lot is abutted by two intersecting or intercepting
streets. Such lots have two front yards, one at each street; two side yards;
and no rear yard.
§ 260-6 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-6
C:598
LOT AREA — The total area within the boundaries of a lot, excluding any
street rights-of-way, usually reported in acres or square feet.
LOT BUILDING COVERAGE — That portion of the lot that is or may be
covered by buildings and accessory buildings.
LOT DEPTH — The distance measured from the front lot line to the opposite
lot line (typically the rear lot line). For lots where the front and opposite lot
lines are not parallel, the lot depth is an average of the depth. Where the
front lot line is a curved line, the distance measured from the midpoint of
the curved radial to the opposite lot line shall constitute lot depth.
LOT FRONTAGE — That portion of a lot abutting a street that has been
approved and accepted by the Town. Minimum frontage requirements shall
be met by contiguous lot frontage.
LOT LINE — A line of record bounding a lot, which divides one lot from
another lot or from a public or private street, or any other public or private
space and shall include:103
LOT, THROUGH — A lot which fronts upon two parallel streets, or which
fronts upon two streets which do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot
measured at right angles to its depth along a straight line parallel to the
front lot line at the minimum front setback line.
MARIJUANA STORE — Any retail establishment at which the sale or use
of marijuana, medical or otherwise, takes place. This shall not include a
compassion center regulated and licensed by the State of Rhode Island, as
defined herein.[Added 1-11-2016 by Ord. No. 846]
MARINA — A facility for storing, servicing, fueling, berthing and securing
and launching of private pleasure craft that may include the sale of fuel and
incidental supplies for the boat owners, crews and guests.
MEDICAL WALK-IN FACILITY — A building designed and used for the
diagnosis and treatment of human patients that does not include overnight
care facilities.
FRONT — The lot line separating a lot from a street right-of-way. Lots
fronting on more than one street right-of-way are considered to have
more than one front lot line and no rear lot line.
A.
REAR — The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line
or, in the case of triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped lots, an
assumed line at least 10 feet in length entirely within the lot, parallel to
and at a maximum distance from the front lot line. Lots with more than
one front lot line are considered to have no rear lot line.
B.
SIDE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. A lot may have
more than two side lot lines.
C.
103. Editor's Note: See Lot Illustration attached to this chapter.
§ 260-6 CHARTER § 260-6
C:599
MERE INCONVENIENCE — See administration and procedures of the
Zoning Board of Review, § 260-91C.[Amended 3-14-2016 by Ord. No.
849]
MICROBREWERY — An establishment where beer and/or malt beverages
are made on premises and then sold or distributed, producing less than
10,000 barrels per year. Microbreweries sell their product in any of the
following ways: the traditional three-tier system of brewer to wholesaler
to retailer to consumer; a two-tier system of brewer acting as wholesaler
and then to retailer to consumer; or directly to the end consumer.[Added
5-9-2016 by Ord. No. 853]
MICRO-DISTILLERY — A commercial establishment duly operating with a
manufacturer's license issued by the State of Rhode Island per RIGL § 3-6-1
wherein potable alcoholic liquors obtained by the process of distillation are
made and sold. The distillation process shall take place wholly inside a
building and shall result in products for sale that may include but not be
limited to whiskey, vodka, rum and gin but which shall expressly exclude
fermented and malted liquors like beer or wine. Microdistilleries (as
distinguished from craft distilleries and large distilleries) shall produce no
greater than 20,000 gallons of liquor per year. All provisions of § 260-24 of
this Zoning Code, Off-street storage and loading, shall apply, and no greater
than 30% of total gross floor area associated with the distillery can be
devoted to tasting room or direct-to-consumer sales.[Added 5-28-2019 by
Ord. No. 881]
MIXED USE — A mixture of land uses within a single development, building
or tract.
MORTUARY/FUNERAL HOME — Establishment in which the dead are
prepared for burial or cremation. The facility may include a chapel for
conduct of funeral services and space for funeral services, gatherings and/
or display of funeral equipment.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A building intended and designed for
residential occupancy by three or more families and not meeting the
requirements for a multiple single-family dwelling. The families shall live
independently in separate dwelling units, and the number of families in
occupancy shall not exceed the number of dwelling units provided.
MULTIPLE SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A building or portion thereof
containing more than two dwelling units, where each unit has an
independent means of egress and is separated by a two-hour fire-separation
assembly. Also called "attached single-family dwellings."
NONCONFORMANCE — A building, structure or parcel of land, or use
thereof, lawfully existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of
this chapter and not in conformity with the provisions of such chapter or
amendment.
Nonconformance shall be of only two types:
NONCONFORMING BY USE — A lawfully established use of land,
building or structure which is not a permitted use in that zoning
(1)
A.
§ 260-6 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-6
C:600
NONRESIDENTIAL COOPERATIVE CULTIVATION — A use of land located
in a nonresidential zone, or of a building, or a portion thereof, located
in a nonresidential zone, for the cultivation of marijuana by two or more
cardholders, as defined in R.I.G.L. § 21-28.6-3.[Added 1-11-2016 by Ord.
No. 846]
NUISANCE — A wrong arising from an unreasonable or unlawful use of
property to the discomfort, annoyance, inconvenience or damage of another
and usually consists of continuous or recurrent acts.
NURSERY SCHOOL — Private nursery schools and other regular programs
of educational services to children between the ages of two years and eight
months and six years where the schools operate one or more sessions daily.
This does not apply to bona fide kindergarten or nursery classes which
are part of a nonpublic elementary school system. See R.I.G.L. § 16-48-1 et
seq.[Added 1-10-2011 by Ord. No. 812]
OFFICE — A building or portion of a building wherein services are
performed involving predominantly administrative, professional or clerical
operations.
OFFICE PARK — A tract of land that has been planned, developed and
operated as an integrated facility for a number of separate office buildings
and supporting ancillary uses with special attention given to circulation,
parking, utility needs, aesthetics and compatibility.
OPEN SPACE — Land area not occupied by buildings, structures, parking
areas, streets, alleys or required yards; may be devoted to landscape
preservation of natural features or recreation facilities and areas.
district. A building or structure containing more dwelling units
than are permitted by the use regulations of this chapter shall be
nonconforming by use; or
NONCONFORMING BY DIMENSION — A building, structure, or
parcel of land not in compliance with the dimensional regulations
of this chapter. Dimensional regulations include all regulations of
this chapter, other than those pertaining to the permitted uses.
A building or structure containing more dwelling units than are
permitted by the use regulations of this chapter is nonconforming
by use; a building or structure containing a permitted number
of dwelling units by the use regulations of this chapter, but not
meeting the lot area per dwelling unit regulations, is
nonconforming by dimension. [Amended 3-14-2016 by Ord. No.
849]
(2)
A building or structure containing more dwelling units than are
permitted by the use regulations of this chapter shall be nonconforming
by use; a building or structure containing a permitted number of
dwelling units by the use regulations of this chapter, but not meeting
the lot area per dwelling unit regulations, shall be nonconforming by
dimension.
B.
§ 260-6 CHARTER § 260-6
C:601
OVERLAY DISTRICTS — A district established by this chapter that is
superimposed on one or more districts or parts of districts. The standards
and requirements associated with an overlay district may be more or less
restrictive than those in the underlying districts, consistent with other
applicable state and federal laws. These districts include but are not limited
to the Historic District, Aquifer/Wellhead District, Floodplain District and
Cluster District.[Amended 3-14-2016 by Ord. No. 849]
PARKING LOT — Any outdoor space, plot, lot, parcel, yard or enclosure, or
any portion thereof, where more than two motor vehicles may be parked,
stored, housed or kept. "Parking lot" includes but is not limited to the
driving and parking areas of drive-through restaurants, banks, gas stations,
grocery stores, etc. "Parking lot" shall also include Town-owned and -
operated and/or -leased off-street parking lots. (See also Article VI of this
chapter.)
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS — A set of criteria or limits relating to
elements which a particular use or process either must meet or may not
exceed.
PERMITTED USE — A use by right which is specifically authorized in a
particular zone.
PERSONAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATION — Marijuana cultivation by a single
registered cardholder, as defined in R.I.G.L. § 21-28.6, within his or her
residential dwelling for medical use only. This use shall only be permitted
as an accessory use to a lawfully permitted residential use. In a mixed-use
building that contains residential and nonresidential uses, this use shall be
contained within the residential dwelling unit only.[Added 1-11-2016 by
Ord. No. 846]
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — Land development project as defined
elsewhere in this chapter and developed according to plan(s) as a single
entity and containing one or more structures and/or uses with appurtenant
common areas.
PLANT AGRICULTURE — The growing of plants for food or fiber, to sell or
consume.[Added 3-14-2016 by Ord. No. 849]
PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE — A review meeting of a proposed
development held between applicants and reviewing agencies, as permitted
by law and municipal ordinance, before formal submission of an application
for a permit or for development approval.
PREKINDERGARTEN — Education programs that are defined by and are
subject to R.I.G.L. § 16-1-5 et seq.[Added 1-10-2011 by Ord. No. 812]
PRIVATE EDUCATION CENTER — A facility owned and operated by a
federal and/or state approved not-for-profit organization or one that is
operated for profit whose purpose is systematic training and instruction
designed to impart knowledge and develop skills, including institutions
which are authorized by the State of Rhode Island to award associate,
baccalaureate or higher degrees and the facilities associated with them.
This term includes academic buildings, administrative facilities, athletic
§ 260-6 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-6
C:602
facilities, residential facilities, parking areas, garages, dining halls, food
service facilities, agricultural facilities and other physical plants associated
with college or university use. This facility may include schools operated by
religious organizations.[Amended 1-10-2011 by Ord. No. 812; 5-9-2011
by Ord. No. 814]
RECREATION, COMMERCIAL — A place designed and equipped for the
conduct of sports leisure-time activities and other customary, usual
recreational activities, which is operated as a business and open to the
public for a fee.
RESIDENTIAL COOPERATIVE CULTIVATION — The use of land located
in a residential zone, or of a building, or a portion thereof, located in
a residential zone, for the cultivation of marijuana by two or more
cardholders, as defined in R.I.G.L. § 21-28.6-3.[Added 1-11-2016 by Ord.
No. 846]
RESTAURANT — A retail establishment where food or beverages are
cooked or prepared and offered for sale and where consumption is
permitted on the premises.
RETAIL, COMMERCIAL — The sale of a product to the general public, not
intended to be resold by others; may involve the sale of general retail goods
and accessory services and the storage of products for sale.
RIDING STABLE/HORSE BOARDING FACILITY — A building or land where
horses are kept for remuneration, hire or boarding. A minimum of one acre
of land per horse boarded on site is required.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — An area or strip of land, either public or private, occupied
or intended to be occupied by a street, electric transmission line, gasline,
water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, drainagecourse, or other special
use.
ROOMING HOUSE — Any building which is used in whole or in part as
a place where sleeping accommodations are furnished for hire or other
consideration, with or without board, for not more than 20 guests or
employees of the management, or where 10 or fewer sleeping rooms are
maintained for such guests or employees. This term shall include tourist
homes, lodging homes, convents, monasteries and other nonprofit and
charitable institutions which have accommodations as stated, but shall
not include private dwellings that accommodate habitation guests or
employees, bed-and-breakfast establishments, apartment houses, hotels,
convalescent homes, nursing homes, assisted living facilities, or homes for
the aged.
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA — A device or antenna intended to receive
signals from orbiting satellites and other sources. Noncommercial dish
antennas are defined as being less than four meters in diameter, while
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT — A building or portion thereof where food
and/or beverages are sold in a form ready for consumption and where
all or a significant portion of the consumption takes place outside the
confines of the building, often in a motor vehicle on site.
A.
§ 260-6 CHARTER § 260-6
C:603
commercial dish antennas are usually those larger than four meters and
typically used by broadcasting stations. The Town does not exercise
jurisdiction over the "mini dishes" which are less than 39 inches in diameter,
except where they are to be installed within the Historic District or on an
outlying historic property included in Article XI of this chapter or where
dish installation must be restricted based on safety issues.
SELF-STORAGE FACILITIES — Any real property designed and used for the
purpose of renting or leasing individual storage space to occupants who
are to have access to the space for the purpose of storing and removing
personal property.[Added 5-10-2004 by Ord. No. 746]
SETBACK LINE OR LINES — A line or lines parallel to a lot line at the
minimum distance of the required setback for the zoning district in which
the lot is located that establishes the area within which the principal
structure must be erected or placed. (See the Lot Illustration at the end of
this chapter and also the definition of "building envelope.")104
SIGN — See "sign" and other sign-related terms defined in Article VII,
Signs.
SITE PLAN — A plan for one or more lots which shows the existing and/or
the proposed conditions of the lot.
SPECIAL USE — A regulated use which is permitted pursuant to the
approval of a special use permit issued by the Zoning Board of Review.
Formerly referred to as a "special exception."
STORAGE — Depositing articles (goods, wares, equipment or merchandise)
for safekeeping or future use. Articles appurtenant for the residential use
of a property are exempted from this definition. Also in order to constitute
storage, articles must be left outdoors on a parcel for a period exceeding 30
days. Stored article shall not be permitted between the front lot line and the
primary structure nor in any side or rear setback.
STREET — A public way established by or maintained under public
authority.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for use,
occupancy, or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below the
surface of land or water.105
SUBSTANDARD LOT OF RECORD — Any lot lawfully existing at the time
of adoption or amendment of this chapter and not in conformance with
the dimensional and/or area provisions of this chapter. (See also Article IV,
Substandard Lots of Record.)
TEMPORARY SALES OR PROMOTION OFFICE — A use that is allowed until
sale or completion of the final unit of an approved development.
104. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
105. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 260-6 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-6
C:604
TENT — A shelter of canvas or like material supported by poles and
fastened to the ground. No tent exceeding 120 square feet shall be erected,
operated or used without permission from the Building Official and Fire
Department. Permits for such tents shall be issued for a period not to
exceed 30 days and shall be revocable for cause.
THEATER — A building or part of a building devoted to showing motion
pictures or for dramatic, musical or live performances.
TOWNHOUSE — Single-family dwelling units constructed in a row of
attached units separated by property lines and with open space on at least
two sides.
TRAILER, STORAGE — Any portable structure or vehicle constructed on
a chassis and self-propelled or designed to be drawn by vehicles which,
notwithstanding the removal of wheels or any other alteration, shall remain
a trailer for purposes expressed here. No person may locate a trailer for
storage without first obtaining a permit from the Building Official. Such
permit may be issued for a period not to exceed 30 days but may be
renewed once, provided that there has been no violation of state law or
Town ordinance. No more than one trailer shall be permitted on a lot,
and such trailers must meet the accessory structure setback requirements
of the relevant zone. Such trailers shall be permitted in industrial zones
only. Construction storage trailers used coincidental with ongoing permitted
construction may be exempted from these requirements for the duration of
the construction project only.
TRANSMISSION TOWERS — A structure designed to aid in the
transmission of radio and/or electrical impulses for the purposes of
communication (i.e., for mobile phones, radio, TV, etc.).
USE — The purpose or activity for which land or buildings are designed,
arranged or intended, or for which land or buildings are occupied or
maintained.
USABLE OPEN SPACE — Space which is effectively separated from
automobile traffic and parking and is an integral part of the cluster
development. The term shall not include:
VARIANCE — Permission to depart from the literal requirements of this
chapter as granted by the Zoning Board of Review. An authorization for
the construction or maintenance of a building or structure or for the
establishment or maintenance of a use of land which is prohibited by this
chapter.
Space devoted to streets, driveways, parking, walkways, sidewalks,
accessory uses or structures, wetlands, wetland buffers, or water
bodies.
A.
Any land area required to be left unaltered by reason of a preexisting
legally enforceable covenant, easement or restriction which runs with
the land.
B.
§ 260-6 CHARTER § 260-6
C:605
WAREHOUSE — A building used primarily for the storage and/or
distribution of goods and materials.
WATERS — As defined in § 46-12-1(23), Rhode Island General Laws, as may
be amended.106
WETLAND — A marsh, swamp, bog, pond, river, river or stream floodplain
or bank; an area subject to flooding or storm flowage; an emergent or
submergent plant community in any body of fresh water; or an area within
50 feet of the edge of a bog, marsh, swamp, or pond, as defined in R.I.G.L.
§ 2-1-20; or any salt marsh bordering on the tidal waters of this state,
whether or not the tidal waters reach the littoral areas through natural
or artificial watercourses, and those uplands directly associated and
contiguous thereto which are necessary to preserve the integrity of that
marsh, and as further defined by the Rhode Island Coastal Resources
Management Program, as may be amended.107
WHOLESALE, COMMERCIAL — The sale of a product in large quantities
from a manufacturing or warehousing facility to be retailed by others.
YARDS — See definitions for "lot line" and "setback lines."108
ZONING CERTIFICATE — A document signed by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer which states whether or not a use, structure, building or lot either
complies with or is legally nonconforming to the provisions of this chapter
or whether or not it is an authorized variance or modification therefrom.
There shall be only two categories of variance: a use variance or
a dimensional variance. (See also Article XV, Administration and
Procedures of Zoning Board of Review.)
USE VARIANCE. — Permission to depart from the use
requirements of this chapter where the applicant for the requested
variance has shown by evidence upon the record that the subject
land or structure cannot yield any beneficial use if it is to conform
to the provisions of this chapter.
(1)
DIMENSIONAL VARIANCE — Permission to depart from the
dimensional requirements of this chapter where the applicant for
the requested relief has shown by evidence upon the record that
there is no other reasonable alternative way to enjoy a legally
permitted beneficial use of the subject property unless granted the
requested relief from the dimensional regulations.
(2)
A.
However, the fact that a use may be more profitable or that a structure
may be more valuable after the relief is granted shall not be grounds
for relief.
B.
106. Editor's Note: The original definitions of "wetland, coastal" and "wetland, freshwater,"
which immediately followed this definition, were repealed at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV). See now the definition of "wetland."
107. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV).
108. Editor's Note: The original definition of "Zoning Administrator," which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. IV).
§ 260-6 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-6
C:606
ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The individual designated by the
Town Manager to interpret and enforce compliance with this chapter.
ZONING MAP — The map or maps which are a part of this chapter and
which delineate the boundaries of all mapped zoning districts within the
physical boundary of the Town and adopted as part of this chapter.
ZONING USE DISTRICTS — The basic unit in zoning, either mapped or
unmapped, to which a uniform set of regulations applies, or a uniform set of
regulations for a specified use.
§ 260-6 CHARTER § 260-6
C:607

ARTICLE III
Zoning Districts
§ 260-7. Districts established.
For the purpose of this chapter, the Town of East Greenwich is divided into
the following fixed zoning districts, as shown on the Zoning Maps filed in
the office of the Town Clerk and entitled "East Greenwich Zoning Map" and
dated July 25, 2000, and further described below:
A. Residential District (R-4) 4,000 square feet. This district is designed to
provide very high-density residential multifamily and affordable
housing development. A minimum of 10% and a maximum of 20% of the
units in an R-4 development shall be for low- and moderate-income
persons as defined by the state or federal government providing the
subsidy for the housing and shall meet the requirements of the Rhode
Island Low and Moderate Income Housing Act, R.I.G.L. § 45-53-1 et
seq., as amended.
B. Residential District (R-6) 6,000 square feet. This district is designed to
provide for high-density residential development within the Town.
C. Residential District (R-10) 10,000 square feet. This district is designed
to provide for medium/high-density residential development within the
Town.
D. Residential District (R-20) 20,000 square feet. This district is designed
to provide for medium-density residential development within the
Town.
E. Residential District (R-30) 30,000 square feet. This district is designed
to provide for medium/low-density residential development within the
Town.
F. Farming District (F/F-1) one acre. This district is designed to preserve
existing farmland and provide low-density residential development
within the Town.
G. Farming District (F-2) two acres. This district is designed to preserve
farmland and open space and provide for very-low-density residential
development within the Town.
H. Commercial Downtown One District (CD/CD-1). This zone is designed to
provide multiple uses on Main Street properties between Division
Street and First Avenue/Rocky Hollow Road to promote active use of
East Greenwich's downtown area by residents, shoppers and serviceuse
clients and to provide vehicle and pedestrian safety. This district
emphasizes first-floor (street-level) uses which promote and encourage
pedestrian activity and stops at more than one business.
I. Commercial Downtown Two District (CD-2). This zone is designed to
provide multiple uses on Main Street properties between First Avenue/
§ 260-7 CHARTER § 260-7
C:609
§ 260-8. General regulations. [Amended 2-25-2002 by Ord. No. 717;
11-4-2002 by Ord. No. 729]
The following regulations shall be applicable to all zones unless otherwise
indicated:
Rocky Hollow Road and Cedar Avenue/Forge Road to provide a
transition between the high-density Commercial Downtown (CD-1)
District and the CH Districts.
J. Commercial Highway District (CH). The purpose of this district is to
provide for those uses which generate a high amount of vehicular traffic
in a manner that is safe and efficient.
K. Waterfront District (W). The purpose of this district is to provide for
water-dependent and water-related uses along Greenwich Cove, and to
limit other uses. The Town of East Greenwich has little waterfront land
and only by recognizing this can the Town best utilize this limited
resource.
L. Light Industry and Office District (M/LIO). The purpose of this district is
to provide low-density, low-impact industrial and office park
development primarily along the Route 2/South County Trail corridor
and retain that district's farming and scenic qualities.
M. Planned Development (PD). This is a designation which allows for
residential land uses through environmentally sensitive design. It would
provide for residential development on a single parcel, for example, a
townhouse design.
N. Mixed Use Planned Development (MUPD). This is a designation which
allows for multiple uses on one parcel. It is offered as a development
option as an encouragement to construct and develop low-density
commercial uses to offset the tax burden of higher density residential
units. Low- and moderate-income residential units are particularly
encouraged in an MUPD.
O. Rocky Hill Fairgrounds (RHF). The purpose of this district is to provide
for the development of a private education center and open space,
including a golf course; development located within 4,000 feet of an
interstate highway having frontage on two or more public roads and
having ingress and egress to a state highway serviced by public sewer,
gas, water and electricity. [Added 10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 750;
amended 5-9-2011 by Ord. No. 814]
A. Where residential structures are permitted, only one residential
structure shall be located on a lot.
B. For all new residential construction, the maximum bottom of the
foundation elevation of the principal structure shall be two feet above
the proven wet-season high-water table. A site plan submitted as part of
the building permit application shall note this relationship.
§ 260-7 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-8
C:610
C. Ordinary projections of window sills, cornices and other structural
features may not extend more than 12 inches into the space above a
required setback.
D. On a street in a residential zone in which 25% or more of the frontage is
improved with buildings, the front setback for a building hereafter
erected may extend to the average alignment of such existing buildings
on the same side of the street instead of as provided for in Table 2 of
this chapter, except that no buildings shall have a front setback of less
than 10 feet.109
E. The Zoning Board of Review may, by special use permit, grant relief
from the dimensional and intensity regulations of this chapter for any
use it authorizes by special use permit.
F. Accessory structures, swimming pools and/or tennis courts shall only be
permitted in rear yards in the building envelope and shall not fall within
any required side or front setbacks. Such structures may be no closer
than 10 feet from the rear lot line in the R-30, F-1 and F-2 Zones, and no
closer than five feet in the R-20, R-10, R-6 and W Zones. On corner lots
where no rear yard or rear lot line is present, accessory structures may
be permitted to be sited within the side setback, subject to the
limitations as noted above.
G. No wall, fence, structure, vehicle, tree, shrub or other growth on the
property shall so obstruct the view as to cause a hazard to traffic in the
street nor shall it cause pedestrians to walk in the street where a
sidewalk or road shoulder would otherwise be available. At street
intersections, no structure shall be erected and no vegetation shall be
planted or maintained in the space between the heights of 2 1/2 feet
and 10 feet above the triangle formed by the street lines and a third line
joining points on the street lines 15 feet from the intersection.
H. Development of the lot shall provide no increase in stormwater runoff
quantity or reduce the quality of the runoff from the lot. Where
additional runoff cannot be retained on site, the applicant shall
demonstrate to the Department of Public Works that the existing public
drainage systems are capable of transporting the increased runoff.
I. Where permitted, commercial uses shall be buffered from adjacent
residential uses through landscaping and/or screening, as further
defined in Article VI. When a lot in an LI/O or CH Zone is situated on the
opposite side of the street from or is bounded by property zoned for
residential use, a buffer strip not less than 100 feet in width shall be
provided on each side of such lot which is situated on the opposite side
of the street from or which bounds property zoned for residential use.
Each such buffer strip shall be maintained in its natural state or shall be
planted with evergreen trees or shall be made to contain other opaque
screening.
109. Editor's Note: Table 2 is attached to this chapter.
§ 260-8 CHARTER § 260-8
C:611
J. Where permitted, outside storage and dumpsters shall be enclosed and
buffered from adjacent properties (including rights-of-way) as may be
further defined in Article VI. The owner or operator of any commercial
establishment which receives a license or permit from the Town Council
and where swill, garbage or refuse accumulates shall provide at such
establishment a covered container, which does not leak, for the deposit
of all swill, garbage and refuse. The container shall have a cover, which
shall be fully closed at all times except when refuse is deposited or
removed. No excess refuse may protrude from said container. If deemed
necessary and feasible by the Building Official, all containers shall be
placed on either a concrete or asphalt pad with an adequate water
supply and drainage available for washing the container and the pad.
Unless the Building Official determines that it is not feasible, any
container which is visible from the street and which holds perishable
food waste shall be located within an opaque fenced area, which fence
must be at least one foot higher than the highest point of the container
on three sides. The fourth side shall have a properly hinged access door,
which shall be kept closed at all times except for the depositing or
removal of refuse. All containers holding perishable food waste shall be
located more than 30 feet from the nearest residence unless the
Building Official determines it is not feasible to do so.110
K. Curb cuts shall require approval by the Director of Public Works. Only
one curb cut for vehicle access to a parcel shall be provided from each
street frontage. Gas stations shall be permitted two curb cuts along a
single frontage and one curb cut along a second frontage, for a
maximum of three curb cuts.
L. Where the rear of a property falls along Greenwich Cove, the rear
setback shall be used for a combination of landscaping and boardwalk
along waterfront properties. The rear setback shall not be covered with
an impervious surface but shall allow for natural infiltration in order to
protect the water quality of the Cove.
M. Fences and walls not exceeding 10 feet in height in the LI/O Zone and
seven feet in all remaining zones may be constructed. Fencing for
tennis courts may exceed the seven-foot maximum but must be no
greater than 12 feet around the playing surface of the court.
N. It shall be the policy of the Town of East Greenwich that high-voltage
transmission lines should be sited so as to reduce the risk of
electromagnetic field exposure to the lowest possible level obtainable
by existing technology. Since the siting of such lines is within the
jurisdiction of the Energy Facility Siting Board (EFSB), the Town shall
actively participate in the EFSB review process, and Town agencies
rendering advisory opinions to the EFSB shall urge that said
transmission lines be regulated in accordance with the Town's policy.
O. Private streets shall be prohibited in all residential developments.
110. Editor's Note: See Ch. 212, Solid Waste Management.
§ 260-8 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-8
C:612
§ 260-9. Uses and zones.
P. Subject to compliance with the requirements of all applicable federal
and state wetlands regulations, wetlands created by action of the Town
of East Greenwich other than stormwater detention and retention
measures shall be excluded from the calculation of wetlands with
respect to the requirements of the PD and MUPD Zones, cluster
development and minimum building envelope.111
A. The following uses shall be allowed as outright permitted uses and shall
be allowed in all zones unless otherwise indicated:
(1) Off-street parking.
(2) Signs (as provided for in Article VII).
(3) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the following
uses are permitted uses within all residential zoning use districts of
a municipality and all industrial and commercial zoning use
districts except where residential use is prohibited for public
health or safety reasons:
(a) Households.
(b) Community residences.
(c) Family day-care homes.
(4) Any time a building or other structure used for residential purposes
or a portion of a building containing residential unit is rendered
uninhabitable by virtue of a casualty such as fire or flood, the owner
of the property is allowed to park, temporarily, mobile and
manufactured home or homes, as the need may be, elsewhere upon
the land for use and occupancy of the former occupants for a period
of up to 12 months, or until the building or structure is
rehabilitated and otherwise made fit for occupancy. The property
owner, or a properly designated agent of the owner, is only allowed
to cause the mobile and manufactured home or homes to remain
temporarily upon the land by making timely application to the local
Building Official for the purposes of obtaining the necessary
permits to repair or rebuild the structure.
(5) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, appropriate
access for people with disabilities to residential structures is
allowed as a reasonable accommodation for any person(s) residing,
or intending to reside, in the residential structure.
(6) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, an accessory
family dwelling unit in an owner-occupied, single-family residence
shall be permitted as a reasonable accommodation only for family
111. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 260-8 CHARTER § 260-9
C:613
members with disabilities. The appearance of the structure shall
remain that of a single-family residence, and there shall be an
internal means of egress between the principal unit and the
accessory family dwelling unit. If possible, no additional exterior
entrances should be added. Where additional entrance is required,
placement should generally be in the rear or side of the structure.
When the structure is serviced by an individual sewage disposal
system, the applicant shall have the existing or any new system
approved by the Department of Environmental Management. The
Zoning Enforcement Officer shall require that a declaration of the
accessory family dwelling unit for the family member or members
and its restrictions be recorded in the land evidence records and
filed with the Zoning Enforcement Officer and the Building Official.
Once the family member or members with disabilities no longer
resides in the premises on a permanent basis or the title is
transferred, the property owner shall notify the Zoning Official in
writing, and the accessory family dwelling unit shall no longer be
permitted, unless there is a subsequent valid application.112
(7) When used in this section, the terms "people with disabilities" or
"member or members with disabilities" means a person(s) who has
a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or
more major life activities, as defined in R.I.G.L. § 34-37-3. [Added
3-14-2016 by Ord. No. 849]
(8) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, plant
agriculture is a permitted use within all zoning districts, including
all industrial and commercial zoning districts, except where
prohibited for public health or safety reasons or the protection of
wildlife habitat. [Added 3-14-2016 by Ord. No. 849]
B. The following uses shall be permitted as accessory uses in all zones and
within the provisions of this chapter unless otherwise indicated:
(1) The keeping of household pets, as defined in § 260-6, for enjoyment
associated with residential uses or animals kept for educational
purposes (as with a museum, learning center, environmental
facility, etc.). [Amended 3-14-2016 by Ord. No. 849]
(2) Licensed family day-care in the home.
(3) A temporary sales or promotion office in connection with adjacent
construction. Such office may be located in a trailer. For these
purposes, "temporary" is considered to be one year. Renewal of this
allowance shall be made by application to the Building Official and
shall be granted in accordance with the original terms upon
demonstrated need by the applicant.
(4) The storage of building materials and equipment incidental to onsite
construction.
112. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV).
§ 260-9 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-9
C:614
§ 260-10. Districts by Assessor's plats. [Amended 5-23-2005 by Ord.
No. 754; 2-27-2006 by Ord. No. 761; 5-1-2006 by Ord. No. 763;
(5) The storage and/or parking of inspected, registered vehicles,
owned or used by a person residing on the premises, which are
physically capable of being operated on a public roadway.
(6) The storage and/or parking of a maximum of one inspected,
commercially registered vehicle with a maximum capacity of two
tons or gross vehicle weight of 10,000 pounds or less and which has
no more than two axles, owned or used by a person residing on the
premises, and which is physically capable of being operated on a
public roadway. Storage of unregistered vehicles is not permitted.
(7) The parking and storage of major recreation equipment, which
includes travel trailers, pickup campers or coaches, motorized
dwellings, tent trailers, boats, boat trailers and similar equipment,
but does not include mobile homes or storage trailers, in residential
districts must comply with the following regulations:
(a) Not more than one travel trailer, pickup camper or coach,
motorized dwelling, tent trailer or boat trailer may be parked
or stored.
(b) Not more than one boat or other watercraft may be stored.
(c) No major recreation equipment, while parked or stored, shall
be used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes.
(d) Storage of major recreation equipment must meet all setback
requirements for the district therein located.
(e) No major recreation equipment shall be stored out of doors in
residential districts unless it is in condition for safe and
effective performance of the function for which it was
intended.
C. The following uses shall be allowed by special use permit in all districts,
provided that such use is first approved of by the East Greenwich
Zoning Board of Review, as defined in Article XV. Uses which may be
permitted under the "special use" heading include:
(1) Houses of worship.
(2) Accessory family dwelling units (in-law apartment).
D. Table 1: Table of Permitted Uses by Zone.113
E. Table 2: Table of Dimensional Requirements by Zone.114
113. Editor's Note: Table 1, Table of Permitted Uses by Zone, is attached to this chapter.
114. Editor's Note: Table 2, Table of Dimensional Requirements by Zone, is attached to this
chapter.
§ 260-9 CHARTER § 260-10
C:615
5-22-2006 by Ord. No. 766; 6-12-2006 by Ord. No. 768; 7-10-2006 by
Ord. No. 770; 12-15-2008 by Ord. No. 796; 6-14-2010 by Ord. No.
805; 5-11-2015 by Ord. No. 842; 1-25-2016 by Ord. No. 848;
5-9-2016 by Ord. No. 854; 10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 859]
See the Table of Districts by Assessor's Plats and Digital Map Numbers.115
115. Editor's Note: Said table is on file in the Town offices.
§ 260-10 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-10
C:616
ARTICLE IV
Substandard Lots of Record
§ 260-11. Creation of substandard lots.
No lot of record shall be reduced in area or subdivided so that yards, other
open spaces, total area, and/or frontage shall be less than prescribed for the
zone in which the lot is located.
§ 260-12. Existing substandard lots of record.
A. Minimum lot size.
(1) A single substandard lot of record located in any zone may be used
for permitted and accessory uses as allowed in the respective
zoning district, provided that the parcel has a minimum of 35 feet
of frontage on a public road and a minimum lot area equal to at
least 3,500 square feet where municipal sewer is available.
(2) If a substandard lot does not have municipal sewers, the minimum
lot area shall be at least 20,000 square feet and an approved
individual sewage disposal system (ISDS) shall be required.
B. Merger provision. If two or more contiguous substandard lots are under
common ownership on or after the effective date of this chapter, such
lots shall be considered to be an undivided parcel of land for the
purpose of this chapter, and no single lot or portion thereof shall be
used in violation of the requirements of this chapter as to lot lines and
area.
C. Reduction of yards. Where substandard lots of record exist per the
provisions of this article, the dimensional requirements for the rear and
side yard setback requirements may be reduced in the proportion that
the area of the substandard lot is reduced from the minimum area
requirements.
§ 260-11 CHARTER § 260-12
C:617

ARTICLE V
Nonconforming Development
§ 260-13. Purpose.
§ 260-14. Nonconforming by dimension.
§ 260-15. Nonconforming by use.
A. Nonconforming uses are incompatible with and detrimental to
permitted uses in the zoning districts in which they are located, cause
disruption of the comprehensive land use pattern of the Town, inhibit
present and future development of nearby properties and confer upon
their owners and uses a position of unfair advantage.
B. It is a fundamental principle of this article that nonconformities may be
continued until abandoned but shall not be increased and shall be
reduced to conformity according to the fair interests of the parties
involved.
A. Any structure, building, sign or other improvement lawfully existing at
the time of adoption or amendment of this chapter but which is
nonconforming by dimension shall be permitted to continue in the same
manner. If said legally nonconforming structure, building, sign or other
improvement is intentionally destroyed, relocated or altered, it shall
lose its nonconforming status. However, if such destruction, relocation
or alteration is the result of fire or a natural catastrophe, the legal
nonconforming improvement may be rebuilt in its previous
configuration.
B. Any extension, addition or enlargement of a nonconforming structure
shall comply with the dimensional regulations and parking
requirements of this chapter. Additionally, the whole structure must
comply with the zone's maximum lot coverage requirement.
A. Any use or activity lawfully existing at the time of adoption or
amendment of this chapter but which is nonconforming by use shall be
permitted to continue in the same manner until said use or activity is
abandoned, relocated or changed. Abandoned uses shall not be
reestablished.
B. Abandonment of a nonconforming use shall consist of either an owner's
(or legal tenant's, if applicable) overt act or failure to act which
demonstrates that there is neither a claim nor any interest in
continuing the nonconforming use. If any nonconforming use is
discontinued for a period of one year, the nonconforming use will be
presumed to have been abandoned unless determined otherwise by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer.
§ 260-13 CHARTER § 260-15
C:619
§ 260-16. Change of use.
§ 260-17. Nuisances.
The interpretation of this article shall not prohibit the regulation of
nuisances.
C. A nonconforming use in any zone shall not be enlarged, expanded,
intensified or changed from one nonconforming use to another
nonconforming use.
A. A nonconforming residential use may change only to a use that
conforms to the provisions of this chapter.
B. A nonconforming agricultural, commercial or industrial use may be
changed only to a use that conforms to the provisions of this chapter or
to an equal or less intense use in the same category.
C. Notwithstanding any other provision herein to the contrary, property
nonconforming by use and dimension may be expanded by special use
permit without the necessity of a dimensional variance.
§ 260-15 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-17
C:620
ARTICLE VI
Off-Street Parking Regulations
§ 260-18. Purpose and intent.
§ 260-19. Applicability.
A. The purpose of this article is to ensure that all structures and land uses
are provided with off-street parking spaces that adequately meet the
parking demands that are generated.
B. Therefore, this article has been set forth with the intent of providing
free movement of public and private traffic at all times, reducing
congestion in the streets, permitting the efficient and safe passage of
emergency vehicles, facilitating the maneuvering of public emergency
equipment in the streets and on site, facilitating the removal and/or
storage of snow, and for all related purposes.
A. Existing structures and uses. Off-street parking spaces associated with
any existing building or use shall be maintained so long as the existing
building or use remains.
B. Alterations, additions, changes of use. All new vehicular use areas,
those altered or improved subsequent to the adoption of these
regulations, and structures that are enlarged or whose use is changed
such that an increase in required off-street parking results (per
§ 260-20, Table of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces) shall be subject
to the provisions of this article and shall be required to submit a
parking plan as described under § 260-21 of this article.
C. Nonconforming parking.
(1) Where parking spaces are provided and maintained in connection
with a building or use legally existing at the time this article
became effective and are insufficient to meet the requirements for
the use as now set forth by this article, such lots will be considered
legally nonconforming.
(2) Where extensions, additions or enlargements to the building or use
are contemplated, no such extension may be made unless the
applicant can demonstrate compliance with the provisions of this
article through the submission of a parking plan as detailed under
§ 260-21 of this article.
D. Exemptions. Any property which provides at least 50% of the required
parking for the building or use and is destroyed by fire or natural
causes may be restored to its original use, provided that the floor area
is not increased without conforming to the parking requirements of this
article.
§ 260-18 CHARTER § 260-20
C:621
§ 260-20. Required off-street parking spaces. [Amended 5-28-2019
by Ord. No. 881]
For every building or structure (or part thereof) constructed or converted
or altered as defined in § 260-19 of this article, off-street parking shall be
provided on the premises as tabulated in this section. All fractions of spaces
shall be calculated as an entire parking space required. For the purpose of
calculating the required number of spaces, net floor area shall be used.
Table of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces
Type of Use Required Parking Spaces
RESIDENTIAL:
Dwelling units (single-family
homes, duplexes, multifamily
homes, etc.)
1.5 per dwelling unit
Housing for the elderly 1 per dwelling unit
Community residence/rooming
house
0.5 per unit
Upper-story housing over firstfloor
commercial uses in the CD
Zone
1.25 per dwelling unit
Assisted-living complex One for every four units designated
independent or congregate living plus
one per employee on the largest shift
Other residential uses not listed 1.5 per unit
PROFESSIONAL SERVICE AND BUSINESS:
Bank, financial institutions 1 per 200 square feet of floor area
Barbershops, beauty parlors 2.5 per operator station
Dry cleaner, full-service laundries 1 per 200 square feet
Meeting hall, conference center 1 per 4 persons of rated capacity
Funeral homes, mortuaries 1 per 4 seats of rated capacity
Gas stations/automobile service
stations (Such facilities must also
comply with additional standards
for convenience stores, etc., if
such ancillary uses, i.e., a mini
mart, etc., are present.)
3 spaces per gas island + 2 spaces per
service bay + 1 per employee on
largest shift, with a minimum of 2
employee spaces provided (Island
areas and bays may not be counted
toward satisfying this requirement.)
Hospital 1 for every 2 beds of capacity + 1 for
each employee on the largest shift
Long-term health-care facility,
including nursing homes and
hospices
1 for every 3 beds of capacity + 10%
for employees
Offices, public and professional,
services/administration
1 per 200 square feet of floor area
§ 260-20 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-20
C:622
Table of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces
Type of Use Required Parking Spaces
Medical offices, including dentist,
doctor, chiropractor and
veterinary offices and outpatient
clinics
1 per 200 square feet of floor area
Self-serve laundries 1 per every 3 washers or dryers
Other professional services or
business-oriented uses not listed
1 per 200 square feet
INSTITUTIONS, PUBLIC ASSEMBLY:
Museums 1 per 500 square feet
Day-care centers and private
education centers
1 per 500 square feet + 1 per
employee on the largest shift (Daycare
centers shall have dedicated
dropoff areas.)
Houses of worship 1 per 4 seats of rated capacity
Libraries 1 per 500 square feet
COMMERCIAL USES:
Auto sales (If service is also
provided, additional standards as
dictated under "gas/service
stations" shall apply.)
1 per 500 square feet of showroom
Retail use in zone other than CD-1
Zone
1 per 90 square feet of floor area
Commercial use CD-1 Zone 1 per 270 square feet of floor area
Nurseries/plant material sales 1 per 500 square feet total sales area
Lumberyards 1 per 500 square feet display area + 1
per company vehicle
Hotels 1 per unit + the parking requirement
for accessory uses like conference
center, restaurant, etc.
Restaurants 1 space for every 2 persons of rated
capacity
Furniture stores 1 per 1,000 square feet
Shopping center use in the CH
Zone
1 space for every 90 square feet of
floor area for the first 15,000 square
feet; 1 space per 150 square feet of
floor area between 15,001 and
100,000 square feet; 1 space per 185
square feet of floor area greater than
100,000 square feet
Wholesale commercial 1 per 500 square feet
§ 260-20 CHARTER § 260-20
C:623
Table of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces
Type of Use Required Parking Spaces
Other commercial uses not listed
outside the CD-1 Zone
1 per 200 square feet
INDUSTRIAL USES:
Light industries and research and
development facilities
1 per 500 square feet for the first
20,000 square feet of floor area; 1 per
650 square feet for the portion of
building exceeding 20,000 square feet
Warehousing and distribution
facilities
1 per company truck or van + 1 per
500 square feet for first 20,000 square
feet, then 1 per 650 square feet for
portion of building exceeding 20,000
square feet
Self-storage facilities 1 per 5 units of storage
Breweries, craft distilleries, large
distilleries and micro-distilleries
1 space per 500 square feet of net
floor area in manufacturing use for the
first 20,000 square feet of floor area; 1
space per 650 square feet of net floor
area in manufacturing use for the
portion of building exceeding 20,000
square feet; plus 1 space per 90
square feet of net floor area in tasting
room or direct-to-consumer retail sales
area.
RECREATION AND LEISURE USES:
Billiard rooms (Ancillary uses, i.e.,
taverns, restaurants, etc., will
require additional parking per the
standards for each respective
use.)
1.25 per table
Bowling alleys (Ancillary uses, i.e.,
taverns, restaurants, etc., will
require additional parking per the
standards for each respective
use.)
2 per alley
Fairgrounds 1 per 1,500 square feet of land area
devoted to the fair, open-air market,
arcade, concessions, etc.
Golf courses 3 per green + 1 per employee on the
largest shift
Golf facility 1.25 per tee + 1 per employee on the
largest shift
§ 260-20 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-20
C:624
Table of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces
Type of Use Required Parking Spaces
Health and fitness centers where
not integrated into shopping
center development
1 per 90 square feet of exercise area +
3 per court + 1 per 200 square feet of
the remaining area
Riding and boarding stables 1 per 3 stalls
Gymnasium 1 per 4 seats of capacity
Skating and roller rinks 1 per 150 square feet of gross floor
area
Social and fraternal organizations 1 per 4 persons of rated capacity
Swimming pools and water parks 1 per 100 square feet of water surface
area
Theaters/cinema 1 per 4 seats of rated capacity
WATER-RELATED USES:
Boat launches 10 per ramp for cars plus 5 per ramp
for trailer storage
Boat repair/boat storage 1 per 5 slips and/or boats
Docking facilities 1 per 3 berths, moorings or slips
Marinas 1 per 1.5 berths, moorings or slips,
plus 1 per 1.2 employees
Mooring repair facilities 2 + 1 per employee on the largest shift
Other recreation and leisure uses
not listed
1 per 250 square feet + 1 per
employee on largest shift or 1 per 3
rated capacity, whichever is greater
NOTE: All dimensions given in square feet are to be calculated based on
total net floor area unless otherwise specified. This changes the basis of
the calculation from gross floor area to net floor area.
§ 260-21. Parking plan; location, number and ownership of parking
spaces.
A. Submission of parking plan.
(1) Designs and specifications for the required parking lot shall
include, but not be limited to, information about the proposed
parking spaces, access drives, circulation patterns, bicycle storage,
dedicated areas for pedestrians, areas for snow storage, loading
areas, landscaping and maintenance plans. All such plans and
specifications shall be submitted at the time of application for a
building permit for work described in § 260-19 of this article.
(2) Such plans shall be reviewed by the Building Official/Zoning
Enforcement Officer and the Director of Planning or his/her
§ 260-20 CHARTER § 260-21
C:625
§ 260-22. Parking lots in or near residential areas.
Parking lots located in an R or F Zone, on a lot adjacent to an R or F Zone, or
across the street from an R or F Zone, shall conform with the following: The
area shall be paved and striped and provided with bumper guards where
needed and a solid wall or opaque fence, not less that five feet nor more
than seven feet in height, or a compact evergreen screen, not less than five
feet in height, shall be erected and maintained between the parking area
and the adjoining property or between such area and the street.
§ 260-23. Design standards.
designee to determine compliance with the provisions of this
article.
B. Location and ownership of parking spaces. Required off-street parking
spaces shall be provided on the same lot or premises as the generating
use which they are intended to serve or on a contiguous lot under the
same ownership unless otherwise permitted by this article. Where
parking spaces are not provided on premises or on a commonly owned
contiguous parcel, parking may be provided on another lot located not
more than 500 feet radially from the subject lot within the same or a
less restrictive zoning district. The exclusive use of such parking must
be dedicated to the use via lease or other agreement.
C. Reduction of existing spaces. If a property owner wishes to reduce the
number of existing parking on his/her lot such that the resulting
number of parking spaces falls below the number required by this
article, such reduction may be done only with approvals as prescribed
elsewhere in this chapter.
D. Parking spaces not counted toward meeting the requirement. No part of
a minimum front yard setback or any land physically inaccessible for
the actual parking of a car (because of structures or for any other
reason) shall be used to satisfy the above off-street parking
requirements.
A. Dimensional requirements.
(1) All commercial parking lots must be paved and striped. All parking
spaces (except handicap spaces) shall have a minimum width of
nine feet and a minimum length of 18 feet so as to accommodate a
vehicle. In an RHF Zone, up to 25% of all parking spaces may have
a minimum width of eight feet and a minimum length of 18 feet.
Such spaces shall be clearly identified as for "compact, lowemission
or fuel-efficient vehicles." Spaces for handicap use shall
have a minimum width of 14 feet, which includes a designated
transfer zone of at least five feet. Where parallel parking is
provided, stall length shall not be less than 20 feet. The following
minimum dimensions affecting the width of aisles shall apply in all
districts, exclusive of necessary drive and access ways. These
§ 260-21 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-23
C:626
§ 260-24. Off-street storage and loading.
dimensions apply to one-way aisles only. For two-way aisles, the
minimum width shall be 20 feet or the required width listed,
whichever is greater: [Amended 5-9-2011 by Ord. No. 814]
Parking Angle
Aisle Width
(feet)
90° 25
80° 25
70° 20
60° 16
45° 13
30° 12
Parallel (0°) 12
(2) Access driveways serving required parking lots as a direct access
drive from a street shall not be less than 12 feet wide for one-way
traffic and not more than 25 feet wide for two-way traffic.
B. Exits. The parking lot shall be designed so that no vehicle exiting the lot
shall be required to back out in reverse from the parking area into any
sidewalk or street.
C. Drainage, surfacing and curbs. All parking areas shall be improved and
maintained to the standards of the Department of Public Works with
regard to grading and drainage, surfacing, installation of bollards to
protect utility or mechanical devices, and curbs, barriers and wheel
stops.
D. Lighting. All artificial lighting shall be arranged to reflect the light away
from an adjoining property and adjacent streets so as to prevent glare
onto other property. Lighting should be of an intensity to satisfy the
minimum requirements of the American Society of Illuminating
Engineers standards for parking lot security.
A. Loading areas. Loading areas shall be required to serve commercial,
business and/or industrial uses throughout the Town in accordance with
the following standards:
(1) For commercial and industrial uses of 1,000 square feet or greater
of gross floor or ground area in which commodities are sold,
displayed, serviced, repaired, altered or fabricated as the principal
use of the enterprise, off-street loading spaces shall be provided.
For the first 1,000 square feet of floor/area as described, one offstreet
loading space shall be required. Thereafter, one off-street
loading space shall be required for every 5,000 square feet of gross
§ 260-23 CHARTER § 260-24
C:627
§ 260-25. Parking lot landscaping.
floor area. Each space shall have a minimum length of 60 feet by a
width of 14 feet with a clearance of 15 feet.
(2) No loading space that is provided in an approved parking plan shall
be eliminated, reduced, enlarged or converted unless equivalent
facilities are provided elsewhere. [Amended 5-22-2006 by Ord.
No. 767]
(3) All loading areas shall be surfaced and maintained in accordance
with the standards of the Department of Public Works.
(4) No part of a public right-of-way shall be used for loading except as
permitted by the Town Council.
(5) The Building Official shall have the right to require additional offstreet
loading spaces when deemed necessary to provide adequate
area for off-street loading.
B. Submission of loading facility plan. All commercial and industrial
storage and loading structures constructed prior to the adoption of this
chapter shall be considered lawfully conforming. For all new
construction or changes of use, plans and specifications shall be
submitted in conjunction with the overall parking plan as addressed in
§ 260-21A of this article.
C. Screening storage and loading area. Where an open storage or outdoor
loading area is located on a lot adjacent to an R or F Zone or across the
street from an R or F Zone, a solid wall or opaque fence, not less than
five feet in height, shall be erected and maintained between such area
and the adjoining property or between such area and the street.
A. Applicability and general requirements.
(1) Parking lot landscaping required by this section is intended to
promote the public health, safety and general welfare by providing
minimum requirements for the installation and maintenance of
landscaped areas in connection with parking lots and other
vehicular use areas; to protect the character and stability of
residential, business, institutional and industrial areas; to provide
visual relief from expanses of unbroken blacktop and vehicles; and
to conserve the value of land and buildings on surrounding
properties and neighborhoods.
(2) Those parking lots as determined applicable under § 260-19B of
this article shall comply with the following provisions set forth
below in Subsection B. Single-family residential lots are exempted.
For the relevant parking lots, a landscaping plan must be submitted
which shows the following: a plant list specifying materials and
numbers and sizes of plants; location and spacing of plants and
ground covers. Additionally, the plan must show property and
§ 260-24 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-25
C:628
setback lines, existing and proposed structures, vehicle and
pedestrian use areas and the location of proposed land alterations.
The plan must also show the name of the person or agency who
prepared the plan, and it must be approved by the Planning
Director or his/her designee. Landscape installations must be
completed within one year of plan approval.
B. Amount of landscaping.
(1) For parking lots of greater than 10 parking spaces but less than 50,
a minimum of 10% of the area designated for parking shall be
landscaped per this section.
(2) For parking lots of 50 or more parking spaces but not exceeding
100 parking spaces, a minimum of 15% of the area designated for
parking shall be landscaped per this section.
(3) For parking lots of greater than 100 parking spaces but less than or
equal to 500 parking spaces, a minimum of 20% of the area
designated for parking shall be landscaped per this section.
(4) For parking lots of greater than 500 parking spaces, a minimum of
25% of the area designated for parking shall be landscaped per this
section.
(5) For parking lots of any size located within an RHF Zone, a minimum
of 20% of the area designated for parking shall be landscaped per
this section. [Added 10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 750]
C. Islands.
(1) Rows of parking spaces shall be provided a terminal island to
protect parked vehicles, confine moving traffic to aisles and
driveways, and provide space for landscaping.
(2) There shall be at least one tree planted for each 15 parking stalls.
Such islands containing trees shall be at least six feet in width in
parking facilities of 100 or fewer parking spaces. In facilities of
greater than 100 parking spaces, tree-planted islands shall be at
least 12 feet in width and shall also be planted with a minimum of
10 shrubs that will grown between two and four feet in height.
D. Required setbacks/buffers.
(1) No unenclosed parking area shall be allowed within five feet of a
front lot line for lots of less than or equal to 50 parking spaces,
within 10 feet of a front lot line for lots greater than 50 but less
than 100 parking spaces, and within 25 feet of a front lot line for
parking lots with 100 parking spaces or greater; except, however,
in the Rocky Hill Fairgrounds (RHF) Zone, no unenclosed parking
area shall be allowed within 20 feet of a front lot line that abuts a
state or Town roadway. [Amended 10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 750;
5-9-2011 by Ord. No. 814]
§ 260-25 CHARTER § 260-25
C:629
(2) Parking lot side and rear setbacks shall meet the minimum setback
requirements of Table 2.116 Setback areas shall serve as buffers
between the parking lot and abutting properties and shall consist
entirely of planting materials. Opaque fencing may be required to
screen abutting properties from the effects of light and noise.
E. Tree standards.
(1) Trees shall be provided within or around all parking facilities at the
rate of one tree for each 2,000 square feet of gross paved lot area.
Such trees may already exist on the site or may be cultivated and
counted toward this requirement.
(2) At least half of the trees required shall be of a species
characterized by moderate growth and expected to reach a mature
height of greater than 30 feet.
(3) When planted, trees shall be a minimum of six feet in height in
parking lots containing fewer than 50 parking spaces. In parking
lots containing 50 or greater parking spaces, cultivated trees shall
be a minimum of 10 feet in height when planted and shall have a
trunk diameter of at least two inches at a height of four feet above
grade.
(4) No one species may account for greater than half of all the trees
planted within a parking lot.
(5) The planting standards in Appendix A of Chapter A263, Land
Development and Subdivision Review Regulations, including the
recommended varieties, shall apply to all projects regulated by this
section.
F. Maintenance. All parking plans as required by this article must include
a maintenance plan or provisions that ensure compliance with the
following:
(1) All plant growth in landscaped areas shall be controlled by pruning,
trimming or other suitable methods so that plant materials do not
interfere with public utilities, restrict pedestrian or vehicular
access or otherwise constitute a traffic or safety hazard.
(2) All plantings shall be maintained in a manner so as to promote
optimum growth of plant materials.
(3) All trees, shrubs, ground covers and other plant materials must be
replaced if they die or become unhealthy because of accidents,
drainage problems, disease or other causes. All such replacements
shall conform to all standards that governed the original
installation of plantings. Where no such standards exist, new
116. Editor's Note: Table 2 is attached to this chapter.
§ 260-25 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-25
C:630
plantings shall match the replaced materials in type, species and
quantity.
(4) All plantings, surfacing, lighting, barriers, markings and other
materials shall be repaired or replaced with new materials to
ensure continued compliance with the provisions of this article.
Failure to maintain these features shall be considered a violation of
this chapter and shall be handled in conformance with Article XIII,
Procedures for General Administration.
(5) All planting and maintenance plans as required by this article shall
be recorded as a deed restriction on the subject property to ensure
the long-term care of plantings.
§ 260-25 CHARTER § 260-25
C:631

ARTICLE VII
Signs
[Amended 9-24-2001 by Ord. No. 714; 2-27-2006 by Ord. No. 762;
5-22-2006 by Ord. No. 767; 4-9-2007 by Ord. No. 783; 11-8-2010 by
Ord. No. 809; 4-14-2014 by Ord. No. 834]
§ 260-26. Authority; purpose; intent.
§ 260-27. Definitions; computations.
A. Authority for this article is granted under the Rhode Island Zoning
Enabling Act, Title 45, Chapter 24. Additional authority for this article
is granted by Rhode Island General Laws Title 24, Chapter 7, § 24-7-1
(Power of towns to establish and regulate sidewalks).
B. The purpose of this article is to regulate the installation and/or
replacement and/or alteration of signs for the purpose of providing
information and advertising in an orderly, effective, legible, aesthetic
and safe manner. Restrictions on number, type, location, size, material
and illumination of signs protect the public from hazardous and
distracting displays, protect property values, enhance the traditional
qualities and characteristics of the Town, and create an attractive
environment which is conducive to business, industry and tourism. The
minimum criteria for review for signs regulated by the Historic District
Commission shall be as described in the Historic District Commission's
Guidelines for Review.
A. Definitions. Words and phrases used in this chapter shall have their
plain and ordinary meaning unless otherwise specifically defined below
or in Article XIII of this chapter. Section headings or captions are for
reference purposes only and shall not be used in the interpretation of
this chapter.
ALTERATION, SIGN — Any change to the sign display.
ANIMATED SIGN — Any sign that uses movement or the visual
impression of movement, sound or change of lighting to depict action
or create a special effect and/or scene. Such signs include but are not
limited to those that give the impression of flashing, running, blinking,
oscillating, twinkling, scintillating, expanding or contracting.
AWNING — Any temporary or retractable covering or shelter which is
supported entirely by the exterior wall of a building. (See also "canopy
sign.")
AWNING SIGN — See "canopy sign."
BACK-LIT SIGN — See "internally illuminated sign."
BALLOON — Any object and/or sign filled with helium or other gas used
to expand its shape and/or form.
BANNER — Any sign of fabric or similar material that is mounted to a
pole, building or other structural support.
§ 260-26 CHARTER § 260-27
C:633
BILLBOARDS — Any off-premises sign exceeding 15 square feet in
area.
BRACKET — The device used to attach and support a sign face to a
building or freestanding structure.
BUILDING MARKER — Any sign indicating the name of a building and/
or date and/or incidental information about its history or construction,
which sign is incombustible material and is attached parallel to the
surface of the building. Building markers may not exceed four square
feet in area.
BULLETIN BOARD — A board or wall area on which bulletins, notices
or displays are temporarily posted. Such signs may not exceed five
square feet in area for public, charitable or religious institutions when
located upon the premises of said institutions.
CANOPY — A roof-like projection or portico over a door, entrance,
window or outdoor service area, including but not limited to industrystandard
gas station roofs independent of an enclosed structure. Such
projections shall provide at least eight-foot clearance to grade from the
bottom edge of the canopy.
CANOPY SIGN — Any sign that is part of or attached to an awning,
canopy or other fabric, plastic or structural protective cover over a
door, entrance, window or outdoor service area. (A marquee is not a
canopy sign.) Where canopy signs are permitted, they shall be allowed
in lieu of wall signs. The maximum width of the area of sign display
shall be 70% of the linear frontage associated with the business. The
maximum height of the sign display shall be 36 inches. A canopy sign
shall not be lit from underneath or behind. A canopy sign shall provide
at least eight-foot clearance to grade from the bottom edge of the
canopy.
COMMERCIAL MESSAGE — Any sign wording, logo or other
representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises or calls
attention to a business, product, service or other commercial activity.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN — Any sign whose purpose is to display the
name of the contractor and/or subcontractors employed on a work
site and/or the consultants and/or financial institutions participating in
the project. Such signs shall be either freestanding or attached to the
structure and shall not exceed 12 square feet in residential zones or 30
square feet in all other zones. Such signs shall be temporary in nature
and shall be removed upon completion of construction. Such signs shall
not be erected until building permits for the relevant project are pulled.
This definition does not include signs located on the premises of the
general offices of a contractor.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — Any sign whose purpose is to direct vehicles
and/or pedestrians onto, around and off of a premises. Such signs shall
be limited to four square feet in area including any attached corporate
logos or other symbols. Such signs shall be limited to three feet in
height from the top of the sign to grade. These signs may contain the
§ 260-27 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-27
C:634
name or logo of an establishment but no advertising copy. Such logos
shall not comprise greater than 20% of the total sign area.
DIRECTORY SIGN — A sign which provides dedicated space for listings
of two or more professional, service, business and/or commercial
activities and is designed and constructed with provision to allow
changes of occupancy to be reflected on the sign. One such sign shall
be permitted per building, either as a wall directory sign or as a
freestanding directory sign. Freestanding directory signs are permitted
in lieu of individual freestanding signs and shall not exceed 15 feet in
height or 60 square feet in sign area.
EXTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGN — Any sign whose light source
is located outside of the sign. This includes, but is not limited to,
spotlights.
FINANCING SIGN — See "construction sign."
FLAG — Any fabric or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns,
words and/or symbols. One flag shall be permitted for every 150 feet of
frontage associated with the property, with a maximum of three flags
permitted per business or residence. Flags attached to a building shall
be displayed at a height where the lowest portion of flag material is a
minimum of seven feet off the ground if hanging over a public rightof-
way. Flags containing a commercial message or business name shall
not exceed 12 square feet in area. Standing flags shall be allowed in
existing flag holes in the sidewalk within the Commercial Downtown
(CD) Zone without a minimum clearance restriction.
FLASHING SIGN — See "animated sign."
FREESTANDING SIGN — Any sign supported by a structural device
or devices that is placed on or anchored into the ground and that
is independent from any building. One freestanding sign shall be
permitted per lot with a maximum visible sign area of 40 square feet.
(See also Subsection B, Computations, for multifaced signs.) Where
more than one business is located on a lot, up to three freestanding
signs shall be permitted, provided that the total square footage of
visible sign area does not exceed 40 square feet. A minimum sign
clearance of eight feet is required between the grade and the base
of the lowest part of the sign to ensure adequate site clearance for
pedestrians and vehicles. Maximum sign height shall be 15 feet, and
all such signs shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from all lot lines.
The area immediately underneath and around the base of the sign shall
be landscaped per the landscaping requirements found in § 260-28G of
this chapter.
GAS AND SERVICE STATION SIGNS — Signs necessary to the
operation of filling and service stations, limited to the following:
Lettering on buildings displayed over individual entrance doors
consisting of the words "washing," "lubrication," "repairing" and/or
words of similar relevance, provided that there shall not be more
(1)
§ 260-27 CHARTER § 260-27
C:635
GOVERNMENT SIGNS — Signs erected by or on behalf of the United
States of America, the State of Rhode Island and the Town of East
Greenwich, traffic controls, legal notices or other signs required by
law, including all signs erected under the authority of the Town of East
Greenwich. The Town shall have the ability to erect such signs without
sign approval.
INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGN — Any sign, exclusive of gas-filled
signs, whose light source is located behind and/or within the sign itself
or behind and/or within any individual element(s) of a sign.
INCIDENTAL SIGN — A sign, generally informational, that has a
purpose secondary to the use of the lot on which it is located, such
as "no parking," "loading zone," "open," "telephone" and other similar
directives. Such signs shall not exceed six square feet in area and
shall not count toward the maximum visible sign area as addressed in
§ 260-28A below.
LEGAL NONCONFORMING SIGN — (1) A sign which was erected
legally prior to the enactment of this article; (2) a sign which does not
conform to the sign code requirements, for which zoning relief has been
granted through the Zoning Board of Review.
LOT FRONTAGE — Roadway frontage on a local access road. Frontage
along limited access highways such as Routes 4 and 1-95 shall not be
considered as lot frontage.
MONUMENT SIGN — Any sign whose base is in contact with or within
one foot of the ground. Where permitted, only one monument sign
shall be allowed per lot in lieu of a freestanding sign and shall have a
maximum sign area of 50 square feet and shall be set back a minimum
of 10 feet from all property lines. Maximum sign height shall be eight
feet. The area immediately underneath and around the base of the
sign shall be landscaped per the landscaping requirements found in
§ 260-28G of this chapter.
MOVING SIGN — Any sign moved by mechanical or natural means,
such as wind.
MURALS — A picture or painting applied directly to a wall or roof of a
structure, containing no written copy or text.
than one such sign centered over each entrance and that the sign
area shall not exceed 12 inches in height.
Lettering or other insignia which are part of a gasoline pump,
consisting only of a brand name, lead warning sign, price and other
signs as required by law.
(2)
A credit card sign not exceeding one square foot in area, affixed to
the building or window.
(3)
(4) Other signs as permitted by this chapter.
§ 260-27 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-27
C:636
NAMEPLATE — Material on which a name and/or professional
designation is inscribed or painted. Professional nameplates shall
indicate a name and/or professional designation and/or affiliation and
shall not exceed one square foot per professional occupant. Residential
nameplates shall display the name and address of a resident and shall
not exceed one square foot in area. All such nameplates shall be affixed
either to a door, an adjacent wall of the premises, or a lamppost/
mailbox.
NEON SIGN — An electronic sign illuminated by inert gas confined
to a glass tube. Such signs may be classified as "window" signs or as
"projecting" signs and must meet all definitions and requirements of
those sign types as addressed in this article.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — Any sign that does not conform to the
requirements of this chapter.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — Any sign that is either a commercial offpremises
sign or a noncommercial off-premises sign.
PEDDLER'S SIGNS — Any wall sign or perpendicular sign which is a
part of and affixed to a permitted peddler's vehicle.
PENNANT — Any lightweight plastic, fabric or other material, whether
or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire,
string or line, usually in series, designed to move in the wind.
PORTABLE SIGN — Any mobile sign not permanently attached to the
ground or permanent structure or a sign which may be transported,
including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means
of wheels; balloons used as signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and
signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the
public right-of-way, unless said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-
COMMERCIAL OFF-PREMISES SIGN — Any sign advertising or
calling attention to a business, product or service not sold,
produced, manufactured, furnished or conducted at the property
where the sign is located.
(1)
NONCOMMERCIAL OFF-PREMISES SIGN — Any sign containing
a noncommercial message about an event, position or point of view
that is not in direct support of the primary use of the property
where the sign is located. Noncommercial off-premises signs that
also meet the definition of a temporary sign shall be permitted in
all zoning districts and may be of any type and size of sign allowed
therein and shall be subject to the same requirements, restrictions
and setback limitations applicable to other sign types in those
zones. Noncommercial off-premises signs that do not meet the
definition of a temporary sign are not allowed. Off-premises signs
are prohibited from all public rights-of-way, municipal buildings
and Town-owned property, and shall not be affixed to any traffic
signs, utility poles nor to any trees located in public rights-of-way
or on Town property.
(2)
§ 260-27 CHARTER § 260-27
C:637
day operations of the business. Sandwich board signs as described and
regulated elsewhere in this chapter shall not be considered portable.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — The building in which the principal use of the
lot is conducted. Lots with multiple principal uses may have multiple
principal buildings, but storage buildings, garages and other clearly
accessory uses shall not be considered principal buildings.
PROJECTING SIGN — Any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a
manner that it extends more than 10 inches beyond the surface of such
building or wall. Such signs shall be permitted in lieu of freestanding
signs or monument signs. Only one projecting sign shall be permitted
per business and shall be perpendicular to the wall to which it is
attached, its nearest edge being no less than three inches and its
furthest edge projecting no greater than 48 inches from the wall. The
projecting sign shall have a maximum sign area of 10 square feet and
its lowest edge shall be a minimum of eight feet from the ground.
REAL ESTATE SIGN — Any temporary sign advertising the real estate
upon which the sign is located as being for rent, lease or sale.
Residential real estate signs shall be permitted for individual
residential properties and shall not exceed six square feet in area. Only
one residential real estate sign per lot shall be permitted. Commercial
and industrial real estate signs shall be permitted for industrial and
commercial properties and shall not exceed 32 square feet in area. All
residential, commercial and industrial signs shall be removed within
two weeks of the sale or lease of the property or unit. Subdivision real
estate signs shall be permitted for subdivisions of five or more lots. One
common sign with a maximum sign area of 32 square feet per side shall
be permitted in lieu of individual real estate signs and shall not be in
place for greater than two years.
RESIDENTIAL SIGN — Any single-faced wall sign or freestanding sign
in a residential zone, including, but not limited to, preservation plaques
and bed-and-breakfast signs. Freestanding signs of this nature shall
have an area not exceeding four square feet, shall be no greater than
four feet in height overall, and shall be located a minimum of five feet
from all property lines.
RESIDENTIAL ZONE USE SIGN — A wall sign or freestanding sign
whose sign display is not to exceed 12 square feet and is used on
premises for church, hospital, library, museum, art gallery or charitable
purposes.
ROOF SIGN — Any sign erected over or on the roof of a building and
which is supported by the roof structure.
SANDWICH BOARD SIGN — Any double-sided portable sign designed
as an "A" or "T" frame, typically hinged or joined at one or more points.
One such sign shall be permitted per business and shall be located
so as to provide a public passage of a minimum of three feet on any
public right-of-way. Each face of the double-sided sign shall not exceed
six square feet in area. No driveways, doorways, walkways or handicap
§ 260-27 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-27
C:638
ramps may be blocked by the sign. Sandwich board signs shall not be
attached to any public structure or street furniture.
SEARCHLIGHT — Any light with one or more beams directed into the
atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same lot as
the light source; also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or
move.
SEASON'S GREETINGS SIGN — Any temporary sign which promotes
holiday greetings. Signs promoting businesses, products, services or
sales do not constitute season's greetings.
SIGN — Any device, fixture, display, placard or structure that uses any
color, form, graphic, illumination, symbol and/or writing to advertise,
announce the purpose of, or identify the purpose of a person or entity,
or to communicate information of any kind to the public. A wall sign
shall consist of both a sign face and a bracket. A freestanding sign shall
consist of the sign face(s), bracket(s), post(s) and frame. A monument
sign shall consist of the sign face(s) and support base.
SUBDIVISION IDENTIFICATION SIGNS — One freestanding
permanent sign may be installed at all exclusive entrances to a
development. Each sign shall have a maximum sign area of 16 square
feet. These signs shall not be located within the public right-of-way or
on Town-owned or -controlled land.
TEMPORARY SIGN — Any sign not permanently installed or any sign
only intended for use for a limited period of time. Such signs shall be
permitted in all zoning districts and may be of any type and size of
sign allowed therein and shall be subject to the same requirements,
restrictions and setback limitations applicable to other sign types in
those zones. Temporary signs are prohibited from all public rights-ofway,
municipal buildings and Town-owned property, and shall not be
affixed to any traffic signs, utility poles, nor to any trees located in
public rights-of-way or on Town property. Such signs shall not remain in
place for more than 120 days in any calendar year.
TOWN — Refers to all governmental entities of the Town of East
Greenwich, including, but not limited to, Town municipal offices and the
School Department.
TRADEMARK — Any trademark that is registered with the United
States Patent Office under 15 U.S.C. § 1051.
WALL SIGN — Any sign attached parallel to but within 10 inches of
a wall, painted on the wall surface, or erected and confined within
the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure which is
supported by such wall or building, and which displays only one sign
surface and is supported by such wall or building. One such sign shall
be permitted per business per building face with a maximum of three
per business. The maximum width of the sign display shall not exceed
70% of the linear frontage associated with the business unit. In the
CD-1 and CD-2 (Commercial Downtown 1 and 2) and W (Waterfront)
Zones, such signs may be either a total of 30 square feet in area or a
§ 260-27 CHARTER § 260-27
C:639
§ 260-28. General regulations.
maximum of 36 inches in height and no greater than six inches from the
wall. In the Route 2 corridor, MUPD (Mixed Use Planned Development),
CH (Commercial Highway) and L1/O (Industrial) Zones, wall signs may
either total 30 square feet in area or be a maximum of 48 inches in
height and no greater than 10 inches from the wall. For businesses
located within shopping centers having greater than 100,000 square
feet of gross floor area, such signs shall not be limited in height or
width but shall not exceed 30% of the building's facade associated
with the business. This provision shall only apply to those businesses
located within the main structure(s) and shall not apply to any other
freestanding structures (i.e., pad sites, kiosks, outbuildings, etc.). All
wall signs must directly advertise or promote the business, entity or
enterprise located within the building or structure to which they are
attached, painted or erected as described above. Any wall signs that do
not directly advertise or promote said business, entity or enterprise are
strictly prohibited.
WINDOW SIGN — Any sign that is placed inside a window, upon the
window panes or glass, or within 12 inches of the window (exclusive
of merchandise display). Permanent window signs may be applied to,
painted on or attached to the inside of each window associated with
a business. The area of such window signs shall be counted toward
the maximum visible sign area as addressed by § 260-28A herein.
Temporary interior signs advertising business openings, specials, sales,
events and greetings shall be permitted in accordance with the
definition above of "temporary sign" for a period not to exceed 14 days.
B. Computations. The following principles shall control the computation of
sign area and sign height.
(1) Sign display. The sign display is a portion of the permitted sign
area. The area of a sign display shall be computed by means of the
smallest square or rectangle that will encompass the extreme limits
of the writing, representation, emblem or other display.
(2) Sign area, single-faced signs. The area of a sign face (which is also
the sign area of a wall sign or other sign with only one face) shall be
computed as the area of sign display together with any material or
color forming an integral part of the background of the display or
used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure
against which it is placed.
(3) Sign height. The height of a freestanding sign shall be computed as
the distance from the base of the sign pole at normal grade to the
top of the sign area. The height of a monument sign shall be
computed as the distance from the base of the sign at normal grade
to the top of the sign area. Normal grade shall be construed to be:
a) the lower of existing grade prior to the construction; or b) the
newly established grade after construction.
§ 260-27 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-28
C:640
A. Maximum sign area. The maximum visible sign area associated with any
business, or any product or service available therein, shall not exceed
100 square feet for properties in the CD-1 or CD-2 and Waterfront
Districts and shall not exceed 140 square feet for properties in the
Route 2 corridor and the MUPD, RHF, CH and L1/O Zones. This
provision applies to all sign types requiring approval, including wall
signs, freestanding and projecting signs. Directional and incidental
signage is not included. For businesses located within shopping centers
having greater than 100,000 square feet of gross floor area, the
maximum visible sign area shall not exceed 30% of the building's facade
(building face providing primary ingress/egress) associated with the
tenant space. No business in such shopping centers shall have greater
than 300 square feet of visible sign area, taking into account all sign
types excluding directional and incidental ones. This provision shall
apply only to those businesses located within the main structure(s) and
shall not apply to any other freestanding structures (i.e., pad sites,
kiosks, outbuildings, etc.).
B. Signs other than those affecting historic properties. The installation,
enlargement, reduction or relocation of permitted signs in all zones are
allowed as indicated in the Sign Table following approval and the
issuance of a building permit from the Building Official unless
otherwise indicated elsewhere in this article.
C. Signs affecting historic properties. All new signs proposed on
properties included in the Article XI, Historic Districts, either as part of
a district or individually or on properties individually listed on the
National Register of Historic Places, shall require sign approval from
the Historic District Commission in addition to a building permit unless
otherwise indicated elsewhere in this article. All requests shall be
submitted for review as part of an overall sign proposal for the business
and/or property.
D. Changes to nonconforming sings. Enlargement or relocation of legal
nonconforming signs requires additional approval from the Zoning
Board of Review as described elsewhere in this chapter.
E. Rhode Island Building Code. Within all zones and districts, all signs
shall comply with applicable provision(s) of the Rhode island State
Building Code and the National Electric Code.
F. Sign maintenance. Within all zones and districts, all signs shall be
maintained in good structural condition, in compliance with Subsection
D and in conformance with this article (unless otherwise allowed
through the Zoning Board of Review) at all times.
G. Landscaping requirements. For the purposes of this article,
"landscaping" shall include any combination of living plants such as
grass, ground cover, shrubs, vines or hedges and nonliving landscape
materials such as rocks, pebbles, sand mulch or decorative paving
material. In the case of freestanding or monument signs, the
§ 260-28 CHARTER § 260-28
C:641
requirement shall be that the area immediately underneath the sign
and the entirety of an area extending two feet radially from the sign
base or supports shall be landscaped. Landscape materials may not
obstruct the view of the sign message.
H. Illumination. Within all zones, except as provided elsewhere in this
article, all signs may be illuminated under the following criteria:
(1) Internal illumination or backlighting of signs is prohibited in the
Commercial Downtown (CD) and Waterfront (W) Districts.
(2) Internal illumination or backlighting of signs is permitted in other
zones only where any of the following exist:
(a) The background is darker than the letters placed against it; or
(b) The background is opaqued; or
(c) The background is ivory or a similar shade to give the
impression of opaquing.
(3) Signs may be illuminated by a stationary white or off-white steady
light only. These lights shall not provide glare, nor shall they direct
light or shine off the premises.
I. Alterations. Any legally existing sign (including legal nonconforming
signs) may be altered either to update the sign content or to reflect new
information, provided that the alteration does not result in any change
in the sign's size, extent, location or illumination. Such updates do not
require review or approval by the Historic District Commission or a sign
permit.
J. Criteria for review.
(1) All sign proposals shall be evaluated under the following
guidelines:
(a) Compliance with ordinances.
(b) Clarity of design and message.
(2) In addition to the criteria listed in Subsection H(1) and (2), all
proposals reviewed by the Historic District Commission shall
conform with the Historic District Commission's Guidelines for
Review.
Sign Table
KEY:
Y = Yes; signs permitted
N = No; signs prohibited
R = Residential and Farm Zones
§ 260-28 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-28
C:642
LI/O-RHF = Light Industry/Office and Rocky Hill Fairgrounds
Zones
Rte. 2 = South County Trail
W = Waterfront Zone
CH = Commercial Highway Zone
CD = Commercial Downtown CD 1 and CD 2 Zones
RHF = Rocky Hill Fairgrounds Zone
MUPD = Mixed Use Planned Development
PD = Planned Development
Type CD CH W
RTE.
2
LI/O-RHFMUPD
R-PD
Addresses2 Y Y Y Y Y Y
Animated
signs
N N N N N N
Banners N N N N N N
Billboards N N N N N N
Building
markers2
Y Y Y Y Y N
Canopy signs Y Y Y Y N N
Construction
signs1
Y Y Y Y Y Y
Directional
signs2
Y Y Y Y Y Y
Directory
signs
Y Y Y Y N N
Flags2 Y Y Y Y Y Y
Freestanding
signs
Y Y Y N N N
Gas station
signs1
Y Y Y Y Y N
Government
signs1
Y Y Y Y Y Y
Incidental
sign
Y Y Y Y Y N
Monument
signs
Y Y Y Y Y N
Moving signs N N N N N N
Murals1 Y Y Y Y Y Y
§ 260-28 CHARTER § 260-28
C:643
Type CD CH W
RTE.
2
LI/O-RHFMUPD
R-PD
Neon signs Y Y Y Y N N
Nameplates2
Professional Y Y Y Y Y Y
Residential Y Y Y Y Y Y
Off-Premises
Signs:
Commercial
off-premises
N N N N N N
Noncommercial
off-premises
Temporary Y Y Y Y Y Y
Permanent N N N N N N
Peddler signs2 Y Y Y Y Y N
Portable signs N N N N N N
Private
parking lot
signs2
Y Y Y Y Y N
Projecting
signs
Y Y Y N N N
Real estate
signs:
Residential1 Y Y Y Y Y Y
Commercial/
industrial1
Y Y Y Y Y Y
Subdivision1 N N N Y Y Y
Residential
signs2
N N N N N Y
Residential
zone use signs
N N N N N Y
Roof signs N N N N N N
Sandwich
board signs2
Y Y Y Y N N
Subdivision
identification
signs1
N N N Y Y Y
Wall signs Y Y Y Y Y N
§ 260-28 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-28
C:644
§ 260-29. Prohibitions.
For the purposes of regulating unauthorized signage, protecting the health,
safety and welfare of residents, promoting the safety of the traveling public,
protecting existing property values, preventing the overcrowding of land,
encouraging positive economic development and promoting a positive
community appearance as part of a concerted effort to protect and enhance
the aesthetics of the Town for the enjoyment of all citizens, certain sign
types are not allowed.
Type CD CH W
RTE.
2
LI/O-RHFMUPD
R-PD
Window signs:
Permanent
signs2
Y Y Y N N N
NOTES:
1 Sign approval not required.
2 Sign approval and building permit not required.
K. Town signs. Governmental signs authorized by the Town may be used
for the display of private commercial messages with the approval of the
Town Council. The commercial message display area may be for a
business, product, service or other commercial activity that is not
located on the same premises. The display area of the commercial
message may be equal to but shall not exceed the display area of the
governmental message.
A. It is recognized here that, unlike on-premises identification signs which
are actually a part of a business being conducted at the property where
the sign is located, "off-premises signage" is a separate and distinct use
which is unrelated to the business, product or service being conducted
at the property where the sign is located. With a view to this distinction,
and in furtherance of the above-stated goals, off-premises signs are
regulated differently from on-premises signs.
B. In addition to the signs described as prohibited under the Sign Table in
§ 260-28J, the following signs and sign materials are also expressly
prohibited by this article:
(1) Types of signs prohibited.
(a) Signs which advertise an activity, business, product or service
no longer produced or conducted on the premises upon which
the sign is located. No such sign shall remain in place in or on
vacated premises for more than 90 days from the date the
vacancy commenced.
§ 260-28 CHARTER § 260-29
C:645
§ 260-30. Nonconforming signs.
(b) Signs which are attached to natural features, stone walls,
utility poles, utility boxes, traffic signs, fences or highway
structures.
(c) Signs attached to or placed on or against trailers or vehicles,
whether registered or unregistered. This does not include
signs adhered or painted onto vehicles.
(d) Signs in the public right-of-way, except for those installed by
the government.
(e) Signs which imitate and may be confused with an official traffic
control sign or signal, or an emergency or road equipment
vehicle.
(f) All other signs which have not been expressly permitted within
this article.
(g) All existing signs erected without the necessary approvals and/
or permits.
(h) Commercial off-premises signs including billboards.
(2) Additional signs prohibited. The total number of permitted exterior
signs at any business shall not exceed four. This number shall
include any combination of wall signs, freestanding signs,
monument signs, projecting signs, canopy signs, marquee signs,
and sandwich board signs.
(3) Prohibited materials:
(a) Pennants, ribbons, streamers, spinners, other moving devices.
(b) Internal illumination or backlighting of signs is prohibited in
the Commercial Downtown CD and Waterfront W Zones.
Internal illumination or backlighting of signs in all other zones
is prohibited, except as permitted § 260-28H of this chapter.
A. A sign shall immediately lose its legal nonconforming status when:
(1) The sign is enlarged or reduced without approvals. (See also
§§ 260-28 and 260-29 of this chapter.)
(2) The sign is relocated without approvals. [See § 260-29B(1).]
(3) The sign advertises or calls attention to any products, businesses or
activities which have not been carried on or sold at the premises for
the past 90 days.
(4) The sign shall not have been repaired or properly maintained
within 30 days after written notice to that effect has been given by
§ 260-29 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-30
C:646
§ 260-31. Indemnification of Town.
Any permit granted or permission given pursuant to this article shall be
upon the express condition that the permittee and/or grantee and every
owner, person or entity maintaining any such sign shall be liable for and
save the Town harmless from and indemnify said Town against any and all
liability, costs and expenses incurred and any damages sustained by persons
or property caused by the construction, existence or maintenance of any
such sign.
§ 260-32. Administration and enforcement.
the Building Official and/or Director of Planning, or their
designees.
(5) The sign is removed and replaced with another nonconforming
sign, regardless of its size.
B. A sign shall not lose its legal nonconforming status when:
(1) A wall sign is removed for construction, painting and/or restoration
of the building, provided that the sign is returned to its location
within 30 days of completion of the building work.
(2) The sign is removed to facilitate repair, maintenance and/or
repainting and replaced immediately upon completion of such
work.
C. No sign that had been erected in violation of any previously existing
sign ordinance shall, by virtue of adoption of this article, become legal
nonconforming.
A. A permit may be required from the Building Department prior to
erecting, (re)placing, (re)building, (re)constructing, or (re)locating any
sign. A permit is not necessary for sign repair and maintenance,
provided that the work is done in conformity with this article.
B. Application(s) for a sign permit(s) shall be accompanied by a sketch
plan of the site and elevation drawings of the proposed sign, caption of
the proposed sign, and such other data as is pertinent to the application
and consistent with this article, as determined by the Building Official.
C. Any newly installed sign found to be in violation of these regulations is
subject to removal by the Town of East Greenwich and/or other
penalties consistent with § 260-79B of this chapter, specifically.
(1) Where the ZEO determines a violation to have occurred, the ZEO
shall have the authority to issue an injunction and an order to
restore the property to its previolation state.
(2) The ZEO shall also require the payment of a penalty fee for such
violation. Each day any violation of any provision of this chapter
(including the failure to perform any act or duty required by this
§ 260-30 CHARTER § 260-32
C:647
chapter) continues shall constitute a separate offense. Penalties
shall be as set forth in § 260-79, Violations and penalties.117
117. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 260-32 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-32
C:648
ARTICLE VIII
Planned Development and Mixed Use Planned Development Overlay
§ 260-33. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this article is to govern the erection, design, use and reuse
of buildings and land approved as either Planned Developments (PD) or as
Mixed Use Planned Developments (MUPD). These districts are intended to
provide the following:
§ 260-34. Applicability.
§ 260-35. Permitted uses.
A. Planned development: a designation which allows for residential land
uses through environmentally sensitive design. It would provide for
residential development on a single parcel (as in a townhouse design,
etc.).
B. Mixed use planned development: a designation which allows for
multiple uses on one parcel. It is offered as a development option as an
encouragement to construct and develop low-density commercial (retail
and/or office) uses so as to offset the tax burden of higher density
residential units. Low- and moderate-income residential units would be
particularly encouraged in an MUPD.
A. Designation of either of these districts requires an amendment to this
chapter and Zoning Map for the Town of East Greenwich. These
districts may be allowed where general impacts and environmental
constraints are minimal and there is a proper fit with existing uses.
B. Development of a parcel under either of these use designations
additionally requires approval under the tenets of Chapter A263,
Development and Subdivision Review Regulations.
C. The standards of this article shall also be applied to projects that are
developed in phases.
A. The following are permitted uses within the PD Zone:
(1) Single-family attached dwellings, including, but not limited to,
duplexes and quadraplexes.
(2) Off-street parking.
(3) Signs (as provided for in Article VII).
B. The following are permitted uses within the MUPD Zone:
(1) Single-family attached dwellings.
(2) Multifamily dwellings and duplexes.
(3) Offices.
§ 260-33 CHARTER § 260-35
C:649
§ 260-36. Accessory uses.
§ 260-37. General requirements.
(4) Health and fitness facilities.
(5) Medical walk-in facilities/outpatient care.
(6) Day care, day-care centers.
(7) Off-street parking.
(8) Signs (as provided for in Article VII).
(9) Assisted living and long-term health care.
A. The following uses are permitted as accessory uses to legally existing
principal uses in both the PD and the MUPD Zones:
(1) The keeping of household pets for residential or educational uses.
(2) Family day-care in the home.
(3) A temporary sales or promotion office in connection with adjacent
construction. Such office may be located in a trailer. "Temporary" is
considered to be one year, but renewal for good cause may be
allowed with application to the Building Official.
(4) Storage of building materials and equipment incidental to on-site
construction.
(5) Storage of inspected, registered vehicles, owned or used by a
person residing on the premises, which are physically capable of
being operated on a public roadway.
(6) Storage of a maximum of one inspected, commercially registered
vehicle, owned or used by a person residing on the premises, that
has a maximum of one-ton capacity, which is physically capable of
being operated on a public roadway. Storage of unregistered
vehicles shall not be permitted.
(7) In-law apartments.
(8) Bed-and-breakfasts by special use permit only.
A. The following requirements shall apply to both the PD and MUPD
Zones:
(1) No accessory structure, swimming pool and/or tennis court shall be
located in any part of the required front and side setbacks.
(2) Proposals for planned developments and mixed use planned
developments are required to follow review procedure spelled out
§ 260-35 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-37
C:650
in Chapter A263, Development and Subdivision Review
Regulations.
(3) Planned developments and mixed use planned developments are
required to participate in any impact program required for such
uses.
(4) All such developments shall be serviced by Town sewer and public
water.
(5) All such developments shall be oriented to the Town's principal
arterials.
(6) All roads within a PD and MUPD shall be constructed to the Town's
standards and may be dedicated as public streets.
(7) The total number of residential dwelling units to be permitted shall
be computed by using the following formula:
D = (GA – NA)/UZ
D = Density (maximum number of residential units, this
number shall be rounded to the nearest whole
number to establish the total number of allowed
units in this development)
GA = Gross acreage (gross area of the proposed
development in acres and tenths of acres)
NA = Not Allowed (the area, in acres and tenths of acres,
of all wetlands or other natural areas protected
under this chapter; all wetland areas shall be
defined by the Department of Environmental
Management; the NA total shall include the total
land area allowed for streets)
UZ = Underlying Zone (gross development density in
units per acre permitted in the underlying zoning
district)
(8) A minimum of 30% common open space shall be provided. Common
open space shall comply with the following criteria:
(a) Wetland areas, as delineated by the state, shall not be counted
toward the 30% required open space. Perimeter wetlands may
be included to meet this requirement;
(b) Up to 20% of the common open space may be devoted to paved
areas or structures used to provide recreational or cultural
facilities for residents of the development, consistent with the
intended use of the common open space and approved by the
Planning Board;
(c) The location, size and shape of common open space shall be
reviewed and approved by the Planning Board. Strips of
§ 260-37 CHARTER § 260-37
C:651
common open space are not permitted unless they provide
access to a larger portion of common open space, serve as
natural drainage areas, or serve as buffers;
(d) Access to common open space shall be provided to every owner
of the common open space; access points shall be marked by
stone bounds to distinguish between the edge of the access
and private property;
(e) Land which has suffered environmental damage, either on the
surface or below the surface, prior to the final approval of the
planned development by the Planning Board, shall not be
counted toward common open space requirements; should the
land be restored to a condition acceptable to the Planning
Board, this condition may be waived;
(f) The developer shall provide for the permanent preservation
and maintenance of the common open space by, at the option of
the Planning Board, either conveying the same to the Town for
use by it for park, open space, agricultural or other specified
use or uses, or by conveying the same to a nonprofit
organization the principal purpose of which is the conservation
of open space, or by conveying the same to a corporation or
trust owned or to be owned by the owners of the units within
the planned development. If such a corporation or trust is
used, ownership shall pass with conveyance of the lots or units.
In any case, where the land is not conveyed to the Town, a
restriction enforceable by the Town shall be recorded
providing that the land shall be kept in the authorized
condition and not be built upon or developed for accessory
uses such as parking or roadway.
B. The following requirements shall apply to the Planned Development
District:
(1) The density within the development shall not exceed that otherwise
permitted in the underlying district.
C. The following requirements shall apply to the Mixed Use Planned
Development District:
(1) A maximum of six units may be permitted per acre, provided at
least 10% of the total residential units within the development are
affordable, based on HUD guidelines. Density shall be determined
based on the land used for residential purposes.
(2) Assisted living facility.
(a) Except for the development of an assisted living facility
together with any complementary or accessory use consistent
with this section, but excluding any additional commercial
development on site, the district shall apply only to parcels
§ 260-37 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-37
C:652
§ 260-38. Procedure for filing applications.
All applications for either PDs or MUPDs made under the provisions of this
chapter shall be filed per the requirements of Chapter A263, Development
and Subdivision Review Regulations.
where both residential and commercial development are
provided. Total commercial development shall not constitute
greater than 50% and less than 25% of the total gross floor
area of the development overall.
(b) The maximum to number of units to be permitted in an assisted
living development shall not exceed one bedroom, or other
space designed or allocated for sleeping purposes such as a
studio or efficiency apartment, for each 4,000 square feet of
land area for the given site.
(c) The Town Council may permit the density of an assisted living
development to be increased to one bedroom, or other space
designed or allocated for sleeping purposes such as a studio or
efficiency apartment, for each 2,700 square feet of land area
when it is determined that the increase will serve the public
welfare by the inclusion of an increase of the following
amenities:
[1] An increase in internal space for the purposes of
recreation, art and education or other enrichment
purposes compatible with the intended occupancy;
[2] An increase in open space for garden plots or passive
recreation for the intended occupants or the dedication of
open space for general public use; and
[3] Provision of increased landscaping within the setbacks and
around the buildings and parking areas.
§ 260-37 CHARTER § 260-38
C:653

ARTICLE IX
Cluster Subdivisions
§ 260-39. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the establishment of single-family
detached cluster subdivisions while maintaining the rural, natural and
scenic character of the Town of East Greenwich. These regulations have
been designed to achieve the following purposes and objectives so as to
contribute to the safety, health and welfare of the residents of East
Greenwich:
§ 260-40. Applicability.
§ 260-41. Permitted uses.
The following are permitted uses within a cluster development:
A. To promote the efficient and economical use of land in harmony with its
natural features and surrounding areas.
B. To encourage the preservation of valuable open space and protection of
the water supply, water bodies, wetlands, floodplains, agricultural
lands, wildlife and other natural resources.
C. To promote diverse and efficient housing through creative and
environmentally responsible site design.
D. To preserve the rural, natural and scenic character of the Town through
the protection of site amenities, natural and cultural features and
historic resources.
A. This article may be applicable to any single-family housing development
located in any residential zone throughout the Town.
B. Compliance with the requirements as described herein shall not be
construed to relieve the applicant of any obligations to obtain additional
local, state or federal permits.
A. Any use permitted in the underlying zone.
B. Single-family detached dwelling structures.
C. Accessory uses to residential dwellings as permitted in the underlying
zone.
D. Maintenance, storage and utility buildings accessory to single-family
dwellings or to noncommercial recreational uses approved as part of
the cluster subdivision.
E. Parking areas designed specifically to accommodate residents of the
cluster subdivision.
§ 260-39 CHARTER § 260-41
C:655
§ 260-42. Open space requirements.
§ 260-43. Minimum requirements.
F. Noncommercial recreational uses subject to the provisions set forth in
Chapter A263, Development and Subdivision Review Regulations.
G. Agriculture, horticulture and silviculture, and any accessory uses or
structures appurtenant thereto.
A. The cluster development shall have a minimum of 30% common open
space, exclusive of utility easements, roads, parcels in individual
ownership and wetlands.
B. Open space shall comply with the criteria for common open space
under § 260-43D of this article.
A. Density requirements.
(1) The total number of residential dwelling units to be permitted on
any site proposed for a cluster development shall be computed by
using the following formula:
D = (GA – NA)/UZ
D = Density: permissible number of residential lots.
This number shall be rounded to the nearest
whole number to establish the total number of
allowed lots in the cluster development.
GA = Gross acreage: gross area of the proposed
subdivision in acres and tenths of acres.
NA = Not Allowed: The area, in acres and tenths of
acres, of all wetlands or other natural area
protected under this chapter. All wetland areas
shall be defined by the Department of
Environmental Management (DEM) with respect
to freshwater wetlands. Also, the NA total shall
include the total land area allowed for streets.
UZ = Underlying Zone: gross development density in
units per acre permitted in the underlying zoning
district.
(2) The total number of lots in a cluster shall not exceed the total
otherwise attainable in a conventional development
B. Dimensional requirements.
(1) The following table sets forth the minimum lot requirements under
the cluster development regulations:
§ 260-41 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-43
C:656
Dimensional Regulations for Cluster Subdivisions1
Underlying
Zone
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Frontage2
(feet)
Front
Yard
(feet)
Side
Yard
(feet)
Rear
Yard
(feet)
F-2 43,560 150 50 30 45
F-1 30,000 150 40 30 40
F 30,000 150 40 30 40
R-30 20,000 125 35 25 35
R-20 10,000 100 30 15 30
R-10 6,000 60 10 10 20
R-6 4,000 65 10 10 20
NOTES:
1 Allowable lot coverage and maximum structure heights are
the same as noted in the underlying zoning designation under
Table 2 at the end of this chapter.
2 Lots fronting on a cul-de-sac shall have a minimum frontage of
60 feet.
C. Design guidelines and requirements.
(1) Preserve and maintain existing fields, pastures and other land for
agricultural use wherever possible.
(2) Maintain or create a vegetated buffer between the cluster
subdivision and any abutting use.
(3) Preserve unblocked or uninterrupted scenic views and vistas,
particularly as seen from public roads or scenic roads.
(4) Protect habitat areas of endangered or threatened species.
(5) Preserve historic and/or archaeological sites and their environs
insofar as needed in order to protect the historic character of the
site.
(6) Maintain the visual integrity of hilltops and ridgelines by siting
development so that building silhouettes will be below the hilltop or
ridgeline; if the area is heavily wooded, the buildings' silhouettes
shall be lower than the average canopy height of trees on the ridge
or hill.
(7) Retain and preserve field stone walls wherever possible and
minimize cuts into the walls. If removal is necessary, a matching
length of dry stone wall or hidden mortar wall shall be rebuilt on
the site.
§ 260-43 CHARTER § 260-43
C:657
(8) Retain or replace old growth trees per Chapter A263, Development
and Subdivision Review Regulations.118
D. Common open space criteria.
(1) Up to 20% of the common open space may be devoted to paved
areas or structures used to provide recreational or cultural
facilities for the residents of the cluster development consistent
with the intended use of the common open space.
(2) Wetland areas as delineated by the State of Rhode Island shall not
be counted toward the 30% required open space for cluster
developments. Wetland buffers may be included to meet this
requirement.
(3) The location, size and shape of common open space shall be
reviewed and approved by the Planning Board. Strips of common
open space are not permitted unless they provide access to a large
portion of common open space, serve as natural drainage areas, or
serve as buffers.
(4) Access to common open space shall be provided to every owner of
the common open space. Access points shall be marked by stone
bounds to distinguish between the edge of the access and private
property.
(5) Land which has suffered environmental damage, either on the
surface or below the surface, prior to the final approval of the
cluster development by the Board shall not be counted toward
common open space requirements. Should the land be restored to a
condition acceptable to the Planning Board, this condition may be
waived upon approval by the Zoning Board of Review.
(6) As per the requirements of Chapter A263, Development and
Subdivision Review Regulations, a conveyance of land or fee may
be accepted by the Town to meet anticipated recreational needs
generated by the cluster development proposal. In the event that
land is conveyed, such area shall not be counted toward meeting
the requirements for common open space under this article.
(7) The developer shall, by appropriate legal instrument, provide for
the permanent preservation and maintenance of the common open
space within the development per the requirements of the
Subdivision Regulations.119
E. Streets.
118. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
119. Editor's Note: See Ch. A263, Development and Subdivision Review Regulations.
§ 260-43 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-43
C:658
§ 260-44. Filing of applications.
All applications for cluster developments made under the provisions of this
chapter shall be filed and reviewed in accordance with the requirements of
Chapter A263, Development and Subdivision Review Regulations.
(1) All streets within a cluster subdivision shall be improved in
accordance with the requirements and specifications set forth in
Chapter A263, Development and Subdivision Review Regulations.
(2) All streets within cluster developments shall be dedicated to the
Town of East Greenwich as public roads.
§ 260-43 CHARTER § 260-44
C:659

ARTICLE X
Aquifer/Wellhead Regulations
§ 260-45. (Reserved)
§ 260-46. (Reserved)
§ 260-47. (Reserved)
§ 260-48. (Reserved)
§ 260-49. (Reserved)
§ 260-50. (Reserved)
§ 260-51. (Reserved)
§ 260-52. (Reserved)
§ 260-53. (Reserved)
§ 260-54. (Reserved)
§ 260-45 CHARTER § 260-54
C:661

ARTICLE XI
Historic Districts
[Amended 2-11-2008 by Ord. No. 787]
§ 260-55. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this article is to regulate construction, alteration, repair,
removal or demolition of historic properties and stone walls through an
overlay zone so as to maintain the historic character of the Town of East
Greenwich. These regulations have been designed to achieve the following
purposes and objectives:
§ 260-56. Authority.
This chapter is adopted in accordance with the provisions of Rhode Island
General Laws, Chapter 45-24.1, Historic Enabling Act, as may be
amended.120
§ 260-57. Definitions.
Words and phrases used in this article shall have their plain and ordinary
meaning unless otherwise specifically defined in this section or in Article
XII of this chapter. Section headings or captions are for reference purposes
only and shall not be used in the interpretation of this article.
ACCESSORIES — Features other than primary structures which contribute
to the exterior appearance of a property, including but not limited to
signage, doors, windows, materials, decorative features, fences and trim
detail, whether or not a building permit is required for the alteration.
Landscape features considered as accessories shall be limited to stone
walls.
ALTERATION — Any act that changes one or more of the architectural
features or its accessories, including but not limited to the erection,
A. To preserve historic districts, outlying properties and stone walls which
define and reflect elements of the Town's cultural, social, economic,
political and architectural history.
B. To protect and improve property values within designated historic
districts of designated outlying properties and of scenic roads.
C. To enhance the traditional qualities and characteristics of the Town and
create an attractive environment which is conducive to residential,
commercial and industrial uses and tourism.
D. To strengthen the local economy by promoting the use of such districts
and outlying properties for the pleasure, education and welfare of the
residents of East Greenwich.
120. Editor's Note: See R.I.G.L. § 45-24.1-1 et seq., Historical Area Zoning.
§ 260-55 CHARTER § 260-57
C:663
installation, construction, reconstruction, relocation or removal of any
structure/accessory.
APPROPRIATE — For the purpose of this article and the certificate of
appropriateness, the term "appropriate" shall mean not incompatible with
those aspects deemed by the Commission as historically, architecturally
or archaeologically significant for the structure, accessories, stone walls,
neighborhood or district in which the review is made.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — A certificate issued by the East
Greenwich Historic District Commission as established under this article
indicating approval of an application for an alteration, construction, repair,
removal or demolition of a structure or accessories of a structure within a
historic district or an outlying property as identified under this article. Also
referred to as "certificate."
COMMISSION — The East Greenwich Historic District Commission as
established under the provisions of the Charter, Part 4, Administration, and
the Code of Ordinances of the Town of East Greenwich.
CONSTRUCTION — The act of adding to an existing structure, erecting
a new structure or adding accessories onto a structure, including but not
limited to buildings, extensions, outbuildings and fire escapes.
DEMOLITION — An act or process that destroys a structure and/or its
accessories in whole or in part.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — Specific divisions of the Town of East Greenwich as
designated by this article which shall act as overlay zones. A historic district
may include one or more structures.
RELOCATION — The moving of an established structure from one site or
area to another.
REMOVAL — The act of elimination as a means of remedying damage or
deterioration of a structure and/or its accessories.
REPAIR — The act of altering as a means of remedying damage or
deterioration of a structure and/or its accessories.
REPLACEMENT-IN-KIND — Any repair work in which old materials are
removed and exactly the same materials are used in its place (i.e., asphalt
shingle roofing is removed and re-laid with new asphalt shingles).
STREET OBJECT — Any object erected or placed in a public way or sidewalk
on a temporary or permanent basis. Authorized public safety/public welfare
street objects include, but are not limited to, such structures as street
lights, traffic lights, U.S. Post Office mailboxes, fire hydrants, utility poles,
street trees and municipal trash receptacles.
STRUCTURE — That which is constructed or erected and requires a
building permit, the use of which requires permanent or temporary location
on or in the ground, to be limited to buildings, gazebos, pergolas,
outbuildings, porches, decks and fences.
§ 260-58. Designation of historic districts and outlying properties.
§ 260-57 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-58
C:664
A. For the purposes of this article, the boundaries of historic districts are
established as shown on a map entitled "East Greenwich Historic
District Map," which is filed in the office of the Town Clerk. This map,
and any recorded amendments to the map, are hereby incorporated as
a part of this article.
(1) The East Greenwich Historic District is bounded and described as
follows: Beginning at the intersection of the center lines of West
Street and Division Street, thence easterly along the center line of
Division Street to the high-water mark of Greenwich Cove, socalled;
thence turning and running generally southerly and
southwesterly along the high-water mark of said Greenwich Cove
to a point, said point being located on the high-water mark of said
Greenwich Cove and also being the point at the easterly end of the
center line of Crompton Avenue; thence turning and running
generally northeasterly along the center line of Crompton Avenue
to the intersection of the center line of Rocky Hollow Road; thence
turning and running generally westerly along the center line of
Rocky Hollow Road to the intersection of the center line of Main
Street and the extensions of the center lines of Rocky Hollow Road
and First Avenue; thence continuing generally westerly along the
center line of First Avenue to the intersection of the center line of
First Avenue and the extension of the center line of Reynolds
Street; thence turning and running generally northerly along the
center lines of Reynolds Street and Spring Street; thence turning
and running generally westerly along the center line of Spring
Street to the intersection of the center lines of Spring Street and
West Street; thence turning and running generally northerly along
the center line of West Street to the center line of Division Street,
being the point and place of beginning, together with all the lots or
parcels of land located as follows:
(a) All lots or parcels of land on the south side of and abutting
Rocky Hollow Road.
(b) All lots or parcels of land on the south side of and abutting
Crompton Avenue.
(c) All lots or parcels of land on the south side of and abutting First
Avenue, between Main Street and the south extension of the
center line of Reynolds Street. Any parcel bisected by this line
is considered outside the boundaries of the Historic District.
(d) All lots or parcels of land on the west side of and abutting
Reynolds Street, between First Avenue and Spring Street.
(e) All lots or parcels of land on the south side of and abutting
Spring Street between Reynolds Street and West Street.
(f) All lots or parcels of land on the west side of and abutting West
Street, between Spring Street and Division Street.
§ 260-58 CHARTER § 260-58
C:665
(g) All lots or parcels of land on the south side of and abutting
Division Street, between West Street and Kenyon Avenue.
(2) The Tillinghast Road Historic District is bounded and described as
follows: Beginning at the northeast corner of the district the
boundary follows the north and east lot lines of Plat 16C Lot 18,
runs due south across Frenchtown Road to the north bound of Plat
18B Lot 1; thence east and south on the north and east bounds of
said lot to the southeast corner; thence east and southeast across
the southern tail of Plat 18B Lot 42 to the southeast corner of said
lot; then following the bounds of Lot 42 north and east to the
northwest corner of Plat 18B Lot 133; thence south and east along
the west and south bounds of Lot 133 to the southwest corner of
Plat 18B Lot 132; thence east and north along the south and east
bounds of Lot 132 to its northeast corner; thence east along the
south bound of Plat 18B Lot 181 to its southeast corner; thence
south along the east bound of Plat 18B Lot 13 to its southeast
corner. From that point running east along the southern bound of
Lot 13 to the eastern edge of Tillinghast Road; thence southerly
along the eastern edge of Tillinghast Road along the western
bounds of Lots 106, 107, 108 and 109 to the northwest corner of
Plat 18E Lot 15; then east along the north bound of Lot 15 to the
northeast corner of said lot; thence south along the eastern bound
of Lot 15 approximately 1,540 feet to the southeast corner of said
lot; thence west along the south bound of Lot 15 a distance of 1,277
feet plus; thence turning south a distance of approximately 470 feet
to the north edge of South Road; thence west along the north edge
of South Road a distance of approximately 180 feet to the eastern
edge of Tillinghast Road; thence north on the east side of the road
to a point opposite the southeast corner of Plat 19B Lot 138; thence
west on the south bound of Plat 19B Lot 138; thence north to the
northwest bound of said lot; thence northeast across Plat 19B Lot
38 to meet the southwest corner of Plat 19B Lot 137; thence north
on the west bound of Lot 137 and following north in the same line
across Plat 19B Lot 38 to meet the southwest corner of Plat 19B Lot
127; thence north on the west bounds of Lot 127 and 128 to Plat
19B Lot 37; thence west and north on the south and west bounds of
Lot 37 to the southwest corner of Plat 19C Lot 72; thence north to
the southwest corner of Plat 19C Lot 32; thence east and north
following the bounds of Plat 19C Lot 72 to the southwest corner of
Plat 19C Lot 71; thence north along the western bounds of Lots 71
and 68 to Frenchtown Road. Thence easterly along the southern
edge of Frenchtown Road to a point approximately 300 feet west of
Tillinghast Road; thence northerly across Frenchtown Road and
straight north across Plat 15J Lot 66 to the southwest corner of Plat
15J Lot 409; thence north along the west bound of Lot 409 and east
along its north bound to the southwest corner of Plat 15J Lot 501;
thence north along the western bound of Lot 501 to the northwest
corner of said lot; thence east along the north bound of Lot 501
approximately 91 feet to a point 80 feet west of Tillinghast Road;
§ 260-58 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-58
C:666
thence north across Plat 15J Lot 13 to the south bound of Plat
15J Lot 63; thence east along the south bound of Lot 63 to the
western edge of Tillinghast Road. Then south along the west edge
of Tillinghast Road about 480 feet to a point opposite the northwest
corner of Plat 16C Lot 18; thence east across Tillinghast Road to
that corner, the point of beginning, including all lots or parcels as
noted below:
(a) Plat 15J, Lots 409 and 501 in total and portions of Lots 13 and
66; Plat 16C, Lot 18 in total; Plat 18B, Lots 1 and 13; Plat 18E,
Lot 15; Plat 19B, Lots 37, 127, 128, 137 and 138 in total and a
portion of Lot 38; Plat 19C, Lots 37, 72, 66, 68, 71, 76, 79, 163,
169, 181 and 187.
B. For the purpose of this article, the following shall comprise a list of
specified structures whose dwellings and accessories are hereby
deemed "outlying properties" of historical, architectural and/or
archaeological value and are hereby designated as historic structures:
CARRS POND ROAD
Caleb Carr House
A.P. 15E Lot 56
941 Carrs Pond Road
Gifford-Pitcher House
A.P. 15E Lot 67
1000 Carrs Pond Road
CEDAR AVENUE
Long-Langord-Kenyon House
A.P. 9B Lots 81 and 186
441 Cedar Avenue
Mawney House
A.P. 9A Lot 281
650 Cedar Avenue
DEERFIELD DRIVE
Gardiner House at High Hawk
Farm
A.P. 15 Lot 104
100 Deerfield Drive
DIVISION STREET
Andrew Briggs House
A.P. 12C Lot 86
1727 Division Street
FRENCHTOWN ROAD
Greene-Davis House
A.P. 16E Lot 14
911 Frenchtown Road
Elisha Greene House
A.P. 16D Lot 15
999 Frenchtown Road
§ 260-58 CHARTER § 260-58
C:667
Tibbitts Farm
A.P. 19I Lot 20
1786 Frenchtown Road
Elder James Wightman House
A.P. 15H Lot 122
1995 Frenchtown Road
Tillinghast Factory Ruins
A.P. 16C and D Lot 53
North Side Frenchtown Road
Frenchtown Baptist Church
NE Wireless & Steam Museum
A.P. 19C Lot 71; Southwest corner
Frenchtown Road and Tillinghast Road
HOWLAND ROAD
Clement Weaver House
A.P. 10F Lot 77
125 Howland Road
KENYON AVENUE
Kenyon Estate
A.P. 2 Lot 69
70 Kenyon Avenue
Spencer-King House
A.P. 9B Lot 283
235 Kenyon Avenue
Freeman House
A.P. 4 Lot 22
216 Kenyon Avenue
MIDDLE ROAD
Crossways Farm
A.P. 8 Lot 1
12 Middle Road
The Lilacs
A.P. 7 Lot 162
388 Middle Road
Paul Spencer House
A.P. 12G Lot 20
1167 Middle Road
Bowen Spencer House
A.P. 16A Lot 5
1266 Middle Road
Captain Brown House
A.P. 12H Lot 30
1341 Middle Road
The Brown Bread Place
A.P. 16A Lot 6
1300 Middle Road
SHIPPEE ROAD
Wightman House
A.P. 19J Lot 21
30 Shippee Road
§ 260-58 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-58
C:668
§ 260-59. Applicability; certificates required.
SOUTH COUNTY TRAIL
Mary Ellis House
A.P. 12F Lot 36
1629 South County Trail
Johnathan Pitcher House
A.P. 11F Lot 7
2400 South County Trail
Spencer Fry House
A.P. 11G Lot 4
2196 South County Trail
Justin Fry Homestead
A.P. 16F Lot 1
2153 South County Trail
Spencer Bailey House
A.P. 11H Lot 2
2068 South County Trail
SOUTH PIERCE ROAD
Joshua Coggeshall House
A.P. 11C Lot 66
62 South Pierce Road
SOUTH ROAD
Richard Briggs Farm
A.P. 19A Lot 46
830 South Road
Silas Jones House
A.P. 19L Lot 50
1570 South Road
SPRING STREET
Congdon House
A.P. 2 Lot 64
194 Spring Street
TILLINGHAST ROAD
Card House
A.P. 15J Lot 40
459 Tillinghast Road
A. This article shall be applicable to any property described in § 260-58,
including developed and vacant sites.
B. Structures and accessories. A certificate is necessary for construction,
alteration, repair, relocation, removal or demolition of new or proposed
structures and accessories for all of the following conditions:
§ 260-58 CHARTER § 260-59
C:669
§ 260-60. Prohibitions.
Street objects, as defined below, shall not be permitted on the public ways
or sidewalks within the East Greenwich Historic District, with the exception
of objects erected or placed by authorized public or quasi-public agencies
for public safety and/or public welfare purposes and with the exception of
tables, chairs and planters maintained on sidewalks in conjunction with a
duly authorized business establishment. "Street object" is defined as any
object erected or placed on a public way or sidewalk on a temporary
or permanent basis. Authorized public safety/public welfare street objects
include, but are not limited to, such objects as street lights, traffic lights,
United States Post Office mailboxes, fire hydrants, utility poles, street trees
and municipal trash receptacles.
§ 260-61. Application procedures.
(1) A building permit or demolition permit is required for such work or
the work proposed will affect the exterior appearance of the
structure or its appurtenances. The Building Official may not issue
a permit until the Commission has granted a certificate under the
provisions of this article.121
(2) The proposed project is for exterior work.
(3) The proposed project is not a replacement-in-kind.
C. Stone walls. A certificate is necessary for the alteration, relocation and/
or demolition of any stone wall located within a historic district or on a
listed outlying property per § 260-58B above, whether or not a building
permit is required for such work. No work on an applicable stone wall
may begin until the Commission has issued a certificate in accordance
with the provisions of this article.
D. Additional regulations. The regulations pertaining to the various zoning
districts which may be included within any historic district or which
may apply to the outlying property identified in § 260-58B shall apply,
together with the additional requirements as set forth in this section
and this article.
A. Application requirements and procedures.
(1) Applications for a certificate shall be submitted to the Commission
through the Planning Department, which shall determine if such
application is complete in accordance with the Commission's Rules
of Procedure. All complete applications shall be forwarded,
together with all maps, plans and other data, to the Commission,
except where a staff review per § 260-62C of this article applies.
Any accepted application shall be filed with the Commission on the
121. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 260-59 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-61
C:670
§ 260-62. Plan review.
last business day of the month in which it was submitted and placed
on the following month's agenda.
(2) Applications for a certificate of appropriateness shall contain
information which is necessary to evaluate the proposed
construction, alteration, repair, removal, relocation or demolition,
including but not limited to plans, drawings and photographs, as
required in the Commission's rules.
(3) Incomplete applications shall be returned to the applicant within
seven working days of receipt by the Planning Department.
(4) In applying for a certificate of appropriateness, a property owner
must comply with the application procedures as established by the
Commission and the provisions of this article.
B. No new application for the same or similar work shall be accepted or
filed within six months after rejection of the application unless the
structure, accessory or stone wall has been changed in some way from
casualty.
A. Structures and accessories. In reviewing applications for the alteration,
construction, relocation, repair or demolition of a new or existing
structure and/or accessory, the Commission shall give consideration to
the following:
(1) The historic, architectural or archaeological significance of the
structure and/or its accessories.
(2) The way in which the structure, stone wall and/or its accessories
contribute to the historical, architectural or archaeological
significance of the neighborhood and the Town.
(3) The appropriateness of the general design, arrangement, texture,
material and siting proposed in the plans.
(4) Solar system installations. In addition to those standards provided
in § 260-123, in reviewing an application for the installation of a
solar energy system (i.e., solar panels), the HDC will consider
building-mounted or building-integrated systems; ground-mounted
systems are prohibited in the downtown historic district. Solar
panels should be placed in areas that are least viewable to the
public. Installations that would alter the characteristic features of a
historic structure should be avoided. Panels should not be visible
above the roofline, and panels installed on flat-roof buildings
should be set back from the edge. Where solar panels and other
appurtenances will not be visible from any public way, they shall be
eligible for administrative staff review and approval (consistent
with § 260-62C of the Zoning Code) rather than a review by the full
§ 260-61 CHARTER § 260-62
C:671
Historic District Commission. [Added 11-6-2017 by Ord. No.
873]
B. Stone walls. In addition to those standards provided in § 260-61A, in
reviewing an application for the alteration, construction, relocation,
repair or demolition of a stone wall, the Commission shall give
consideration to the following:
(1) The historical importance of stone walls in delineating the property
boundary of land.
(2) The scenic importance of stone walls along the designated scenic
roadway and the neighborhood.
(3) The impact that the proposed plans would have on the historical
integrity of the stone wall(s).
(4) The ability of a plan to show due regard for stone walls and not
disturb any identified unique and significant archaeological sites.
(5) The retention of stone walls whenever possible and their proper
maintenance.
(6) Breaks for roads, utility easements or fire lanes such that they are
the minimum necessary and are sufficient to provide emergency
vehicles clear access onto and off the site.
C. Staff reviews. The Town Manager may designate a member of his/her
professional staff to render a decision on an application on behalf of the
Commission for work categories listed in Subsection C(3) hereof. In
order to be eligible for a staff review, two copies of a completed
application form for a certificate of appropriateness signed by the
applicant and owner of the subject property must be submitted. A
detailed description of the work to be performed is also required, along
with labeled and dated current photographs of the property. In some
cases, manufacturer's specs, product information, elevations or other
technical or descriptive information may also be required. Requests for
approval of dumpster enclosures and fences require submission of a
site plan.
(1) Unfavorable staff review. In order to qualify for staff-level review
and approval, the work must conform to the guidelines outlined and
comply with all other applicable regulations. Should staff
determine that the application does not conform to the guidelines,
it shall be scheduled before the full Commission for a formal
hearing and decision.
(2) Favorable staff review. Staff shall issue a stamped certificate of
appropriateness just as the full Commission does, and the staff
member issuing it shall sign his/her name to the approval.
(3) Work categories eligible for staff review.
§ 260-62 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-62
C:672
(a) Dumpster enclosures. Wooden opaque fence styles are
appropriate dumpster enclosures. Such fences shall have flat
tops, preferably capped, as this not only gives a finished look
but also protects the end grain of the wood, lending a longer
life for the fence. Most flat-board, closed-space, wooden fences
are acceptable. Stockade fences shall not be approved. Metal
posts may be used but should be placed inside the enclosure
and be completely concealed from view by the fence face.
(b) Fences, gates and arbors. Capped flat-board, closed-space,
wooden fences are acceptable. Lattice toppers are also
appropriate, provided that they do not increase the fence
height beyond seven feet. Such toppers shall be proportioned
consistent with the following: For a fence height totaling six
feet, 4.5 feet shall be board fence with 18 inches of lattice; this
amounts to a 3:1 ratio of board fence to topper. Traditional
spaced picket fences shall also be approved at heights not
exceeding four feet. The space between pickets shall not
exceed the width of one picket; a tighter spacing is preferred.
Stockade-style, chain-link and vinyl fence proposals shall not
be eligible for staff-level review and approval and are generally
not approved by the Commission.
(c) Awnings, except as signs. Any awning making use of text or
graphics to advertise a business name or location shall be
considered a sign and must be reviewed as such by the full
HDC. Other awnings, in use as sun shields, for sheltering of
merchandise or customers, for conservation of energy, or
simply to dress up a storefront, add architectural interest or
make a building more inviting, are encouraged. Awning
materials should be soft canvas, acrylic or vinyl rather than
wood or metal. Awnings should be installed without damaging
the building or visually impairing distinctive architectural
features. Awnings may be fixed or retractable and must
provide at least eight feet of clearance from the bottom edge to
grade.
(d) Replace/repair in kind where tax credits are requested.
Ordinary repairs/replacements in kind require no certificate of
appropriateness. However, if state or local tax credits are
requested, a certificate is necessary. This provision empowers
staff to issue such certificate if the following conditions are
met: Deteriorated architectural features should be repaired
rather than replaced whenever possible. If replacement is
necessary, the new feature should match the existing or
original feature in design, composition, texture, material and
other visual qualities. Replacement of missing features should
be substantiated by documentary, physical or pictorial
evidence. Replacement-in-kind of nonconforming materials or
§ 260-62 CHARTER § 260-62
C:673
§ 260-63. Decisions.
§ 260-64. Demolition.
features exceeding 25% of the total shall require full
Commission review and decision.
A. The Commission or municipal professional staff, as designated by the
Town Manager, shall either approve, approve with conditions or deny
an application and issue all of its decisions in writing. Staff denial
constitutes referral to the full Commission. Such decisions shall include
an explanation of the reasons and basis of each decision within the
disposition.
B. In the case of a decision not to issue a certificate of appropriateness,
the Commission shall include the basis for its conclusion that the
proposed activity would be incompatible with those aspects of the
structure, accessories or stone walls, or with aspects of the district and/
or outlying properties generally, that the Commission has determined to
be historically, architecturally or archaeologically significant.
C. All decisions shall reflect the Commission's Rules of Procedure and the
Town's Standards and Guidelines for Historic Properties.
D. The Commission or staff shall forward a copy of the decision to the
applicant.
E. Extensions. Failure of the Commission to act within 45 days from the
date of a completed application shall be deemed to constitute approval
unless an extension is agreed upon mutually by the applicant and the
Commission.
F. Continuations. A continuation for a period of up to 90 days from the
date a completed application was filed may be granted by the
Commission in the event that the Commission finds that the
circumstances of a particular application require further time for
additional study and information that cannot be obtained within the
forty-five-day application filing period. Notification of this continuation
shall be made to the applicant within seven days of the decision to
continue.
A. Standards for decision.
(1) If the Commission is presented with an application for the removal,
relocation, alteration or demolition of a structure, its accessories
and/or a stone wall and finds that the approval of such an
application would pose a significant threat or total loss to the Town,
state or nation, it shall endeavor to work out with the owner an
economically feasible plan for the preservation of the structure,
accessories, and/or stone wall.
§ 260-62 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-64
C:674
§ 260-65. Exemptions.
(2) Applications for demolition shall require proof that the retention of
the structure, accessory or stone wall would constitute a public
safety hazard (as defined by the Rhode Island Building Code)122
which cannot be eliminated by any economic means available to the
owner. If the Commission remains unconvinced that retention is a
hazard, the Commission shall forward its rejection of the
application for demolition to the Building Official.
B. External considerations. If any of the following conditions apply, the
Commission may approve the application for a certificate:
(1) Preservation of such structure, accessory or stone wall is a
deterrent to a major improvement program which will significantly
benefit the Town.
(2) Preservation of such structure, accessory or stone wall would cause
undue or unreasonable financial hardship to the owner, taking into
account the financial resources available to the owner, including
the sale of the structure to any purchaser willing and able to
preserve such structure.
(3) Preservation of such structure, accessory or stone wall would not
be in the best interest of the community as a whole.
C. Alternatives to demolition and removal.
(1) When considering an application to demolish or remove a
structure, accessory or stone wall of historic, cultural, architectural
or archaeological value, the Commission shall assist the owner in
identifying and evaluating alternatives to demolition.
(2) In addition to any other criteria, the Commission shall also consider
whether there is a likelihood that some person or group of persons
other than the current owner is willing to purchase, move and
preserve such structure or accessory and whether the owner has
made continuing, bona fide and reasonable efforts to sell the
structure to any such purchaser.
A. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent replacement-inkind,
painting, routine maintenance or repair of any structure,
accessory or stone wall within a historic district, outlying property or
along a scenic road, provided that such maintenance or repair does not
result in any change of design, type of material, or appearance of the
exterior of the structure, accessory or stone wall. The following work
categories are specifically exempt:
122. Editor's Note: For the State Building Code, see R.I.G.L. § 23-27.3-100.1 et seq.
§ 260-64 CHARTER § 260-65
C:675
§ 260-66. Appeals.
§ 260-67. Enforcement.
(1) Replacement- or repair-in-kind, except replacement of
nonconforming materials or features exceeding 25% of the total
building exterior.
(2) Ordinary maintenance and repair.
(3) Storm windows/storm doors.
(4) Gutters, downspouts and chimney caps.
(5) Flat roofs where not visible from the street.
(6) Site work and appurtenances, including driveways, walkways,
terraces, garden furnishings, play sets, and the like.
(7) Painting/new paint colors.
(8) Window boxes.
(9) Temporary signs. (See the Sign Ordinance for definition.)123
(10) Mechanical equipment, including chillers, condensers, heating
units. Such equipment must comply with the State Building
Code.124
B. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the construction,
alteration, repair, relocation or demolition of any structure or accessory
previously allowed under a permit issued by the Building Inspector
prior to the passage of this article.
A. Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by a decision of the
Historic District Commission shall have the right to appeal such
decision to the Zoning Board of Review.
B. When hearing appeals from the Commission's decision(s), the Zoning
Board of Review shall not substitute its own judgment for that of the
Commission but must consider the issue upon the findings and record
of the Commission. The Zoning Board of Review shall not reverse a
Commission decision except on a finding of a prejudicial procedural
error, clear error, or lack of support by the weight of the evidence in
record. All such decisions by the Zoning Board of Review shall be in
writing and shall articulate and explain the reasons and basis of its
decision. Copies of such a decision shall be sent to the Commission.
A. The Zoning Enforcement Officer and/or the Planning Director shall be
responsible for the enforcement of this article.
123. Editor's Note: See Art. VII, Signs, § 260-27, Definitions; computations.
124. Editor's Note: See R.I.G.L. § 23-27.3-100.1 et seq.
§ 260-65 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-67
C:676
B. The Town Solicitor may bring an action against any property owner who
fails to comply with the requirements of this article when authorized to
do so. Such actions shall be brought in any court of competent
jurisdiction.
C. The Town may seek restraining orders and injunctive relief to restrain
and enjoin the violation or threatened violation of this chapter and in
addition may seek monetary fines for any violation of the chapter.
§ 260-67 CHARTER § 260-67
C:677

ARTICLE XII
Telecommunications Towers
[Added 8-25-2003 by Ord. No. 737; amended 6-6-2005 by Ord. No.
755]
§ 260-68. Purpose and intent.
A. The purpose of this article is to establish general guidelines for the
siting of wireless communications towers and antennas. It is specifically
recognized that this article is subordinate to the Federal
Telecommunications Act of 1996. If any provision of this article is found
to be in conflict with the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, it is
the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 that will be controlling.
B. The goals of this article are to:
(1) Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse
impacts of towers and antennas;
(2) Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas;
(3) Minimize the total number of towers throughout the community;
(4) Strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites as
a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use
towers;
(5) Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the
extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the
community is minimal;
(6) Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way
that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and
antennas through careful design, siting, landscape screening, and
innovative camouflaging techniques;
(7) Encourage users of antennas to locate them, to the extent possible,
inside of existing clock towers, bell steeples, church steeples and
similar structures, and on existing light poles, signs and other
similar structures, in such a manner as to minimize the adverse
visual impact of the antennas;
(8) Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services
to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively and
efficiently; and
(9) Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure
through engineering and careful siting of tower structures.
C. In furtherance of these goals, East Greenwich shall give due
consideration to the Town's Comprehensive Community Plan, Zoning
Map, existing land uses, and environmentally sensitive areas in
approving sites for the location of towers and antennas.
§ 260-68 CHARTER § 260-69
C:679
§ 260-69. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth
below:
ANTENNA — Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted in or
on a tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate
or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio
frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals
or other communication signals.
FAA — Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC — Federal Communications Commission.
HEIGHT — When referring to a tower or other structure, the distance
measured from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on the
tower or other structure, including the base pad and any antenna.
PREEXISTING TOWERS AND PREEXISTING ANTENNAS — Any tower or
antenna for which a building permit or special use permit has been properly
issued prior to the effective date of this article, including permitted towers
or antennas that have not yet been constructed so long as such approval is
current and not expired.
TOWER — Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for
the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio and
other communication purposes, including self-supporting lattice towers,
guyed towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television
transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular
telephone towers, and the like. The term includes the structure and any
support thereto.
§ 260-70. Applicability.
A. New towers and antennas. All new towers and antennas in East
Greenwich shall be subject to these regulations.
B. Amateur radio station operators/receive-only antennas. This article
shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is
under 70 feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally
licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for
receive-only antennas.
C. Preexisting towers or antennas. Preexisting towers and preexisting
antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of this article,
other than the requirements of § 260-71G and H.
D. AM array. For the purposes of implementing this article, an AM array,
consisting of one or more tower units and supporting ground system
which functions as one AM broadcasting antenna, shall be considered
one tower. Measurements for setbacks and separation distances shall
be measured from the outer perimeter of the towers included in the AM
§ 260-69 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-70
C:680
§ 260-71. General requirements.
array. Additional tower units may be added within the perimeter of the
AM array by right.
A. Permitted zoning districts. Telecommunications towers shall be
permitted by special use permit issued after public hearing by the
Zoning Board of Review in the districts noted on Table 1,125 subject to
the provisions of this article and the underlying zoning district.
Telecommunications towers shall be prohibited in all other zoning
districts except by a use variance from the Zoning Board of Review.126
B. Antennas. Telecommunications antennas not attached to a
telecommunications tower may be permitted by special use permit
issued after public hearing by the Zoning Board of Review as an
accessory use to any commercial, industrial, office, institutional or
public utility structure, provided that:
(1) The antenna is completely contained within the structure.
(2) Any communication equipment or accessory building complies with
all other applicable zoning requirements and building codes.
(3) All requirements for public notice and public hearing as otherwise
requited by this article and by this chapter are met.
C. Public notice. For the purposes of this article, any special use request,
use or dimensional variance request or appeal of a special use shall
require public notice to all abutting property owners in addition to any
notice otherwise required by this chapter.
D. Historic District. Telecommunications towers shall be prohibited in the
Historic District and within 500 feet of any outlying historic structure
as identified in Article XI, § 260-58, of this chapter except by a use
variance from the Zoning Board of Review and a certificate of approval
from the Historic District Commission.
E. Evidence. Applications for a use variance or a special use permit shall
be accompanied by evidence that the proposed tower cannot be located
in a permitted district. Such evidence shall consist of the following
information for a minimum of three sites:
(1) Site plans;
(2) Photographs of the site and surrounding areas; and
(3) Written documentation of the lack of a site in a permitted district.
125. Editor's Note: Table 1, Table of Permitted Uses by Zone, is attached to this chapter.
126. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 260-70 CHARTER § 260-71
C:681
F. Removal of abandoned towers. Any telecommunications tower that is
not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered
abandoned. The owner of an abandoned tower is required to remove
the same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the Town notifying the
owner of the abandonment. Failure to remove an abandoned tower shall
be grounds to remove the tower at the owner's expense. If there are two
or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become
effective until all users cease using the tower.
G. Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower
shall provide to the Zoning Enforcement Officer and Planning Director
an inventory of its existing towers, antennas and/or sites approved for
towers or antennas, that are either within the jurisdiction of East
Greenwich or within one mile of the border thereof, including specific
information about the location, height and design of each tower. The
Zoning Enforcement Officer and Planning Director may share such
information with other applicants applying for special use permits or
use variances under this article or other organizations seeking to locate
antennas within the jurisdiction of East Greenwich; provided, however,
that the Zoning Enforcement Officer and Planning Director are not, by
sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that
such sites are available or suitable.
H. State or federal requirements. All towers and antennas must meet or
exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any
other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to
regulate towers and antennas. If such standards are changed, then the
owners of the towers and antennas governed by this article shall bring
such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards
and regulations within six months of the effective date of such
standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is
mandated by the controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring
towers or antennas into compliance with such revised standards and
regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or
antenna at the owner's expense.
I. Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of
towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in
compliance with standards contained in applicable state or local
building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are
published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from
time to time. If upon inspection the Town concludes that a tower fails to
comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to
persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of
the tower, the owner shall have 30 days to bring such tower into
compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such tower into
compliance within said 30 days shall constitute grounds for the removal
of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense.
J. Municipal use. Towers shall provide space for Town of East Greenwich
municipal use at no cost to the Town.
§ 260-71 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-71
C:682
§ 260-72. Development standards.
The following standards shall apply to all applications:
K. Performance bond. Each applicant shall post a performance bond with
the Town of East Greenwich to cover the cost of removal of its
abandoned tower(s) and the cost of maintaining its tower(s) in
accordance with building codes and safety standards and, if applicable,
FAA regulations.
A. A reasonable effort shall be made to utilize existing structures for
telecommunications antennas. Should an existing structure not be
utilized, evidence as to why an existing structure is not to be utilized
shall be submitted.
B. Town-owned sites that are located in the prospective development area
and which could potentially accommodate the proposed antennas and
communication towers shall be identified.
C. Communication towers shall be set back from all property lines a
minimum of one foot for each one foot of tower height. When the
property abuts a residential district or historic district, the setback
distance shall be 1 1/2 feet for each one foot of tower height. All guy
wires and guyed towers shall be clearly marked so as to be visible at all
times, and all guy wires shall be set back from all property boundaries
the minimum of the zoning district in which they are located.
D. All communication tower supports and peripheral anchors shall be
located entirely within the boundaries of the development site and shall
be set back from all property boundaries the minimum of the zoning
district in which the communication tower is located, but no less than
25 feet. When located in or abutting a residential district or historic
district, the minimum setback distance shall be 35 feet. Supports and/or
peripheral anchors shall not encroach upon the minimum landscaped
screening requirement. All supports and anchors shall have, at a
minimum, a ten-foot horizontal setback from any overhead utility line.
E. Communication equipment buildings and structures shall be considered
accessory uses and comply with the following setbacks:
(1) One hundred square feet or less, shall be set back from all property
boundaries a minimum of 15 feet, unless located within or abutting
a residential district or historic district, which shall require a
minimum of 25 feet;
(2) Greater than 100 square feet, shall be set back from all property
boundaries a minimum of 25 feet, unless located within or abutting
a residential district or historic district, which shall require a
minimum of 35 feet.
F. Communication towers shall be constructed and situated to fit in with
the topography and features of the surrounding environment. Towers
§ 260-71 CHARTER § 260-72
C:683
shall be completely screened from all adjacent properties and streets,
and appropriately camouflaged if required. Plantings shall be of a
height and density to ensure complete screening. Screening shall
consist of plants and/or trees accepted by the Chapter A263,
Development and Subdivision Review Regulations, or as accepted by
the Director of Planning. Screening shall comprise 10% of the minimum
established setback requirement, but shall not be less than five feet
in width unless located in or abutting a residential district or historic
district, which will require that it not be less than 10 feet in width.
Screenings may be waived by the Zoning Board of Review on those
sides or sections that are adjacent to undevelopable land or land not
in public view. Existing vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum
extent possible and may be used as a substitute for or supplement
towards meeting the landscaped screening requirement. The owner of
the property shall be responsible for all maintenance and shall replace
any dead plantings within 30 days.
G. Communication towers shall be enclosed by a fence no less than eight
feet in height or more than 10 feet in height from finished grade. Access
shall be through a locked gate. Communication towers in or abutting a
residential district or historic district shall have opaque fencing made
of wood or stone. The Town of East Greenwich reserves the right to
choose the color of the tower.
H. Communication towers shall not be artificially lighted except as
required for public safety purposes, by the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA), or by the Town.
I. No signs shall be allowed on any communication tower except as
required for public safety purposes, by the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC), or by the Town.
J. Separation distance between towers.
(1) Communication towers shall be located so as to comply with the
following standards for the minimum separation distance from
existing communication towers and/or communication towers that
have received a valid special use permit:
Minimum Separation Between Towers
(by tower type)
Proposed
Tower Type
Self-
SupportingGuyed
Monopole -
75 Feet in
Height or
Greater
Monopole -
Less than
75 Feet in
Height
Selfsupporting
3 miles 3 miles 1.5 miles 2,500 feet
Guyed 3 miles 3 miles 1.5 miles 2,500 feet
§ 260-72 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-72
C:684
§ 260-73. Nonconforming uses.
§ 260-74. Effective date.
This article shall take effect August 25, 2003.
Minimum Separation Between Towers
(by tower type)
Proposed
Tower Type
Self-
SupportingGuyed
Monopole -
75 Feet in
Height or
Greater
Monopole -
Less than
75 Feet in
Height
Monopole - 75
feet in height
or greater
1.5 miles 1.5 miles 1.5 miles 2,500 feet
Monopole -
less than 75
feet in height
2,500 feet 2,500
feet
2,500 feet 2,500 feet
(2) Separation distances shall be calculated and applied respective of
jurisdictional boundaries.
A. Not an expansion of nonconforming use. Towers that are constructed
and antennas that are installed in accordance with the provisions of this
article shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a
nonconforming use or structure.
B. Preexisting towers. Preexisting towers shall be allowed to continue
their usage as they presently exist. Routine maintenance (including
replacement with a new tower of like construction and height) shall be
permitted on such preexisting towers. New construction other than
routine maintenance on a preexisting tower shall comply with the
requirements of this article.
C. Rebuilding damaged or destroyed nonconforming towers or antennas.
Notwithstanding § 260-70C, bona fide nonconforming towers or
antennas that are damaged or destroyed may be rebuilt without having
to first obtain a special use permit. The type, height and location of the
tower on site shall be of the same type and intensity as the original
facility approved. Building permits to rebuild the facility shall comply
with the then applicable building codes and shall be obtained within
180 days from the date the facility is damaged or destroyed. If no
permit is obtained or if said permit expires, the tower or antenna shall
be deemed abandoned as specified in § 260-71F.
§ 260-72 CHARTER § 260-74
C:685

ARTICLE XIIA
Home Occupations
[Added 5-23-2005 by Ord. No. 753]
§ 260-74.1. Purpose and intent.
§ 260-74.2. Definition.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HOME OCCUPATION — See § 260-6.
§ 260-74.3. Standards.
A. This article is designed to regulate the conduct of business within the
home and to achieve the following purposes and objectives:
(1) Preserve and protect residential neighborhoods from the adverse
impacts of home occupation activities.
(2) Permit residents of East Greenwich the ability to use their homes as
a place of livelihood or to supplement personal or family income.
(3) Establish criteria and standards for home occupations conducted in
dwelling units and structures accessory to dwelling units.
B. These regulations are not intended to restrict the use of a residence by
the occupants for the following purposes: occasional yard or garage
sales; party-related sales when conducted less than once per month;
hobbies not undertaken for financial gain and seasonal sales of flowers
and/or vegetables grown on site, provided no additional structure is
constructed from which to sell the goods; nor are these regulations
intended to restrict farming activities as permitted by this chapter.
A. The home occupation shall be conducted indoors and shall be clearly
subordinate, incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling and
accessory structures for residential purposes and shall occupy a floor
area no greater than 20% of the floor area of the dwelling unit or
relevant accessory structure.
B. Outward appearance. The exterior appearance of the residential and
accessory structures shall not be changed as a result of or for the
purposes of the home occupation.
C. Impacts. There shall be no outside storage or window display. Noise,
dust, odors, heat, glare, noxious fumes or vibrations shall not result
from the home occupation. Mechanical or electronic equipment which
is incidental to the home occupation may be used, provided it does not
create visible or audible interference in radio, telephone or television
receivers or cause fluctuations in line voltage off the premises. The
home occupation shall not interfere with the delivery of utilities or
§ 260-74.1 CHARTER § 260-74.3
C:687
§ 260-74.4. Permitted uses.
other service to the area. The use shall not involve the storage or use of
explosive, radioactive or other hazardous materials on site.
D. Traffic. The home occupation shall not generate greater traffic volume
than would normally be expected in the particular residential zone in
which the home occupation is conducted.
E. Parking. The parking of vehicles shall not create safety hazards or
congestion. No additional on-site parking shall be permitted. Parking
other than in a designated driveway shall not occur within the front
yard between the street and the dwelling unit.
F. Employees. The home occupation is to be conducted only by members
of the family residing in the dwelling.
G. Limits on classes or instruction. If the home occupation is the type in
which classes are held or instruction given, there shall be not more than
two students or pupils in the dwelling unit or on the premises at any one
time, and hours of instruction shall be limited to from 9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m.
H. Limits on clients/customers. If the home occupation is the type in which
customers or clients visit the premises, there shall be no more than two
clients or customers in the dwelling unit or on the premises during any
period of 60 consecutive minutes, and hours of operation shall be
limited to from 9:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
I. Allowable number of home occupations. The total number of home
occupations conducted with a dwelling unit is not limited, except that
the cumulative impact of all home occupations conducted within the
dwelling unit or on the premises thereof shall not be greater than the
impact of one home occupation as set forth in these regulations.
J. Compliance. Home occupations shall comply with all local, state or
federal requirements pertinent to the activity pursued, including
licensing, and the requirements of or permission granted by this
chapter shall not be construed as an exemption from such regulations.
K. Signs. There shall be no signs advertising, directing or otherwise
identifying or indicating the presence of any home occupation.
L. Deliveries to be made to the home concerning home occupations shall
be deliveries ordinarily made in residential neighborhoods.
A. Home occupations shall blend with their neighboring surrounds and
shall not impair the use and value of residentially zoned areas for
residential purposes. The following uses shall be allowed under this
article:
(1) Dressmaking, sewing and tailoring.
§ 260-74.3 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-74.4
C:688
§ 260-74.5. Prohibited uses.
The following uses are prohibited and shall not be allowed under this article
as home occupations:
(2) Telephone solicitation.
(3) Tutoring.
(4) Artist's or craft studio.
(5) Professional office for attorneys, real estate agents, insurance
agents, accountants, stockbrokers, engineers, architects,
landscape architects, musicians, writers, data programmers and
sales representatives.
(6) Photography, cosmetology, retail sales by mail order or electronic
means, catering and light assembly of goods.
(7) Information and data processing via facsimile or the Internet.
(8) Consulting.
B. Proposed home occupations that are not expressly permitted and are
not prohibited may be granted approval by application to the Zoning
Board of Review for a special use permit.
A. Animal hospitals, stables, kennels and dog breeding.
B. Dry cleaners.
C. Eating and drinking establishments.
D. Mortuaries and undertakers.
E. Sales of, repairs, painting or body work to motor vehicles, recreational
vehicles or boats.
F. Service and repair shops, including but not limited to small engine
repairs.
G. Welding shops.
H. Private clubs.
I. Adult businesses and entertainment by the Internet or otherwise.
J. Rentals of equipment, tools, trailers and vehicles.
K. Retail sales of goods not otherwise permitted under § 260-74.4A(6).
L. Food service.
§ 260-74.4 CHARTER § 260-74.6
C:689
§ 260-74.6. Inspections; enforcement.
The Building Official/Zoning Enforcement Officer may inspect the premises
to determine compliance. Any violations of this article shall be subject to
enforcement action by the Town as provided by this chapter.
§ 260-74.6 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-74.6
C:690
ARTICLE XIII
Procedures for General Administration
§ 260-75. Appointment of local official and agencies.
The following local officials and agencies shall be responsible for the daily
administration and enforcement of this chapter and the Zoning Map(s).
§ 260-76. Maintenance and update.
A. The Building Official shall serve as the Zoning Enforcement Officer. The
appointing authority may assign other professional Town staff to serve
in this capacity as well.
B. The Director of Planning, or his/her designee, shall work in conjunction
with the Zoning Enforcement Officer, assisting in the interpretation of
the chapter. The Director of Planning, at the direction of the Town
Manager, shall be responsible for the maintenance and update of the
text of this chapter and shall review the text and map at reasonable
intervals and identify any changes necessary to the chapter following
changes to the Comprehensive Community Plan. The Director of
Planning shall perform such other duties and take such actions as may
be assigned in the chapter.
C. The Town Clerk shall serve as the custodian of this chapter and the
Zoning Map(s) created hereunder and as the official keeper of Zoning
Board of Review decisions.
D. The Director of Public Works, at the direction of the Town Manager,
shall be responsible for the maintenance of the Zoning Map and to
depict any changes on the Map.
A. Maintenance and update of the text.
(1) The Director of Planning shall inspect this chapter on file with the
Town Clerk on an annual basis to ensure that all amendments
approved within the past year are reflected therein.
(2) On a biannual basis, the Director of Planning shall review this
chapter to ensure it is in compliance with the most recent
Comprehensive Community Plan, as may be amended. The Director
of Planning shall forward findings and proposed amendments, if
any, to the Planning Board and the Town Council for review and
adoption, as provided in Article XIV, Procedures for Adoption and
Amendment.
B. Maintenance and update of the Zoning Map(s). The Director of Public
Works, at the direction of the Town Manager, shall ensure that the
official Zoning Map(s) on file in the Town Clerk's office are accurate and
that zoning amendments which impact the Zoning Map(s) are depicted
on the Map(s) within 90 days of such authorized change.
§ 260-75 CHARTER § 260-77
C:691
§ 260-77. General responsibilities of Zoning Enforcement Officer.
§ 260-78. Interpretation.
§ 260-79. Violations and penalties.
A. General enforcement duties. It shall be the duty of the Zoning
Enforcement Officer (ZEO) to enforce this chapter. The ZEO shall issue
any required permits or certificates, collect required fees relating to the
issuance of the permits or certificates, keep records showing the
compliance of uses of land, authorize the commencement of uses or
development under the provisions of the chapter, inspect suspected
violations, issue violation notices with required corrective action,
collect fines for violations, and perform such other duties and take such
other actions as may be assigned in the chapter. The ZEO shall be
responsible to the Town Manager.
B. Zoning certificates. In order to provide guidance or clarification, the
ZEO shall, within 15 days of receipt of a completed zoning certificate
application, issue a zoning certificate or provide information to the
requesting party as to his determination regarding the legality of a use
or structure. In the event that no written response is provided within
said time, the requesting party shall have the right to appeal to the
Zoning Board of Review for determination.
A. Interpretation. Where questions regarding the language in the chapter
arise, the ZEO shall consult the Director of Planning, or his/her
designee, for assistance in interpretation of the language. The final
decision as to interpretation shall rest with the ZEO. All decisions
(interpretations) may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Review.
B. Clarification and ordinance revision. Upon resolution by the ZEO (or the
Zoning Board of Review, in the case of an appeal), the Director of
Planning shall prepare an amendment to the chapter clarifying the
unclear language of this chapter so that the intent is clearly understood
by all users of the chapter. This proposed amendment shall then be
submitted to the Planning Board and Town Council for review and
approval, per Article XIV of this chapter.
A. Classification of penalty.
(1) Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who or
which violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter or any requirement imposed by the Zoning Board of
Review shall be subject to a monetary fine as provided herein.
(2) Notwithstanding Subsection A(1) of this section, the Town may
cause suit to be brought in any court having jurisdiction over the
Town of East Greenwich to restrain the violation of or to compel
compliance with the provisions of the chapter. The Town may
consolidate an action for injunctive relief with an action for the
§ 260-77 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-79
C:692
imposition of monetary fines under this chapter in any court of
competent jurisdiction.
B. Penalties.
(1) Where the ZEO determines a violation to have occurred, the ZEO
shall have the authority to issue an injunction and an order to
restore the property to its previolation state.
(2) The ZEO shall also require the payment of a penalty fee for such
violation. Each day any violation of any provision of this chapter
(including the failure to perform any act or duty required by this
chapter) shall constitute a separate offense. Penalties shall be as
follows:
(a) Installation of a sign not in conformance with the chapter: $50
per day.
(b) Installation of an accessory structure not in conformance with
the chapter: $100 per day.
(c) Use of property not in conformance with this chapter: $250 per
day.
(d) Noncompliance with a decision of the Zoning Board of Review:
$250 per day.
(e) Construction, alteration, enlargement, removal or demolition
of a structure prior to issuance of a building permit where one
is required: $100 per day.
(f) Construction of parking lot/parking structure prior to approval
of parking plan: $100 per day.
(3) Where the violation is advanced for judicial action, as noted in
§ 260-79A(2), the court may assess a penalty of up to $500 for each
violation, where each day of the existence of any such violation
shall be deemed to be a separate offense. The court may also
require restoration of the property to previolation conditions.
C. Violations not exclusive. Violations of this chapter are in addition to any
other violation enumerated within the Town of East Greenwich
ordinances and Code and in no way limits the penalties, actions or
abatement procedures which may be taken by the Town of East
Greenwich for any violation of this chapter which is also a violation of
any other ordinance or Code provision of the Town of East Greenwich or
statutes of the State of Rhode Island.
D. Reporting of violations. Enforcement actions shall be reported by the
ZEO to the property owner, together with a compliance order. The order
shall describe the measures required to correct the violation.
§ 260-79 CHARTER § 260-79
C:693
§ 260-80. Right of appeal.127
An appeal from any decision of an administrative officer or agency charged
in this chapter with interpretation or enforcement of any of its provisions
may be taken to the Zoning Board of Review by an aggrieved party in a
manner described in Article XV, Administration and Procedures of Zoning
Board of Review. An appeal from a decision of the Zoning Board of Review
may be taken by an aggrieved party to the Superior Court for Kent County,
notice of which shall be given in accordance with R.I.G.L. § 45-24-69.1.
E. Judicial aid in enforcement. Where compliance orders are not followed
within the period set in the order and where no appeal has been filed
with the Zoning Board of Review, the Town shall have the authority to
request assistance from the Kent County Superior Court, East
Greenwich Municipal Court, or any other court of competent
jurisdiction to enforce this chapter in accordance with Rhode Island
General Law § 45-24-62.
127. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 260-79 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-80
C:694
ARTICLE XIV
Procedures for Adoption and Amendment
§ 260-81. Powers of Council.
For the purpose of promoting the public health, safety and general welfare,
the Town Council shall have the power to adopt, amend or repeal, and to
provide for the administration, interpretation and enforcement of a zoning
ordinance in accordance with Rhode Island General Laws § 45-24-27 et
seq. Provisions of this chapter shall be set forth in text and map(s), and
may incorporate tables or other material. This chapter, and all amendments
thereto, shall be consistent with the East Greenwich Comprehensive
Community Plan as described in Rhode Island General Law § 45-24-27 et
seq., as may be amended, and shall provide for the implementation of said
plan.
§ 260-82. Procedure.
A. Initiation of application.
(1) Requests to amend this chapter may be initiated by the East
Greenwich Town Council, Planning Board or any real property
owner in the Town. Applications for amendments shall be made in
the office of the Town Clerk on a form provided therefor; however,
the Planning Department shall review the application for
completeness and compliance with this article prior to its
acceptance.
(2) Immediately upon receipt of a complete application the Town Clerk
shall forward such application to the Town Council, Planning Board
and Planning Department.
B. Authorized applicants.
(1) In the event an application for amendment is proposed by a
property owner, the application shall be signed by the owner of the
real property which is the subject of the application or by the agent
or attorney for the owner of such property. The authority of an
agent or attorney for a real property owner applicant shall be in
writing and shall be presented at the time the application is filed.
(2) Application initiated by the Town Council or Planning Board to
change the district map shall conform to the Comprehensive
Community Plan, but none of the requirements of this section shall
apply.
C. Fee schedule. Application for amendment to the ordinance or map(s)
shall be accompanied by fees as follows: [Amended 12-17-2007 by
Ord. No. 786.4]
§ 260-81 CHARTER § 260-82
C:695
Fee Schedule
Zoning Amendment Applications
Proposal Nonrefundable Fee
Comprehensive Community Plan
amendment
$500*
Rezoning to Residential District $1,000*
Rezoning to Commercial, Light
Industrial, or Waterfront District
$1,000*
Amendment to general requirements
or use of any zone
$500*
Request for Town Council continuance $200*
Rezoning to Planned Development
(PD) or to Mixed Use Planned
Development (MUPD)
$1,000 plus $20 per acre
exclusive of wetlands*
Amendment to Planned Development
(PD) or Mixed Use Planned
Development (MUPD)
$500*
Request for extension of time on an
approved PD or MUPD
$100*
*NOTE: In addition to this fee, the applicant shall bear the expense
of the public notice, notification to abutters (if applicable) and
stenographers. A nonrefundable deposit of $250 shall be required to
cover the expense of stenographic services.
(1) To protect the public health, safety and welfare, the Town may
require peer review of expert witness reports and testimony on
behalf of applicants. A list of peers and their fees shall be
maintained by the Town for selection by the Town, and the cost of
peer review shall be borne by the applicant. [Added 5-22-2006 by
Ord. No. 767]
(2) The Town reserves the right to place a lien on the subject property
for any fees not paid in full. [Added 5-22-2006 by Ord. No. 767]
D. Hearings.
(1) Hearing(s) by Planning Board; report to Town Council. Upon
receipt of the zoning application from the Town Clerk, the Planning
Board shall study and make recommendations on said application.
The Planning Board shall seek the advice of the Planning
Department and shall report to the Town Council within 45 days
after receipt of the proposal unless an extension has been
requested by the applicant or has been mutually agreed upon by
the Planning Board and the applicant. The Planning Board's report
to the Town Council shall include, but not be limited to:
§ 260-82 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-82
C:696
(a) The Planning Board's recommendation;
(b) A summary of its findings;
(c) A statement as to the general consistency of the proposal with
the Comprehensive Community Plan, including the goals and
policies statement, the implementation program, and all other
applicable elements of the Comprehensive Community Plan;
and
(d) A demonstration of the Planning Board's recognition and
consideration of the applicable purposes of this chapter.
(2) Hearing(s) by the Town Council. The Town Council shall hold a
public hearing within 65 days of receipt of a proposal. For the
purposes of this article, "receipt of a proposal" is defined as the
date of the first Town Council meeting held following the receipt of
the Planning Board's report. The Town Council shall render a
decision on any such proposal within 45 days after the date of
completion of its public hearing. Extensions of deadlines require
the applicant's consent.
E. Notice and hearing requirements. No zoning ordinance shall be
adopted, repealed or amended until after a public hearing has been
held upon the question before the Town Council in compliance with this
section.
(1) Notice.
(a) When any proposed general amendment to this chapter is
proposed, whether requiring a change to the Zoning Map or
not, the Town Council shall first give notice of a public hearing
by publication of a notice in a newspaper of general circulation
within East Greenwich at least once each week for three
successive weeks prior to the date of such hearing. This notice
may appear during the week in which the hearing is to be held.
The notice shall advertise that all persons interested in this
matter shall be given the opportunity to be heard on the
proposed amendment.
(b) Written notice, which may be a copy of said newspaper notice,
shall be mailed to the Associate Director of the Division of
Planning of the Rhode Island Department of Administration at
least two weeks prior to the hearing.
(c) Such newspaper notice shall be published as a display
advertisement, using a type size at least as large as the normal
type size used by the newspaper in its news articles, and shall:
[1] Specify the date, time and location of the hearing.
[2] Indicate that adoption, amendment or repeal of this
chapter is under consideration.
§ 260-82 CHARTER § 260-82
C:697
[3] Contain a statement of the proposed amendments to the
ordinance that may either be printed once in its entirety or
summarized or otherwise described.
[4] Advise where and when a copy of the matter under
consideration may be obtained or examined and copied.
[5] State that the proposals shown thereon may be altered or
amended prior to the close of the public hearing as a result
of further study or because of the views expressed at the
public hearing without further advertising. Any such
alteration or amendment must be presented for comment
in the course of said hearing.
(2) Where a proposed amendment to an existing ordinance includes a
specific change in a zoning district map but does not affect districts
generally, public notice shall be given as required by Subsection
E(1) of this section, with the additional requirement that:
(a) Newspaper notice shall include a map showing the existing
and proposed boundaries, zoning district boundaries, and
existing streets and roads and their names, and city and town
boundaries where appropriate.
(b) Written notice of the date, time and place of the public hearing
and the nature and purpose thereof shall be sent to all owners
of real property whose property is located in or within not less
than 200 feet of the perimeter of the area proposed for change,
whether within the Town or within an adjacent city or town.
Notice shall also be sent to any individual or entity holding a
recorded conservation or preservation restriction on the
property that is the subject of the amendment. (Such notice
shall be sent by registered or certified mail to the last known
address of such owners as shown on the current real estate tax
assessment records of the city or town in which the property is
located.)128
(3) Where the proposed change would affect an area within 200 feet of
an abutting municipality and/or within 2,000 feet of a public or
quasi-public water source (or a private water source suitable for
public use), a notice of the public hearing shall be sent by first class
mail to the affected municipality or agency.
(4) No defect in the form of any notice under this section shall render
any ordinance or amendment invalid, unless such defect is found to
be intentional or misleading.
(5) Costs of any notice required under this section shall be borne by
the applicant.
128. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 260-82 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-82
C:698
§ 260-83. Appeals to Superior Court.
F. Decision.
(1) Upon completion of the public hearing, and within the required
time frame, the Town Council may approve, approve with
conditions, revise or deny the application for an amendment to this
chapter and the Zoning Map(s).
(2) Limitations and conditions.
(a) In granting an amendment to this chapter, the Town Council
may limit the change to one of the permitted uses in the zone to
which the subject land is rezoned and impose such limitations,
conditions and restrictions, including without limitation:
[1] Requiring the petitioner to obtain a permit or approval
from any and all state or local governmental agencies or
instrumentalities having jurisdiction over the land and use
which are the subject of the zoning change;
[2] Relating to the effectiveness or continued effectiveness of
the zoning change; and/or
[3] Relating to the use of the land as it deems necessary.
(b) The Town Council shall direct the appropriate Town
department(s) to cause the limitations and conditions so
imposed by their decision to be clearly noted on the Zoning
Map and recorded in the land evidence records; provided,
however, in the case of a conditional zone change, the
limitations, restrictions and conditions shall not be noted on
the Zoning Map until the zone change has become effective.
(3) If the permitted use for which the land has been rezoned is
abandoned or if the land is not used for the requested purpose for a
period of two years or more after the zone change becomes
effective, the Town Council may, after public notice and a public
hearing as set forth in this section, revert the land to its original
zoning use/designation before such petition was filed.
(4) If any limitation, condition or restriction in an ordinance is held to
be invalid by a court in any action, that holding shall not cause the
remainder of the ordinance to be invalid.
(5) Where an application to amend the Ordinance or Map(s) is denied
by the Town Council, an identical application shall not be accepted
by the Town Clerk's office for a period of one year following said
denial.
A. An appeal of an enactment of, or an amendment to, this chapter may be
taken to Superior Court for Kent County by filing a complaint within 30
days after such enactment or amendment has become effective, in
§ 260-82 CHARTER § 260-83
C:699
accordance with Rhode Island General Law § 45-24-71. Such appeal
may be taken by an aggrieved party or by any legal resident or
landowner of the Town of East Greenwich or by any association of
residents or landowners of the Town.
B. An appeal shall not stay the enforcement of this chapter as enacted or
amended, unless the court grants, at its discretion, a stay.
C. A complaint shall set forth with specificity the area(s) in which the
enactment or amendment does not conform with the East Greenwich
Comprehensive Community Plan and/or the manner in which it
constitutes a taking of private property without just compensation.
§ 260-83 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-83
C:700
ARTICLE XV
Administration and Procedures of Zoning Board of Review
§ 260-84. Organization.
§ 260-85. Powers and duties.
The Board shall have the following powers and duties:
A. Establishment of organization.
(1) There is hereby created a Board of Review, which shall be
appointed for a term and shall be subject to the conditions set forth
in Article XX of the East Greenwich Home Rule Charter. The word
"Board" when used in this section shall mean the Zoning Board of
Review.
(2) The Board shall consist of five members appointed by the Town
Council, each to hold office for the term of five years. Each year the
term of one member of the Board shall come up for renewal. The
Town Council shall also appoint two alternates to the Board, to be
designated as the first and second alternate members, each for
terms of one year. Where a vacancy occurs in an unexpired term of
a Board member, the Town Council shall appoint someone to
complete the term of membership.
(3) The Board as constituted at the time of the adoption of this chapter
shall be continued, and the original appointments specified in
Subsection A(1) of this section shall be deemed to have been made.
(4) The Town Council, following a public hearing on the matter, may
remove a Board member if that member misses three consecutive
meetings or 25% of the meetings during the course of one year.
B. Organization procedures.
(1) The Board shall meet once monthly if there are pending
applications. Additionally, special meetings or continuances may be
convened as necessary. The Chair or, in his absence the Acting
Chair may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses by the issuance of subpoenas.
(2) The alternate members of the Board shall sit and may actively
participate in hearings. The first alternate shall vote if a member of
the Board is unable to serve at a hearing, and the second shall vote
if two members of the Board are unable to serve at a hearing. In the
absence of the first alternate member, the second alternate
member shall serve in the position of the first alternate. No
member or alternate may vote on any matter before the Board
unless they have attended all hearings concerning such matter.
§ 260-84 CHARTER § 260-85
C:701
§ 260-86. Attendance and voting requirements.
A. To hear and decide appeals within 65 days of the date of the filing of the
appeal where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by an administrative officer or agency
in the enforcement or interpretation of this chapter, or of any ordinance
adopted pursuant hereto.129
B. To hear and decide appeals from a party aggrieved by a decision of the
Historic District Commission, pursuant to the Historical Zoning
Enabling Legislation.130
C. To authorize, upon application, in specific cases of hardship, variances
in the application of the terms of this chapter.
D. To authorize, upon application, in specific cases, special use permits.
E. To refer matters to the Planning Board or to other boards or agencies of
the Town as the Board may deem appropriate for findings and
recommendations.
F. To authorize, upon application, conditional zoning approvals where a
proposed application would otherwise be approved, except that one or
more state or federal agency approvals which are necessary are
pending. A conditional zoning approval shall be revoked in the instance
where any necessary state or federal agency approvals are not received
within a specified time period.
G. To hear and decide such other matters according to the terms of the
ordinance or other statutes and upon which such Board may be
authorized to pass under such ordinance or other statutes.
H. To determine whether new evidence/information previously unavailable
would warrant the reconsideration of a previous decision of the Board.
I. To amend and/or reconsider a previous decision of the Board, including
reconsiderations of parts of a decision.
J. To authorize by special use permit relief from the dimensional and
intensity regulations of this chapter for any use the Board authorizes by
special use permit. See Article III, § 260-8E.
A. Five active members shall be necessary to conduct a hearing. As soon
as a conflict occurs for a member, that member shall recuse him/herself
and shall not sit as an active member nor take part in the conduct of the
hearing. Only five active members shall be entitled to vote on any issue.
Alternates not considered as active members for the purpose of a
hearing may participate in the conduct of the hearing but not in the
vote.
129. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
130. Editor's Note: See R.I.G.L. § 45-24.1-1 et seq.
§ 260-85 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-86
C:702
§ 260-87. Board decisions and records.
B. The concurring vote of three of the five members of the Board sitting at
the hearing shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement,
decision or determination of any zoning administrative officer or agency
from whom an appeal was taken.
C. The concurring vote of four of the five members of the Board sitting at a
hearing shall be required to decide in favor of an applicant on
applications for variances and special use permits.
A. Following a public hearing on an application for appeal, variance or
special use permit, the Board shall render a decision within 15 days.
The Board shall include in its decision all findings of fact and
conditions, showing the vote of each member participating thereon, and
the absence of a member or his/her failure to vote.131
B. Written decisions shall be recorded in the office of the Town Clerk and
filed in the Planning Department within 30 working days from the date
when the decision was rendered and shall be a public record. The
decision shall be posted in a location visible to the public in the Town
Hall for a period of 20 days following the recording of the decision.
C. The Zoning Board of Review shall keep written minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or
if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records
of its examinations, findings of fact, and other official actions, all of
which shall be recorded and filed in the Planning Department in an
expeditious manner upon completion of the proceeding.
D. For any proceeding in which the right of appeal lies to the Superior or
Supreme Court, the Zoning Board of Review shall have the minutes
taken either by a competent stenographer or recorded by a soundrecording
device. The cost of such stenographic services shall be borne
by the applicant.
E. Any decision by the Zoning Board of Review, including any special
conditions attached thereto, shall be distributed to the applicant, to the
Zoning Enforcement Officer, Tax Assessor, the Planning Department
and to the Associate Director of the Division of Planning of the Rhode
Island Department of Administration. Any decision evidencing the
granting of a variance or special use shall also be recorded in the land
evidence records of the Town.
F. Reconsiderations of previous decisions shall be provided the same time
considerations regarding decisions, recording of decisions, minutes and
rights of appeal, as other applicable time periods.
131. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 260-86 CHARTER § 260-88
C:703
§ 260-88. Special conditions.
In granting a variance or in making any determination upon which it is
required to pass after public hearing under such zoning ordinance, the
Board may apply such special conditions that may, in its collective opinion,
be required to promote the intent and purposes of the Comprehensive
Community Plan and this chapter of the Town Code. Failure to abide by
any special conditions attached to a grant of relief shall constitute a zoning
violation. Such special conditions shall be based on competent credible
evidence on the record, be incorporated into the decision, and may include,
but are not limited to, provisions as follows:
§ 260-89. Variance and special use permit application procedure
and fees. [Amended 5-22-2006 by Ord. No. 767]
A. Minimizing adverse impact of the development upon other land,
including the type, intensity, design and performance of activities;
B. Controlling the sequence of development, including when it must be
commenced and completed;
C. Controlling the duration of use or development and the time within
which any temporary structure must be removed;
D. Assuring satisfactory installation and maintenance of required public
improvements;
E. Designating the exact location and nature of development; and
F. Establishing detailed records by submission of drawings, maps, plats or
specifications.
A. Submission of applications. All applications for variances and special
use permits may be made by any person, group, agency or corporation
by filing a completed application with the Planning Department. An
appeal to the order, requirement, decision or determination made by an
administrative officer, agency or the Historic District Commission may
be made by any aggrieved party within 20 days of administrative or
Historic District Commission action. Completed applications shall be
submitted to the Planning Department prior to or on the 15th day of the
month in order to be heard on the following month's agenda. Should the
15th fall on a day when the office is closed, the deadline shall be at the
end of the next regular business day.
(1) Complete applications for variances and special use permits shall
include, but not be limited to, the following information:
(a) Completed application form;
(b) Plat plan(s) drawn to scale showing the location of all lot and
street lines, existing and proposed structures, utilities, access/
egress, parking, on-site traffic flow, landscaping, drainage
systems, provisions for off-street (un)loading facilities,
§ 260-88 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-89
C:704
dumpsters, assessment of noise/glare/odor effects on adjacent
parcels, signs, lighting facilities and other site features;
(c) Plat map showing lot and street lines and approximate location
of structures on parcels immediately adjacent to the subject
site;
(d) Elevation drawings, where relevant;
(e) Application fees; and
(f) A map displaying the uses of all properties within a fivehundred-
foot radius of the subject property is also required for
use variances and special use permit applications.
(2) Applications for an appeal from an administrator or agency shall
include, but not be limited to, the following information:
(a) A written description of the issue in question;
(b) A scaled graphic representation of the issue, where applicable;
(c) Copies of any and all relevant correspondence and paperwork,
including copies of completed application forms;
(d) A written discussion of the grounds on which the appeal is
being sought; and
(e) The required application fees.
(3) Applications shall be accompanied by fees as follows: [Added
5-22-2006 by Ord. No. 767]
(a) Single-family and duplex residential, including in-law
apartments and residential accessory uses: $150.
(b) Multifamily residential, commercial and industrial uses: $350.
(c) Signs: $250.
(d) Appeals of single-family and duplex residential: $200.
(e) Appeals of multifamily, major and minor development, and
commercial and industrial: $500.
(f) Telecommunications: $500.
(g) Historic District: $50.
(4) Applicants are responsible for the costs of advertising and abutter
notification. A nonrefundable deposit of $50 shall be required to
cover the expense of stenographic services. [Added 5-22-2006 by
Ord. No. 767; amended 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 786.5]
§ 260-89 CHARTER § 260-89
C:705
(5) To protect the public health, safety and welfare, the Zoning Board
of Review may require peer review of expert witness reports and
testimony on behalf of applicants. A list of peers and their fees shall
be maintained by the Town for selection by the Town, and the cost
of peer review shall be borne by the applicant. All costs associated
with peer review shall be paid in full before Zoning Board of Review
approvals are recorded in the Land Evidence Records. The Town
reserves the right to place a lien on the subject property for any
fees not paid in full. [Added 5-22-2006 by Ord. No. 767]
B. Accepting and processing applications.
(1) Variances and special use permits. Upon receipt and acceptance of
a completed application, the Planning Department shall schedule
the matter before all applicable advisory boards (including the
Planning Board, the Historic District Commission and the
Conservation Commission) as well as the Zoning Board of Review.
The Planning Board shall only review those matters where it has
approval authority under the Rhode Island Development Review
Act (R.I.G.L. § 45-23-25 et seq.) or when the Zoning Board
specifically requests an advisory opinion. All advisory boards as
well as Planning Department staff shall report their findings and
recommendations (including a general statement of consistency of
the request with the Comprehensive Community Plan) in writing to
the Zoning Board of Review within 30 days of receipt of the
application.
(2) Appeals:
(a) The Planning Department shall schedule the completed appeal
application for the next available Zoning Board public hearing.
Notice of the appeal shall be placed in the newspaper as
provided for in Subsection C of this section. Additionally, notice
shall likewise be provided to the individual or agency from
which the appeal is sought.
(b) The filing of an appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance
of the action appealed from unless the Building Official
certifies to the Board (after an appeal has been duly filed) that,
by reason of facts stated in the decision that is being appealed,
a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property based on
the Rhode Island State Building Code. In such a case, the
proceedings shall only be stayed by a restraining order which
may be granted through a court of competent jurisdiction.
C. Notification of public hearing.
(1) Prior to holding its public hearing, the Board shall require public
notice at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Town. Notice of hearing
§ 260-89 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-89
C:706
§ 260-90. Review of appeals. [Amended 9-22-2014 by Ord. No. 838]
shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, by the
applicant to the following:
(a) All owners of real property whose property is located in or
within not less than 200 feet of the perimeter of the parcel(s)
covered in the application, whether within the Town or within
an adjacent municipality;
(b) The Associate Director of the Division of Planning of the Rhode
Island Department of Administration; and
(c) The city or town council of any municipality which is located in
or within 200 feet of the boundary of the area covered in the
application and/or where there is a public or quasi-public
water source or private water source that is used or is suitable
for use as a public water source within 2,000 feet of any real
property that is the subject of the application, regardless of
municipal boundaries.
(2) Said notice shall include the street address of the subject property
and a reference to the relief or appeal sought. The Chair may order
that the notice be posted at the location in question. Such notice
shall not constitute required notice of public hearing. The
responsibility and cost for all abutter notification and legal notice
in the newspaper of general circulation shall be borne by the
applicant.
A. Appeals to Zoning Board of Review. An appeal to the Zoning Board of
Review from a decision, order, requirement or determination made by
an administrative officer or agency such as the Historic District
Commission or Planning Board may be taken by an aggrieved party. The
appeal shall be taken within 30 days of the recording of the decision by
the officer or agency by filing with the officer or agency from whom the
appeal is taken and with the Zoning Board of Review a notice of appeal
specifying the grounds of the appeal. Said appeal shall be accompanied
by a radius map showing all real property within 200 feet of the subject
property and a list of all real property owners therein for purposes of
notification consistent with § 260-89C of this chapter. The officer or
agency from whom the appeal is taken shall promptly transmit to the
Zoning Board of Review all the papers constituting the record upon
which the action appealed from was taken. Notice of the appeal shall
also be transmitted to the officer, agency or board from whom the
appeal is taken.
B. Stay of proceedings. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance
of the action being appealed.
C. Public hearing by Zoning Board of Review. The Zoning Board of Review
shall hear the appeal within 45 days of the receipt of the appeal. Public
§ 260-89 CHARTER § 260-90
C:707
notice is to be provided, at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing
in a newspaper of general circulation. Notice of the hearing, which shall
include the street address of the subject property, shall be sent by firstclass
mail, postage prepaid, to the appellant and to those requiring
notice under § 260-89C of this chapter. The cost of any notice required
for the hearing shall be borne by the appellant.
D. Procedure for zoning hearing. The hearing of any appeal shall be at a
separate meeting, distinct from the hearing of any variance or special
use permit, although such hearings may be held on the same day or
night. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or
attorney. The officer or a designated individual of the agency,
commission or board from whom the appeal is taken shall appear
before the Zoning Board at the hearing to represent such agency,
commission or board. The Board shall render a decision within 10 days
of the close of the public hearing.
E. Decisions; standards of review.
(1) Review of Planning Board or Historic District Commission
decisions.
(a) In instances of the Board of Appeal's review of a Planning
Board or Historic District Commission decision, the Board of
Appeal shall not substitute its own judgment for that of the
Planning Board or Historic District Commission but must
consider the issue upon the findings and record of the Planning
Board or Historic District Commission. The Board of Appeal
shall not reverse a decision except on a finding of prejudicial
procedural error, clear error, or lack of support by the weight
of the evidence in the record.
(b) The concurring vote of three of the five members of the Board
of Appeal sitting at a hearing is necessary to reverse any
decision of the Planning Board or Historic District Commission.
(c) In the instance where the Board of Appeal overturns a decision
of the Planning Board or Historic District Commission, the
proposed project application is remanded to the Planning
Board or Historic District Commission, at the stage of
processing from which the appeal was taken, for further
proceedings and/or for the final disposition, which shall be
consistent with the Board of Appeal's decision.
(d) The Board of Appeal shall keep complete records of all
proceedings, including a record of all votes taken, and shall put
all decisions on appeals in writing. The Board of Appeal shall
include in the written record and the reasons for each decision.
(2) In exercising its powers with respect to all other appeals, the
Zoning Board of Appeal may reverse or affirm wholly or partly and
may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination
§ 260-90 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-90
C:708
§ 260-91. Standards of review.
appealed from and may make any orders, requirements, decisions
or determinations that ought to be made, and to that end has the
powers of the officer from whom the appeal was taken.
A. In reviewing an application for a variance (either use or dimensional)
the Board shall require that evidence satisfying standards in this
section be entered into the record of the proceedings. Such evidence
shall satisfy the following standards:
(1) That the hardship from which the applicant seeks relief is due to
the unique characteristics of the subject land or structure and not
to the general characteristics of the surrounding area and not due
to the physical or economic disability of the applicant.
(2) That said, hardship is not the result of any prior action of the
applicant and does not result primarily from the desire of the
applicant to realize greater financial gain.
(3) That the granting of the requested variance will not alter the
general character of the surrounding area or impair the intent or
purpose of this chapter or the Comprehensive Community Plan
upon which said chapter is based.
(4) That the relief to be granted is the least relief necessary.
B. In addition to those standards outlined above in Subsection A, an
applicant for a use variance must additionally demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Board the following: That the subject land or
structure cannot yield any beneficial use if it is required to conform to
the provisions of this chapter. Nonconforming use of neighboring land
or structures in the same district and permitted uses of lands or
structures in an adjacent district shall not be considered in granting a
use variance.
C. In addition to those standards outlined above in Subsection A, an
applicant for a dimensional variance must demonstrate, to the
satisfaction of the Board, the following: The hardship that will be
suffered by the owner of the subject property if the dimensional
variance is not granted shall amount to more than a mere
inconvenience. The fact that a use may be more profitable or that a
structure may be more valuable after the relief is granted is not
grounds for relief. The Zoning Board of Review has the power to grant
dimensional variances where the use is permitted by special use permit
as provided for in the special use permit sections of this chapter.
[Amended 5-22-2006 by Ord. No. 767; 3-14-2016 by Ord. No.
849]
D. In reviewing an application for a special use permit, the Board shall
require that evidence satisfying standards in this section be entered
§ 260-90 CHARTER § 260-91
C:709
into the record of the proceedings. Such evidence shall satisfy the
following standards:
(1) That the public convenience and welfare will be substantially
served.
(2) That the proposed development will be in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of this chapter and the Comprehensive
Community Plan.
(3) That the proposed development will not result in or create
conditions that will be inimical to the public health, safety, morals
and general welfare of the community.
(4) That the granting of the special use permit will not substantially or
permanently injure the appropriate use of the property in the
surrounding area or district.
E. Bed-and-breakfast homes.
(1) In reviewing an application for a special use permit for a bed-andbreakfast
home, the Board shall require that evidence satisfying
standards in this section be entered into the record of the
proceedings. For bed-and-breakfast homes, the applicant must, in
addition to those standards outlined in Subsection D of this section,
demonstrate the following:
(a) That the bed-and-breakfast home and use shall be an accessory
use to a single-family house and that it shall be subordinate to
the residential use of the premises. The bed-and-breakfast
home shall be operated by the homeowner.
(b) That each guest room of the bed-and-breakfast home is in
compliance with the Rhode Island State Housing Maintenance
and Occupancy Code.132
(c) That there will be no change in the outside appearance of the
building and/or premises nor any visible or audible evidence
detectable from outside the lot as to the presence of a bed-andbreakfast
home except for signage as permitted under Article
VII.
(d) That there shall be no meals served to the general public.
Breakfast may be served to guests of the bed-and-breakfast
home.
(e) That minimum off-street parking requirements shall be
provided such that one parking space is provided per guest
unit or guest room. Stacked parking (where one car parks
behind another, essentially blocking it in) is acceptable. All
parking areas shall be paved or graveled. Parking areas for
132. Editor's Note: See R.I.G.L. § 45-24.3-1 et seq.
§ 260-91 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-91
C:710
bed-and-breakfast homes with only two guest rooms or less
may be grassed. Where parking spaces are not provided on
site, the owner shall produce a lease, for a minimum of one
year, for use of a private parking lot. During review of annual
licensing renewal, the owner shall be required to submit proof
of the continuing availability of minimum parking
requirements prior to the license being renewed.
(f) That where deemed necessary to preserve and protect the
residential nature of the neighborhood, the Board may require
a landscape buffer, fence or other screening between the bedand-
breakfast home's parking area and the neighbors'
properties or street.
(g) That the bed-and-breakfast home shall be in compliance with
all applicable provisions of the Rhode Island State Fire Safety
Code, the Rhode Island State Building Code,133 regulations of
the Department of Environmental Management, Department of
Health and any other relative code or agency.
(2) Additionally, licensing shall be required for all bed-and-breakfasts
per the requirements of § 93-1, Schedule of fees and charges, in the
East Greenwich Code.
F. Special use standards for compassion centers in the CH (Commercial
Highway) and M/LIO (Light Industry/Office) Zones. Compassion centers
shall be permitted as a special use permit use in the CH and M/LIO
Zones, subject to all applicable provisions of the Zoning Ordinance,
including Subsection D above, and all of the following additional
requirements: [Added 1-11-2016 by Ord. No. 846]
(1) The application for a special use permit shall provide the legal
name and address of the compassion center, a copy of the articles
of incorporation, and the name, address and date of birth of each
principal officer and board member of the compassion center.
(2) The requested use at the proposed location will not adversely affect
the use of any property used for school, public or private park,
playground, play field, youth center, licensed day-care center, or
any location where groups of minors regularly congregate.
(3) The requested use at the proposed location will be sufficiently
buffered in relation to any residential area in the immediate vicinity
so as not to adversely affect said area.
(4) The exterior appearance of the structure must be consistent with
the exterior appearance of existing structures within the
immediate neighborhood, so as to prevent blight or deterioration,
133. Editor's Note: See R.I.G.L. §§ 23-28.1-1 et seq. (Fire Safety Code) and 23-27.3-100.1 et seq.
(Building Code).
§ 260-91 CHARTER § 260-91
C:711
or substantial diminishment or impairment of property values
within the neighborhood.
(5) The compassion center must not be located within:
(a) One thousand feet from the nearest residential zoning district;
or
(b) One thousand feet from the nearest house of worship, school or
public or private park, playground, play field, youth center,
licensed day-care center, or any other location where groups of
minors regularly congregate; or
(c) Two thousand feet from any other compassion center.
(6) The distances specified in the immediately preceding Subsection
F(5) shall be measured by a straight line from the nearest boundary
line of the premises on which the proposed compassion center use
is to be located to the nearest boundary line of a residential district
or to the nearest boundary line of any of the other designated uses
set forth herein.
(7) Hours of operation for the compassion center shall be limited to
8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
(8) Lighting shall be required such that will illuminate the compassion
center, its immediate surrounding areas, any accessory uses,
including storage areas, the parking lot(s), its front facade, and any
adjoining public sidewalk.
(9) The proposed compassion center shall implement the appropriate
security measures to deter and prevent the unauthorized entrance
into areas containing marijuana and shall ensure that each location
has an operational security/alarm system.
(10)No compassion center shall be established prior to the submission
and approval of a site plan by the Planning Department and the
Zoning Enforcement Officer. The site plan shall depict all existing
and proposed buildings, parking spaces, driveways, service areas
and open uses. The site plan shall show distances between the
proposed use and the boundary of the nearest residential zoning
district and the property line of all other abutting uses as described
within this section.
(11) All compassion center uses shall fully comply with all licensing
requirements of the Town of East Greenwich and the laws of the
State of Rhode Island.
G. Residential cooperative cultivations shall be permitted by special use
permit in residential zones, subject to all applicable provisions of the
Zoning Ordinance, and subject also to the additional requirements of
R.I.G.L. § 21-28.6-14, as set forth below: [Added 1-11-2016 by Ord.
No. 846]
§ 260-91 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-91
C:712
(1) A cardholder can only cooperatively cultivate on one location.
(2) No single locations may have more than one cooperative
cultivation. For the purposes of this section, "location" means one
structural building, not units within a structural building.
(3) The cooperative cultivation shall not be visible from the street or
other public areas.
(4) A written acknowledgement of the limitation of the right to use and
possess marijuana for medical purposes in Rhode Island that is
signed by each cardholder and is displayed prominently on the
premises.
(5) A residential cooperative cultivation may have no more than 10
ounces of usable marijuana, 24 mature marijuana pants, and 12
seedlings.
(6) A residential cooperative cultivation must have displayed
prominently on the premises an affidavit by a licensed electrician
that the cultivation has been inspected and is in compliance with
any applicable state or municipal housing and zoning codes. This
affidavit must also be filed with the Town Building Official.
(7) The location of the cooperative cultivation must be reported to the
division of state police by the applicant for the special use permit.
§ 260-91 CHARTER § 260-91
C:713

ARTICLE XVI
(Reserved)
§ 260-92. (Reserved)
§ 260-93. (Reserved)
§ 260-94. (Reserved)
§ 260-95. (Reserved)
§ 260-96. (Reserved)
§ 260-97. (Reserved)
§ 260-92 CHARTER § 260-97
C:715

ARTICLE XVII
Affordable Housing
[Added 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 779; amended 10-26-2015 by Ord. No.
845; 3-14-2016 by Ord. No. 849; 6-12-2017 by Ord. No. 870]
§ 260-98. Purpose, authority and applicability.
A. The purpose of this article is to:
(1) Implement the Town's Affordable Housing Plan contained in the
state-approved Comprehensive Community Plan, as adopted by the
Town Council and amended from time to time.
(2) Promote the public health, safety and welfare by promoting the
development of affordable housing within the Town of East
Greenwich in accordance with the state mandate and to promote a
full range of housing choices throughout the Town for households
of all incomes, ages and sizes.
(3) Promote housing that qualifies as "low- or moderate-income
housing" under R.I.G.L. § 45-53-3(9).
B. The authority for adoption and implementation of the Affordable
Housing Plan is conferred by R.I.G.L. §§ 42-128-8.1(d)(2) and (3), and
45-22.2-6(b)(6).
C. This article shall apply to all subdivisions and land development
projects of five or more residential units, as classified under East
Greenwich's Zoning Ordinance and Land Development and Subdivision
Regulations,134 within zones where residential units are permitted.
D. All developers of the aforementioned projects shall be required to
submit a "yield plan," defined as: a plan demonstrating a subdivision's
or land development project's maximum density (maximum number of
lots or units), taking into account all environmental, natural and manmade
physical constraints to development, including but not limited to
wetlands, topography, groundwater characteristics, and existing
improvements. A yield plan shall meet all conventional zoning and
subdivision requirements, including minimum buildable area
requirements, and shall not assume that any waivers, variances or
special use permits will be granted. On parcels located in areas not
serviced by public sewers and not proposed for extension of public
sewers, the yield plan shall include the location of an appropriate onsite
wastewater treatment system on each lot.
E. For all applicable projects under the preceding, at least 20% of the
proposed base developable yield must qualify as affordable housing as
defined per Subsection A(3) above. Affordable units must be deed
restricted to remain affordable to households with gross incomes at or
134. Editor's Note: See Ch. A263, Development and Subdivision Review Regulations.
§ 260-98 CHARTER § 260-98
C:717
§ 260-99. Incentives & building requirements for production of
affordable housing.
below 120% of the area median income, adjusted for family size, per
R.I.G.L. § 42-128-8.1(d)(1).
F. When a subdivision or land development project that creates fewer than
five new dwelling units is approved on a portion of a parcel of land,
leaving another portion of the same parcel undeveloped, the portion left
undeveloped shall not be subdivided or developed for residential or
mixed use unless the undeveloped portion is subject to the inclusionary
requirements of this chapter. The number of inclusionary units required
in the later development shall be calculated as if the earlier
development were part of it. This provision does not apply when an
entire parcel receives Master Plan approval and is developed in phases.
A. Consistent with Chapter 93 of the Town Code, Fees, Article II,
Development Impact Fees, affordable housing units [those referenced
in § 260-98A(3) above] are exempt from the Town's development impact
fee and this fee waiver shall constitute a municipal government subsidy
as defined in R.I.G.L. § 45-53-3, the Rhode Island Low and Moderate
Income Housing Act, Definitions.
B. All projects subject to the provisions of this article wherein low- and
moderate-income housing units are being provided on site as part of an
approved development shall be entitled to a density bonus of up to 20%
more units than otherwise allowed consistent with Subsection C below.
Development of projects that include a density bonus shall require a
special use permit (consistent with the standards listed in § 260-91D of
this Code) from the Zoning Board of Review that incorporates
deviations from the ordinary dimensional standards. Such permit can
also be used to allow multiple residential structures on one lot.
C. Additional units/lots allowed under this zoning incentive provision shall
constitute a municipal government subsidy as defined in the Rhode
Island Low and Moderate Income Housing Act. In addition to the yield
plan required of each developer to show the maximum base number of
units/lots, developers shall also be required to submit a second yield
plan that includes the additional units as permitted with the zoning
incentive. The Planning Board may require the modification via special
use permit of the building height cap and/or minimum dimensional
standards, including overall lot size, lot coverage, setbacks, and
frontage requirements to accommodate affordable units. Lot size,
coverage, setback, and frontage requirements can be reduced by up to
20% but only following an affirmative finding by the Planning Board
that:
(1) Using a flexible zoning standard is in the best interest of good
planning practice as evidenced by consistency with the
Comprehensive Community Plan, including the Housing Plan; and
§ 260-98 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-99
C:718
(2) Using a flexible zoning standard would not impair the purpose or
intent of the Zoning Ordinance and meet the standards of review
spelled out in Chapter 260 of the Town Code, § 260-91D.
D. A "yield plan" indicates the basic maximum number of units or lots a
parcel can support. A minimum of 20% of all proposed lots or units shall
be affordable to low- or moderate-income households as defined in
R.I.G.L. § 45-53. Where such calculation yields a fraction of a unit and
such fraction is 0.5 or higher, the requirement shall be rounded to the
next higher, whole number. Where such calculation yields a fraction of a
unit and that fraction is less than 0.5, the requirement shall be rounded
to the lower whole number.
E. All affordable units provided within a development shall comply with all
of the following requirements:
(1) All affordable units shall be dispersed throughout the development
so as to ensure a true mix of market-rate and affordable housing.
(2) All affordable units shall be visually compatible with market-rate
units in the same development. Affordable units shall be
comparable to market-rate units in terms of location, type, quality,
character, architectural style, and primary exterior building
finishes and materials.
(3) Except as otherwise authorized by the Town, all affordable units
shall contain one or more bedrooms. The mix of unit sizes and
number of bedrooms per unit among the affordable units shall be in
the same proportion as the mix among the market-rate units. If only
one affordable unit is required and the other units in the
development are of various sizes with varying numbers of
bedrooms, the affordable unit shall contain an average of the
number of bedrooms located in the market-rate units rounded to
the nearest whole number.
(4) In assessing the compatibility of character between the affordable
units and the market-rate units within a development, the Planning
Board may consider building elevations, renderings, models and
any other materials it deems necessary to assess and compare
building features, including but not limited to overall height, roof
pitch, building shape and footprint, exterior materials, structural
massing and window pattern, style, and sizes.
(5) The owners or renters of affordable units shall have all rights,
privileges and responsibilities accorded to market-rate owners or
renters, including access to all non-fee amenities within the
development.
(6) Certificates of occupancy (C/Os) for affordable units shall be issued
prior to, or simultaneously with, the certificates of occupancy for
market-rate units. In phased developments, the affordable units
shall be phased, built, and occupied at least at the same
§ 260-99 CHARTER § 260-99
C:719
§ 260-100. Substandard lots of record.
§ 260-101. Affordability requirements.
All affordable housing units constructed pursuant to this article must qualify
as low- and/or moderate-income housing units as defined in Title 45,
Chapter 53 of the Rhode Island General Laws. To accomplish this, an
applicant shall, at a minimum, make the following submission in conjunction
with the final plan:
§ 260-101.1. Off-site exactions.
proportionate rate as the market-rate units. If the off-site exaction
is exercised (see § 260-101.1) and affordable units are rehabilitated
or constructed at some other location, certificates of occupancy for
the off-site units shall be issued at the same rate as certificates of
occupancy for the market-rate units in the development.
F. Any dwelling units proposed to be deed-restricted and counted as
affordable units must be in full compliance with all applicable
construction and occupancy codes, and shall be sufficiently maintained
or rehabilitated so that all major systems meet standards comparable to
new construction.
A. Complete applications for construction of affordable housing on
substandard lots of record (nonconforming by dimension) will be
reviewed as land development projects.
B. Applications for development of two or more substandard lots of record
shall include the complete Master Plan checklist in the Land
Development and Subdivision Review Regulations.135
C. Applications for development of one substandard lot of record not
abutting any other lot or parcel in the same ownership shall include the
completed Master Plan Checklist in the Land Development and
Subdivision Review Regulations, § A263-17, Subsection (a), Items 1
through 12, 14, 17, 18, and 23 and Subsection (b), Items (3) and (9).
D. The Planning Board, with advice from the Technical Review Committee,
shall recommend the dimensional requirements for these applications.
The Zoning Board of Review retains purview over projects requiring
variances and special use permits, and any necessary relief shall be
subject to its review and approval.
A. A Town-Solicitor-approved monitoring service agreement with a
qualified organization; and
B. Town-Solicitor-approved land lease and/or deed restriction to be in
place not less than 30 years that includes the Town as a signatory, and
grants to the Town enforcement authority and the right to notice.
135. Editor's Note: See Ch. A263, Development and Subdivision Review Regulations.
§ 260-99 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-101.1
C:720
A. Purpose. It is acknowledged that not every subdivision proposal or
project site will be compatible with the goals and requirements of this
Affordable Housing Ordinance. Therefore, the Planning Board, with
input from the Town professional staff and Technical Review
Committee, may exempt a subdivision or land development project from
the requirement to provide affordable units on-site, and instead require
an off-site exaction. The Planning Board may allow off-site exactions
when, in its determination, either of the following conditions is met:
(1) It would not be feasible to provide affordable units on-site due to
existing physical conditions that present unusual development
challenges. These challenges may be environmental or regulatory
and could impact the public safety or welfare. Examples include
high water tables, presence of sensitive wildlife habitat, lot
geometry, and surrounding traffic circulation patterns.
(2) The off-site alternative would be beneficial to the Town or to future
residents of the units because it is more likely to produce housing
that accomplishes the goals of the Town's Affordable Housing Plan,
which calls for, among other things, housing locations to be closely
related to the presence of existing public services and facilities,
jobs, transit and other amenities.
B. Options. On-site affordable unit provision within a new development is
strongly preferred. In special circumstances consistent with the above,
the following off-site exactions may be allowed by the Planning Board in
priority order:
(1) Purchase, deed-restrict and rehabilitate existing buildings to
create affordable units;
(2) New construction of off-site affordable units.
C. Compatibility. Off-site units rehabilitated or constructed in other
neighborhoods remote from the proposed development site shall be
compatible in siting, style, character, quality, and scale with existing
dwelling units in the surrounding area.
D. Concurrent development. Any required off-site affordable units shall be
developed concurrently with the market-rate units in the subject
subdivision or land development project, and certificates of occupancy
(C/Os) for market-rate units shall be issued at the same proportionate
rate as C/Os for newly constructed or rehabilitated affordable units.
Where only one affordable unit is required to be provided, the Planning
Board shall impose a condition of final plan approval that stipulates the
timing of the availability of the affordable unit. In no case shall the final
C/O for a market-rate unit in a development be granted before
rehabilitation/construction of all required affordable units is complete.
E. Rehabilitation. Existing housing units provided to satisfy the affordable
housing requirement as described herein shall be rehabilitated
consistent with the definition of "low or moderate income housing"
§ 260-101.1 CHARTER § 260-101.1
C:721
§ 260-101.2. Reports.
found in the R.I.G.L. § 45-53-3(9). Affordable off-site units provided
without any rehabilitation shall not be accepted.
F. Incentive. Pursuant to R.I.G.L. § 45-24-46.1, which requires a subsidy or
financial incentive for all residential projects with an inclusionary
component, the twenty-percent density bonus over the base
developable yield shall also be applied to projects pursuing an off-site
exaction. As an example, if a parcel's yield plan shows development
potential for six units, the developer, taking advantage of the density
bonus, could propose construction of seven units on the project site but
would also need to construct and deed-restrict, or purchase,
rehabilitate and deed-restrict, an off-site unit as well. Consistent with
§ 260-99B above, projects including density bonus units shall require a
special use permit from the Zoning Board of Review that incorporates
any necessary deviations from the ordinary dimensional standards.
A. The local review board shall submit a report on affordable housing
activities in each fiscal year to the Town Council not later than August
14 of the following fiscal year.
B. The report shall include the following:
(1) The number of applications to construct or rehabilitate affordable
housing units submitted, accepted as complete, and rejected as
incomplete.
(2) The total number of dwelling units proposed to be constructed or
rehabilitated in applications that are accepted and the number of
dwelling units that are proposed to be affordable in such
applications.
§ 260-101.1 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-101.2
C:722
ARTICLE XVIII
Private Education Centers
[Added 5-9-2011 by Ord. No. 814]
§ 260-102. Master plan.
All private education centers shall file a private education center master
plan (hereafter called "master plan") with the Planning Board, which shall
be in compliance with the use and dimensional requirements of this chapter
and the Town's Comprehensive Community Plan and which shall be
considered by the Planning Board as a major land development project
and be subject to the normal procedure for a review set forth in the
Development and Subdivision Review Regulations of the Town of East
Greenwich for a major land development. The master plan must include
all of the minimum requirements which are to be included in the five-year
update plan set forth in § 260-109 of this article.
§ 260-103. Purpose.
A master plan is required to promote the orderly growth and development
of private education centers while preserving neighborhood character and
historic resources and to ensure that the design is consistent with the
Town's Comprehensive Community Plan. The master plan shall be a
statement, in text, maps, illustrations or other media of communication that
is designed to provide a basis for rational decisionmaking regarding the
long-term physical development of the education center. The master plan
shall include an implementation element that defines and schedules, for a
period of five years or more, the specific public actions to be undertaken in
order to achieve the goals and objectives of the plan.
§ 260-104. Filing requirements.
Private education centers shall file the master plan as outlined in Chapter
A263, Development and Subdivision Review Regulations. Said private
education center shall review the master plan five years following master
plan approval and every five years thereafter to determine if any changes
are being considered or proposed and submit a five-year update plan as
described below to the administrative officer. If changes are not proposed,
the institution shall notify the administrative officer in writing that the
master plan is valid and accurate for another five years.
§ 260-105. Review and approval.
The plan shall be subject to the procedure for review and approval set
forth in Chapter A263, Development and Subdivision Review Regulations,
for a major land development. A private education center master plan
includes the entire process of a major land development, including the
preapplication stage, the master plan stage, the preliminary plan stage
(which may be combined, in the sole discretion of the Planning Board, with
the master plan stage), and the final plan stage.
§ 260-102 CHARTER § 260-106
C:723
§ 260-106. Vesting.
The master plan shall be submitted and approved as a phased development
consistent with R.I.G.L. § 45-23-48. The submission of a five-year update
plan (or written notification noting that the current master plan is valid and
accurate) shall constitute the vesting requirements of R.I.G.L. § 45-23-48(c).
§ 260-107. Phasing.
The permitting, design and construction of a private education center may
be phased in accordance with R.I.G.L. § 45-23-48 after the submission and
approval of an overall master plan.
§ 260-108. Amendments.
The master plan may be amended at any time by the private education
center upon application to and approval by the Planning Board, subject
to any other corresponding approvals deemed necessary by the Planning
Board.
§ 260-109. Five-year update plan.
The five-year update plan shall contain the following minimum
requirements:
A. Mission statement of the institution, including its relationship with the
neighborhoods, communities and environment in which it is physically
situated.
B. Description of existing conditions that shall include a list of all
properties owned or leased by the institution within the Town. The list
shall be arranged by Assessor's plat and lot and include street address,
present uses and condition of building, structures, parking lot, open
space and the like, and other relevant existing conditions of the
campus. "Use" shall include the general academic function of the
building or structure and not the specific program (e.g., "classroom"
and not "English Department classroom").
C. Statement of ten-year goals and five-year objectives and means and
approaches through which such goals and objectives may be reached.
D. Proposed phasing of new development and pacing of proposed
improvements.
E. Proposed changes in land holdings of the institution, including property
to be acquired or sold.
F. Proposed changes in land use within the institution's campus and
grounds.
G. Proposed capital improvements, including new structures, additions to
existing structures, parking garages, parking lots, parks and grounds.
Major renovations that affect the building and/or campus grounds shall
§ 260-106 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-109
C:724
§ 260-110. Preliminary plan and final plan review and approval.
The Planning Board shall review and consider a master plan for the entire
private education center development in the manner set forth in the
Development and Subdivision Review Regulations of the Town of East
Greenwich. Subsequent land development review and approval (preliminary
plan and final plan) may be submitted, reviewed and considered for
approval in phases as outlined in the master plan or the five-year update
plan. The final plan approval may be completed by the Administrative Office
as long as there are no major changes as outlined below.
§ 260-111. Minor changes.
In addition to amendment of the master plan or five-year update plan, minor
changes may be made by the institution upon prior written notice and
approval by the Administrative Office. Minor changes include but are not
limited to the following:
be included. The plan shall, at a minimum, identify the location of
such improvements, the footprint and exterior dimensions of any new
structure, height in stories and feet, proposed uses, including primary
and accessory uses, parking and loading to support such uses, and
landscaped buffers.
H. For any new building or additions to an existing building, include scaled
plans and elevations in the five-year update plan.
I. Proposed demolition of any building, structure, parking garage, parking
lot, park or any other campus facility.
J. A circulation plan indicating existing and proposed vehicular access,
pedestrian sidewalks and general circulation layout of the campus. The
circulation plan shall address on-site and off-site impacts on adjacent
streets. In addition, the plan shall address the adequacy of on-site
traffic circulation, parking and loading, sidewalk/pedestrian circulation,
delivery and emergency access and related circulation issues.
A. The addition or cumulative addition to an existing building of less than
10% in the size of a building or structure.
B. Any change in parking which does not result in a net decrease in the
number of spaces available on the campus or decrease in buffers to
abutting parcels.
C. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a mere change from one department or
discipline to another shall NOT be deemed to be any change to the
master plan or five-year update plan. Examples of such non-change
events include a change from architecture and design department
classrooms to medical classrooms, or a change from admission office to
development office.
§ 260-109 CHARTER § 260-112
C:725
§ 260-112. Major changes.
In addition to amendment of the master plan or five-year update plan, major
changes may be made by the institution, subject to review and approval
by the Planning Board. Major changes include but are not limited to the
following:
A. The addition or cumulative addition to an existing building of greater
than 10% in the size of the building or structure.
B. Any change in parking which results in a net decrease in the number of
spaces available on the campus or decreases buffer width to abutting
parcels.
C. Any changes in building location, roadway circulation, or parking
location which increases the amount of impervious area and/or requires
a variance.
D. Any change which would necessitate a review and approval by RIDEM,
RIDOT or KCWA.
§ 260-112 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-112
C:726
ARTICLE XIX
Wind Energy Systems
[Added 10-6-2014 by Ord. No. 839]
§ 260-113. Legislative findings; purpose.
§ 260-114. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OWNER — The individual or entity that intends to own and operate a wind
facility in accordance with this article.
A. The Town Council of the Town of East Greenwich finds, determines, and
declares that, in accordance with R.I.G.L. § 45-24-27 et seq., the Town
is empowered to regulate and control land use in order to protect the
health, safety, and welfare of its residents. The Town has made a
thorough study of wind energy systems as a land use and has identified
several issues, especially pertaining to potential negative impacts on
the environment and on the health of residents in the vicinity of
turbines, that are cause for concern in siting such facilities.
B. The Town has determined that, in much of the community, given the
density and proximity of properties and the existing mix of uses within
the Town limits, and given the sheer size and scale of most effective
wind energy systems, such construction would be inconsistent with
protection of the general health, safety and welfare. Such systems have
an inherent impact on community character and aesthetics and would
not be consistent with preserving the cultural and historical fabric of
downtown or other historically zoned areas or the visual character of
our scenic corridors.136
C. The purpose of this article is to accommodate wind energy systems in
appropriate geographic locations and at appropriate scales while
simultaneously protecting the public health, safety and welfare. This
article will provide for a review and approval process for limited wind
energy projects that will ensure compliance with the standards and
regulations established herein. A special use permit process will be
created for the construction and operation of wind systems, providing
clear standards for the placement, design, construction, monitoring,
modification and removal of wind facilities to address public safety and
minimize impacts on the scenic, natural and historic resources of the
Town and to provide adequate financial assurances regarding the
viability of such projects from construction, through operation and
maintenance, to ultimate decommissioning and removal.
136. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 260-113 CHARTER § 260-114
C:727
RATED NAMEPLATE CAPACITY — The maximum rated output of electric
power production equipment. This output is typically specified by the
manufacturer with a nameplate on the equipment.
TOWER — The monopole, freestanding or guyed structure that supports a
wind generator.
TURBINE HEIGHT — The vertical distance from ground level at the base of
the turbine to the tip of a rotor blade at its highest point.
WIND ENERGY FACILITY — A facility consisting of any and all equipment,
machinery and structures utilized in connection with the conversion,
storage or transfer of wind into electrical energy. It includes all
transmission, storage, collection and supply equipment as well as
substations, transformers, turbines and accessways (examples include but
are not limited to all blades, base, foundations, rotors, towers, vanes, wires,
inverters, batteries, generators and/or other components of the system).
WIND TURBINE — A device that converts kinetic wind energy into
rotational energy that drives an electrical generator. A wind turbine
typically consists of a tower, nacelle body, and a rotor with two or more
blades.
§ 260-115. Restrictions; permit requirements.
UTILITY-SCALE WIND FACILITY — A commercial wind facility where
the primary use is intended to be electrical generation that will be sold
to wholesale electricity markets.
A.
SMALL WIND ENERGY FACILITY — A wind facility located at a
commercial, industrial, agricultural, residential, institutional or public
facility that is designed and intended to generate electrical output
primarily for the use or benefit of structures on the same lot or on
contiguous commonly owned lots. Small wind facilities have a rated
nameplate capacity of 80 kilowatts or less and a total height not
exceeding 35 feet.
B.
A. Utility-scale wind facilities are not permitted.
B. Wind energy facilities are prohibited in all local historic districts and on
any outlying property covered by historic zoning.
C. On-site small wind energy facilities may be installed, erected or
constructed in the F-2, M/LIO, RHF and MUPD Zones on lot sizes not
less than two acres, subject to the issuance of a special use permit by
the Zoning Board of Review, provided that the use complies with all
requirements set forth herein. Such systems are not permitted in any
other zones. All permitted wind facilities shall be constructed and
operated in a manner that minimizes any adverse visual, safety, and
environmental impacts. No special use permit shall be granted unless
the ZBR finds specifically in writing that the specific site is an
appropriate location for such use; and the use is not expected to
adversely affect the surrounding neighborhood; and there is not
§ 260-114 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-115
C:728
§ 260-116. Design and installation standards.
expected to be any serious hazard to pedestrians or vehicles from
the use; and no nuisance is expected to be created by the use; and
adequate and appropriate facilities will be provided for the proper
operation, maintenance and protection of the use. In order to affirm
the above-required findings of fact, the Zoning Board must assess the
compliance of all proposed wind facilities with the design, installation,
safety, aesthetic and environmental standards outlined below in
§§ 260-116 and 260-117.
D. All special use permit applications for small wind energy systems shall
be accompanied by a fee equal to the fee charged for
telecommunications towers per Subsection A(3) of § 260-89, Variance
and special use permit application procedure and fees, of this chapter.
E. Where permitted, only one small wind energy system shall be allowed
on a property.
F. All approved small wind energy systems shall be required to undergo an
annual safety review, and a certified inspection report shall be filed with
the Zoning Officer.
G. All approved turbines shall be set back a distance either 1) equal to or
exceeding the maximum projectile distance (or thrown hazard) as
determined by the manufacturer; or 2) equal to two times or greater the
overall blade tip height of the turbine from the nearest existing
residential or commercial structure, whichever is greater, and a
distance at least equal to the overall blade tip height of the turbine from
the nearest property line or public right-of-way. All other components of
the wind facility (equipment, storage/generator sheds, transformers,
substations, guy wires or support footings) shall meet the standard
setbacks for the zone and all other relevant dimensional regulations,
including those pertaining to lot coverage, buffers and accessory
structure heights.
H. All wind energy facility owners shall provide a copy of their site plans
and construction plans, and, ultimately, the as-built plan sets, to local
emergency service providers and cooperate with same in developing an
emergency response plan.
A. Controls. Wind turbines shall have automatic braking, governing,
feathering, deicing and/or shutdown systems as needed to prevent
uncontrolled rotation, overspeeding, rotor breakage, or excessive
pressure on the tower structure, blades and other turbine components.
B. Lighting. Wind turbines shall only be lighted if required by the FAA.
Lighting of nontower parts of a wind turbine, such as appurtenant
structures, shall be limited to that required for safety, security and
operational purposes and shall be shielded from abutting properties
consistent with the "dark skies" principle outlined in the land
§ 260-115 CHARTER § 260-116
C:729
development and subdivision regulations.137 Lighting glare on abutting
properties shall be minimized except as required by the FAA.
C. Outside experts. The Zoning Board of Review may hire outside
consultants and experts as needed at the applicant's expense to peer
review studies done by a wind energy facility applicant or to otherwise
evaluate the design and installation impacts of a proposed wind turbine.
Such review may cover any of the impacts addressed by this section and
may also include a structural analysis of the proposed turbine,
assessments of the expected power generation output of the facility,
and any other topics deemed relevant by the ZBR.
D. Visual impacts. To assess the visual impacts on a neighborhood, area or
viewshed of a proposed wind system, the Zoning Board may require
color photos of a site and its surrounding areas along with color photo
simulations, by a qualified graphics professional, of said site and
surroundings with the proposed wind facility superimposed thereon.
E. Warnings. Clearly visible warning signage concerning voltage shall be
placed at the base of all wind turbines, and turbines shall be designed
to prevent unauthorized access. The Zoning Board may require
protective fencing as reasonably necessary given the location of the
wind turbine on the site or in relation to the neighboring area.
F. Shadow flicker. Wind turbines shall be sited to minimize the shadow
flicker effect on neighboring property. The applicant bears the burden
of proving that significant adverse impacts will not occur, and failure to
show same shall result in denial of the wind system petition. Required
documentation may include simulations showing the angle of the sun at
various times of the day and of the year and at any/all angles wherein
surrounding property may be affected depending on projected turbine
height.
G. Utility connections. No special use permit for a wind energy facility will
be issued until an applicant submits documentation from the relevant
electrical utility, as applicable, approving the proposed connection.
H. Environmental analysis. Depending on proposed size, scale and siting,
wind energy facility applicants may be required to submit to the Zoning
Board of Review a report, from a professional environmental consulting
firm, that addresses the following factors:
(1) Constraints imposed by environmental and/or archaeological
regulations.
(2) The presence of plant communities or animal species of concern or
critical habitat for these species.
137. Editor's Note: See Ch. A263, Development and Subdivision Review Regulations.
§ 260-116 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-116
C:730
§ 260-117. Aesthetic, safety and environmental standards.
(3) Presence of critical areas of species congregation such as
maternity roosts, hibernation sites, staging areas, winter ranges,
nesting sites and migration stopovers.
(4) The potential for habitat fragmentation.
(5) Known avian species that are either present at the site, that
migrate through it, or that may be attracted by site alteration and
current studies addressing potential impacts on them by the
specific turbine type proposed.
(6) An assessment of the general suitability of the site for wind
development in light of potential environmental impacts.
(7) Design and operational recommendations to avoid or minimize
significant adverse environmental effects.
(8) Recommended mitigation measures if significant impacts cannot
be avoided.
(9) Recommendation regarding post-construction studies that might
evaluate animal mortality and other impacts so that operational
adjustments can be made to mitigate as necessary.
(10) A structural analysis from a registered professional engineer to
show that the proposed setback is adequate assuming the event of
a turbine blade break or throw.
A. All wind energy system operators shall maintain a current liability
insurance policy, subject to annual certification, which will cover all
liabilities associated with installation and ongoing operation of the
facility through decommissioning. The special use permit approval for
such system shall be conditioned upon continuation of said policy.
B. All approved wind turbines, and other wind-facility-related equipment,
shall, to the extent possible, be constructed of neutral, nonreflective
exterior colors designed to blend with the surrounding environment.
C. Wind turbines shall not be sited in areas that will result in the turbine
dominating the view of a scenic, natural, or historic resource of the
Town from any prominent public vantage point. The Zoning Board may
require perspective drawings, digital renderings, photographic
simulations, constructed models and/or any other graphic depictions it
deems useful in determining viewshed impacts.
D. Signage at approved wind facilities shall be limited to those necessary
to identify the owner, provide emergency contact information, and warn
of any possible dangers.
E. Utility connections from the wind facility shall be located underground
unless soil conditions or site topography prevent it. The requirement for
§ 260-116 CHARTER § 260-117
C:731
§ 260-118. Maintenance of facilities; decommissioning;
abandonment.
underground utilities can only be waived by the Zoning Board of Review
if sufficient expert testimony is presented to its satisfaction that such
connection is not viable.
F. Noise levels resulting from operation of a wind turbine shall not raise
area noise levels more than five dB(a) above ambient existing
conditions and in no case shall noise levels from wind turbines exceed
the maximums established by the Town Code at Chapter 152, Noise.
Noise levels are measured at the lot lines of the turbine site, consistent
with the provisions for assessing noise effects as found in
aforementioned Chapter 152, Noise. The applicant may be required to
produce documentation from a qualified acoustics professional
demonstrating to the satisfaction of the Zoning Board of Review that
the proposed installation complies with the purpose and intent of this
requirement.
G. The Zoning Board in issuing a special use permit may also consider
potential impacts on communications, including local emergency
responder telecommunications, other military or civilian radio use or
telecommunications and/or interference with other transmissions,
including television. The Zoning Board may require local expert
testimony to this effect or other written testimony from qualified
personnel.
H. Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to that which is
necessary for the construction, operation, and maintenance of the wind
facility and as otherwise prescribed by applicable state and local laws,
regulations and ordinances.
I. Wind facilities shall comply with all applicable requirements of the
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
A. All permitted wind turbines shall be maintained in good working
condition. Maintenance shall include painting, structural repairs, and
the integrity of security and life safety measures. A report
demonstrating compliance with an acceptable maintenance schedule
shall be submitted annually to the Building Official on the anniversary
of the issuance of the building permit as part of an annual safety
certification process.
B. An applicant for a wind energy facility project shall be required to post
a bond of a type, of a duration, and in an amount to be determined by
the Town.
C. When a wind energy system is scheduled for decommissioning, the
applicant shall notify the Town by certified mail of the proposed date of
discontinued operation and plans for removal. The owner/operator shall
§ 260-117 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-118
C:732
remove the entire wind system no more than 150 days after the
discontinuation.
D. At the time of removal, the wind energy facility site shall be restored to
its state from before the facility was constructed. Removal shall include
all associated equipment, with appropriate disposal of any hazardous
materials. Stabilization and revegetation of the site shall occur as
necessary to minimize erosion. The Zoning Officer may allow the owner
to leave established vegetation and possibly below-grade foundations
where they would minimize erosion and limit site disturbance.
E. The owner/operator of a facility shall implement current industry
practices during removal to ensure minimal adverse impacts on the
public health, safety and welfare. Environmental impacts shall also be
minimized, with appropriate notice to state regulatory agencies as
required.
F. After 12 months or one year of inoperability of any wind energy system,
the Zoning Officer may reasonably determine the system to be
abandoned and shall issue a notice of abandonment to the property
owner. The owner shall have the right to respond to the notice within 30
days of receipt. Abandonment constitutes the voiding of any special use
permit granted for a wind energy project on site.
G. Should the property owner fail to respond to the notice of
abandonment, the Zoning Officer shall allow 90 days from original
receipt of the notice to accommodate complete physical removal of the
offending wind energy system. If the system is not removed within 90
days, the Zoning Officer may impose the penalties outlined in § 260-79,
Violations and penalties, of this chapter or will seek all available legal
remedies through a court of competent jurisdiction.
H. The owner of an abandoned or decommissioned wind energy facility
shall remove the turbines, towers, bases and associated structures and
components. If the owner fails to do so, the Town, through the Zoning
Officer, shall pursue all legal remedies available to it and/or seek
satisfaction through the posted bond and/or place a lien against the
property. The Town reserves the right to salvage the wind facility
demolition debris to defray the cost of demolition and site stabilization.
§ 260-118 CHARTER § 260-118
C:733

ARTICLE XX
Solar Energy Systems and Facilities
[Added 11-6-2017 by Ord. No. 873]
§ 260-119. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this article is to establish protocols for the construction and
operation of solar energy systems in the Town of East Greenwich, subject
to reasonable conditions that will protect the public health, safety, and
welfare.
§ 260-120. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING-INTEGRATED SYSTEM — A solar energy system that is
constructed as an integral part of a principal or accessory building or
structure and where the building integrated system features maintain a
uniform profile or surface of vertical walls, window openings and roofing.
Such a system is used in lieu of a separate mechanical device replacing or
substituting for an architectural or structural component of the building or
structure that appends or interrupts the uniform surfaces of walls, window
openings and roofing. A building-integrated system may occur within
vertical facades replacing view glass, spandrel glass or other facade
material into semitransparent skylight systems, into roofing systems
replacing traditional roofing materials or other building or structure
envelope systems.
BUILDING-MOUNTED SYSTEM — A solar energy system that has its
electricity-generating solar panels attached to any part or type of roof
on a building or structure that has an occupancy permit on file with the
municipality and that is either the principal structure or an accessory
structure on a recorded parcel. This system also includes any solar-based
architectural elements and building-integrated systems.
COVERED PARKING SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — An active solar energy
system that is structurally mounted to the ground yet additionally maintains
the permanent function of vehicle parking underneath; may be either a
minor or major system.
GROUND-MOUNTED SYSTEM — A solar energy system that has its
electricity-generating solar panels mounted on a structure, pole or series of
poles constructed specifically to support the system and not attached to any
other structure.
MAJOR SOLAR SYSTEM INSTALLATION — A solar energy system
installation designed primarily to sell electricity to a utility supplier or
a solar installation with an output exceeding 25kW. Where any installed
system exceeds 5,000 square feet or 20% of the net buildable area (i.e.,
the total area of the applicable lot, minus setbacks, vegetated buffers, and
wetlands) it shall be classified as a major system installation.
§ 260-119 CHARTER § 260-120
C:735
MINOR SOLAR SYSTEM INSTALLATION — A solar energy system
installation designed to primarily service the property on which the solar
installation is located with an output of 25kW or less.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — All equipment, machinery and structural
features designed and intended for converting solar energy (sunlight) into
electricity; includes all facilities involved in the collection, storage, and
distribution of solar energy.
§ 260-121. Applicability.
§ 260-122. General requirements.
A. This article applies to building- and ground-mounted solar PV systems
installed and constructed after the effective date of this article.
B. PV systems constructed prior to the effective date of this article are not
required to meet the requirements of this article.
C. Any upgrade, modification or structural change that materially alters
the size or placement of an existing PV system shall comply with the
provisions of this article.
A. Location.
(1) Ground-mounted system installations are prohibited in the
Downtown East Greenwich Historic District Overlay Zone but may
be permitted on properties located in the Tillinghast Road Historic
District Overlay Zone and on properties covered by historic zoning
as outlying properties (see Article XI of the Zoning Code).
(2) Building-mounted or building-integrated systems may be allowed
at the discretion of the Historic District Commission in all Historic
District Overlay Zones and with a special use permit as required
depending on the class of project. Minor building-mounted or
building-integrated systems shall be allowed by right in all other
zones.
B. Exemptions. Net-metering minor solar system installations for
residential or commercial uses shall be allowed in all zoning districts as
a matter of right. Nothing herein shall preclude the Town of East
Greenwich from installing ground-mounted or other solar photovoltaic
facilities on any Town-owned or -controlled property regardless of
zoning district.
C. Compliance with laws, ordinances and regulations. The construction
and operation of all solar system installations shall be consistent with
all applicable local, state and federal laws, ordinances, regulations and
requirements, including, but not limited to, all applicable safety,
construction, electrical and communications requirements. All
buildings and fixtures forming part of a solar energy installation shall
§ 260-120 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-122
C:736
§ 260-123. Development Standards
The following standards shall apply to all applications:
be constructed and maintained in accordance with the Rhode Island
Building Code and Electrical Code.
D. Building permit and building inspection. No solar energy system
installation shall be constructed, installed or modified without first
obtaining a building permit and shall be subject to periodic inspections
as deemed necessary by the building official.
E. Fees and surety. All applicable fees, including but not limited to, a
building permit fee, planning and zoning board review fees, as provided
for herein or in the Code of Ordinances for the Town of East Greenwich,
shall be paid prior to the issuance of any building permits.
F. Plans and surveys. All plans related to design, construction, installation
or modification of a solar energy system installation shall be prepared,
signed and stamped by either a professional engineer, surveyor (for
property line information), or landscape architect (for landscape
information) licensed to practice in the State of Rhode Island.
A. Minor solar energy system installation. A minor system installation is
permitted in all zones, provided such solar installation:
(1) Shall meet all applicable zone requirements, including but not
limited to lighting, setbacks, signage, and height. Should such
proposal require zoning relief, it shall be elevated to a major
installation for procedural purposes; and
(2) Shall require a building permit after submission and approval of
layout and design. Any memorandum of lease, easement, or utility
agreements must also be submitted for review, and shall be
recorded in land evidence in the Town of East Greenwich upon
approval; and
(3) Shall be in compliance with Rhode Island State Building Code and
the Rhode Island State Electrical Code; and
(4) Where applicable, shall have gained approval by the Historic
District Commission.
B. Major solar energy system installation. Major system installations shall
be allowed in the F1 and F2 Zones, the CH and M/LI-O Zones and the
PD and MUPD Zones subject to the below and shall not be permitted in
other zones:
(1) Where allowed, major PV installations require, in all zones except
farm zones as described below, minor land development approval
from the Planning Board and a special use permit from the Zoning
Board of Review, pursuant to RIGL § 45-23-61. On farm-zoned
property in agricultural or farming use and having total land area
§ 260-122 CHARTER § 260-123
C:737
exceeding two acres, the Planning Board's review is not required.
Farm-zoned property not meeting these criteria shall be subject to
the regular Planning Board review process.
(2) When a major installation has an output of greater than 250kw or if
it exceeds 40% of the net buildable area of the lot on which it is
located, then such major solar installation shall require major land
development approval from the Planning Board and a special use
permit from the Zoning Board of Review in all zones, pursuant to
RIGL § 45-23-61. All major system installations shall require a
building permit prior to construction and adhere to the following:
(a) Design standards. Major system installation applications shall
include the proposed site layout and any landscape changes, a
diagram of electrical components, a description of the major
system components to be used, an operation and maintenance
plan, a decommission plan, proof of liability insurance, the
contact information for the project contractors, and utility
approval where applicable (following completion of the utility
company's review and approval of an impact study). Additional
documents may be required by the Planning Board or by the
Zoning Board of Review. The Planning Board may waive
requirements of the land development review process upon
written request of the applicant at preapplication.
(b) Land evidence. Any memorandum of lease, easement, or
utility/distribution agreements shall be submitted with the
installation application and shall be recorded in land evidence
in the Town of East Greenwich after Planning Board and
Zoning Board of Review approvals.
(c) Setbacks and height. Any solar installation, including covered
parking solar installations, must meet all height, lot coverage,
and minimum front, side, and rear yard requirements in the
applicable zone, and must additionally maintain a twenty-foot
vegetated buffer from all adjacent properties and roadways.
(d) Code requirements. All installations shall be in compliance
with the Rhode Island State Building Code and the Rhode
Island State Electrical Code, and shall be subject to periodic
inspections by the East Greenwich Building Official. All
relevant installation components must have a UL listing or
equivalent.
(e) Electrical. All electrical connection and distribution lines
within the installation shall be underground or located entirely
within a structure. Electrical equipment between the
installation and the utility connection may be aboveground if
required by the utility.
(f) Security. A fence shall surround the perimeter of any groundmounted
installation unless adequate property perimeter
§ 260-123 EAST GREENWICH CODE § 260-123
C:738
fencing already exists to the satisfaction of the Zoning Board of
Review. Said fencing shall be no less than seven feet in height
nor greater than 10 feet in height.
(g) Emergency access. Reasonable accessibility for emergency
service vehicles shall be required.
(h) Signage. No signs are allowed on the security perimeter
fencing except for a sign displaying the installation name,
address and emergency contact information, and trespassing/
warning/ danger signs to ensure the safety of individuals who
may come in contact with the installation. No sign shall exceed
four square feet in area.
(i) Lighting. Lighting of solar energy facilities and appurtenant
structures shall be limited to that required for safety and
operational purposes and shall be reasonably shielded from
abutting properties. Such lighting shall be directed downward
and incorporate cutoff fixtures to reduce light pollution.
(j) Abandonment or decommissioning. It is the responsibility of
the parcel owner to remove all obsolete or unused systems
within six months of cessation of operations. Reusable
components are to be recycled whenever feasible. Physical
removal of ground-mounted solar energy systems, structures
and equipment shall include stabilization or revegetation of the
site as necessary to minimize erosion.
(k) Operations and maintenance. When an applicant makes
submission to the Planning Board, he or she shall include an
operations and maintenance plan for the solar energy system.
It shall include provisions for emergency shutdown and shall
provide for maintaining contact information for a responsible
party for the public and agents of the Town to contact with
inquiries or concerns throughout the useful life of the system.
Such plan shall also provide detailed information regarding
any chemicals, solvents or other compounds used to clean or
otherwise maintain the solar panels and provide information
on their storage, disposal and handling.
(l) Financial security. The Planning Board may require a financial
security instrument covering the entire solar energy system
from commencement of operations through decommissioning.
Such instrument may be cash held in escrow or a surety bond
or other form acceptable to the Town. The security must be
sufficient to cover the complete cost of removal and disposal of
the system. The applicant shall submit a fully inclusive
estimate of the costs associated with removal, at the end of the
useful life of the facility, prepared by a qualified engineer
licensed in the State of Rhode Island.
§ 260-123 CHARTER § 260-123
C:739
Appendix
Chapter A261
SPECIAL ACTS
§ A261-1. List of Special Acts.
Year Page Subject
1961 197 Bonds for school projects
491 Annual financial town meeting
1963 26 Town house
29 Civic center bonds
94 Sewer assessments
97 Bonds for school projects
1964 92 Bonds for school projects
97 Senior high school
103 Town house
119 Civic center bonds
1965 43 Town dump
219 Bonds for library
549 Bonds for high school swimming pool
555 Town dump
1966 593 Sewerage disposal system
648 Tax exemption for the aged
1623 Holdings of Free Library Association
1967 149 Tax exemption for the aged
773 Police force
1968 129 Elementary school bonds
618 Acquisition of land for parks
831 Dedication of land for recreation
999 Transfer of cemetery remains
1969 292 Acquisition of land for parks, etc.
707 Regulation of trailers
1971 557 Qualification of Tax Assessor
690 Police force
1973 638 Earth removal ordinances
650 Home Rule Charter provisions validated
1974 97 Boundaries of the East Greenwich Fire District
§ 260-123 EAST GREENWICH CODE § A261-1
C:740
Year Page Subject
1976 313 Housing Authority agreements
489 Historic area zoning
1977 79 Tax exemption for the elderly
81 Home Rule Charter provisions validated
84 Dedication of land for public purposes
1978 215 Tax exemption for the elderly
1979 53 East Greenwich Fire District Charter
1981 1670 Licensing jukeboxes and mechanical devices
1982 452 Tax abatement for historic structures
1984 863 Licensing hawkers and peddlers
1985 19 Bonds for sewage system
508 Opening hours of election polls
1986 14 Tax exemptions
178 Retirement credits for East Greenwich Fire
District members
739 East Greenwich and Warwick boundary lines
1987 138 Retirement system for East Greenwich Fire
District volunteers
424 Regulation of public waters
1988 899 Search warrants and arrest warrants
88 Tax exemption for the elderly, disabled and
blind
122 Zoning exemptions
1989 805 Home Rule Charter amendments validated
806 Home Rule Charter provisions validated
888 Residential parking program
1993 330 Conveyance of Kent County Courthouse to the
Town
1409 Conveyance of Kent County Courthouse to the
Town
26 Kent County Courthouse bonds
99 Kent County Courthouse bonds
1994 1174 Smoking in public buildings prohibited
1486 Smoking in public buildings prohibited
1995 Class B alcoholic beverage licenses
Class B alcoholic beverage licenses
Licensing hawkers and peddlers
§ A261-1 CHARTER § A261-1
C:741
Year Page Subject
Licensing hawkers and peddlers
Licensing hawkers and peddlers
Licensing hawkers and peddlers
1996 Home Rule Charter amendments validated
Homestead exemption
1997 Sewer construction bonds
Taxation of new real estate construction
Taxation of new real estate construction
1998 Establishment of Municipal Court
Community center/high school construction
bonds
Community center/high school construction
bonds
Statement of tax liens
1999 Sewer construction bonds
2000 Regional tourism districts
Interest on unpaid quarterly tax payments
Interest on unpaid quarterly tax payments
2001 13 Home Rule Charter amendments validated
673 Cost of living adjustments for Town employees
679 Open space/recreation bonds
285 Freeze tax rate and valuation for the elderly
338 Freeze tax rate and valuation for the elderly
2002 Open space/recreation bonds
Open space/recreation bonds
School construction and renovation bonds
School construction and renovation bonds
School construction and renovation bonds
Sewer construction bonds
Sewer construction bonds
Tax exemption for the elderly
Tax exemption for the elderly
Tax exemption for the elderly
Reduction in assessed value of real estate upon
removal of damaged structures
Reduction in assessed value of real estate upon
removal of damaged structures
§ A261-1 EAST GREENWICH CODE § A261-1
C:742
Year Page Subject
2004 School construction and renovation bonds
School construction and renovation bonds
School renovation bonds
School renovation bonds
2005 Home Rule Charter amendments validated
Home Rule Charter amendments validated
Fire Engine Company Charter amendment
Police station construction bonds
Police station construction bonds
2006 Former landfill remediation bonds
Recreation and sports facilities bonds
Senior and community center bonds
Tax increase deferral for elderly resident
homeowners
Tax increase deferral for elderly resident
homeowners
2007 Senior and community center bonds
2008 Public building construction and renovation
bonds
School construction and renovation bonds
2013 182 Acquisition of East Greenwich Fire District
205 Acquisition of East Greenwich Fire District
1782 Tax exemption for the elderly, disabled and
veterans
1883 Tax exemption for the elderly, disabled and
veterans
2014 515 Road, sidewalk and drainage bonds
425 Road, sidewalk and drainage bonds
2015 Home Rule Charter amendments validated
Home Rule Charter amendments validated
§ A261-1 CHARTER § A261-1
C:743
Chapter A263
DEVELOPMENT AND SUBDIVISION REVIEW REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Board — See Ch. 34, Art. IV.
Building construction — See Ch. 38.
Development impact fees — See Ch. 93, Art.
II.
Land Trust — See Ch. 143.
Sewers — See Ch. 197.
Soil erosion and sedimentation control — See
Ch. 207.
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
STATE LAW REFERENCES
Abandonment of streets — See R.I.G.L.
§ 24-6-1 et seq.
Land Development and Subdivision Review
Enabling Act of 1992 — See R.I.G.L.
§ 45-23-25 et seq.
Comprehensive Planning and Land Use
Regulation Act — See R.I.G.L. § 45-22.2-1 et
seq.
Development Impact Fee Act — See R.I.G.L.
§ 45-22.4-1 et seq.
Zoning Enabling Act of 1991 — See R.I.G.L.
§ 45-24-27 et seq.
§ A263-1. Title.
These regulations shall be known as the "Town of East Greenwich
Development and Subdivision Review Regulations."
§ A263-2. Authority.
In accordance with the authority vested in the East Greenwich Planning
Board by Title 45, Chapter 23 of the General Laws of Rhode Island (the Act),
as amended, and by the Code of Ordinances of the Town of East Greenwich,
Chapter 34, Article IV, Planning Board, the Planning Board hereby declares
its intention to exercise the power granted to it and hereby adopts the
following regulations. They are declared effective as of August 16,1999, and
supersede all previous land development and subdivision regulations of the
Town of East Greenwich.
§ A263-3. Applicability.
A. Generally. These regulations shall be applicable in all of the following
instances:
(1) In all cases of subdivision of land, including resubdivision, as
defined in Section 45-23-32 of the Act, all provisions of Sections
45-23-25 through 45-23-74 of the Act shall apply.
§ A261-1 EAST GREENWICH CODE § A263-3
C:744
§ A263-4. Continuation of ordinances; suppression; effect on earlier
recorded plats.
Nothing herein contained and no Town ordinance, rule or regulation
adopted herein shall impair the validity of any plat legally recorded prior to
the effective date of such ordinance, rule or regulation.
§ A263-5. General purposes of these regulations.
The purpose of these regulations is to establish procedural and substantive
provisions for the subdivision and development of land that will, consistent
with the provisions of the Comprehensive Community Plan and the Zoning
Ordinance, accomplish the following purposes:
(2) In all cases of land development projects, as provided for in Section
45-24-47 of the Zoning Enabling Act of 1991, where East
Greenwich may allow for such land development projects in the
Zoning Ordinance.138
(3) In all cases of development plan review, as provided for in Section
45-24-49 of the Zoning Enabling Act of 1991, where East
Greenwich has established, within its Zoning Ordinance,
procedures for review and approval of such applications.
B. Plats required.
(1) All activity defined as a subdivision shall require a new plat, drawn
to the specifications of these regulations, and shall be reviewed and
approved by the Planning Board or its agents as provided; and
(2) Prior to recording, the approved plat shall be submitted for
signature as specified in Section 45-23-64 of the Development
Review Act.
A. Provide for the orderly, thorough and expeditious review and approval
of land developments and subdivisions;
B. Promote high quality and appropriate design and construction of land
developments and subdivisions;
C. Protect the existing natural and built environment and mitigate all
significant negative impacts of any proposed development on the
existing environment;
D. Promote design of land developments and subdivisions that are wellintegrated
with the surrounding neighborhoods with regard to natural
and built features, and that concentrate development in areas that can
best support intensive use by reason of natural characteristics and
existing infrastructure;
138. Editor's Note: See Ch. 260, Zoning.
§ A263-3 CHARTER § A263-5
C:745
§ A263-6. Consistency with East Greenwich Comprehensive
Community Plan; Zoning Ordinance and the Act.
In the instance of uncertainty in the interpretation, construction or
application of any section of these regulations, it shall be construed in
a manner that will further the implementation of, and not be contrary
to, the goals and policies and applicable elements of the East Greenwich
Comprehensive Community Plan and the Zoning Ordinance. Furthermore,
this chapter shall be interpreted in a fashion that is consistent with the
legislative findings, intents and purposes of Sections 45-23-25 through
45-23-74 of the Act.139
§ A263-7. Definitions.
Where words or phrases used in this chapter are defined in the definitions
section of either the Rhode Island Comprehensive Planning and Land Use
Regulation Act, § 45-22.2-4, or the Zoning Enabling Act of 1991, § 45-24-31,
they shall have the meanings stated therein. In addition other below-listed
words, phrases and terms shall have the following meanings:
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Town official(s) designated by these
regulations to administer the land development and subdivision regulations
and to coordinate with local boards and commissions, municipal staff and
state agencies.
ADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISION — Resubdivision of existing lots which
yields no additional lots for development and involves no creation or
extension of streets. Such resubdivision shall only involve divisions,
E. Provide thorough technical review of all proposed land developments
and subdivisions;
F. Provide local design and improvements standards to reflect the intent
of the Comprehensive Community Plan with regards to the physical
character of the various neighborhoods and districts of the Town of East
Greenwich;
G. Encourage, fairly apply, and administer dedications of public land,
impact mitigation and payment-in-lieu thereof, based on clear
documentation of needs;
H. Establish consistent application of procedures for local recordkeeping
on all matters of land development and subdivision review, approval
and construction;
I. Protect the public health, safety and welfare; and
J. Assure the orderly growth and development of the Town of East
Greenwich.
139. Editor's Note: See the Rhode Island Land Development and Subdivision Review Enabling
Act of 1992.
§ A263-5 EAST GREENWICH CODE § A263-7
C:746
mergers, mergers and division, or adjustments of boundaries of existing
lots.
BICYCLE PATH — A pathway, usually separated from the roadway, designed
specifically to satisfy the requirements of bicycling.
BOARD OF APPEAL — The review authority for appeals of actions of the
Administrative Officer and the Permitting Authority on matters of land
development or subdivision, which shall be the Zoning Board of Review
constituted as the Board of Appeal. See § A263-43.
BOND — See "improvement guarantee."
BUILDABLE LOT — A lot where construction for the use(s) permitted
on the site under the Zoning Ordinance is considered practicable by the
Permitting Authority, considering the physical constraints to development of
the site as well as the requirements of the pertinent federal, state and local
regulations. See also Appendix B, Lot Design Standards.140
CAPPED SYSTEM — A completed water supply and/or sanitary sewer
system constructed prior to availability of a public water or sewer
connection, which is sealed or capped to prevent usage until such a
connection is made.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETENESS — A notice issued by the
Administrative Officer informing an applicant that the application is
complete and meets the requirements of this chapter and that the applicant
may proceed with the approval process. See § A263-10B.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — A site planning technique that concentrates
buildings in specific areas on the site to allow the remaining land to be used
for recreation, common open space and/or preservation of environmentally,
historically or other sensitive features and/or structures. The techniques
used to concentrate buildings shall be specified in the ordinance and may
include, but are not limited to, reduced lot areas, setback requirements and/
or bulk requirements with the resultant open land being devoted by deed
restrictions for one or more uses. Under cluster development there is no
increase in the number of lots that would be permitted under conventional
development except where ordinance provisions include incentive bonuses
for certain types or conditions of development. (See Chapter 260, Zoning,
Article IX, Cluster Subdivisions, for further definitions related to clusters.)
CONCEPT PLAN — A drawing with accompanying information showing
the basic elements of a proposed land development plan or subdivision
as used for preapplication meetings and initial process discussions and
classification of the project within the approval process.
CONSISTENCY WITH THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — A requirement of
all East Greenwich regulations, which means that all such regulations
and subsequent actions shall be in accordance with the public policies
arrived at through detailed study and analysis and adopted by the Town
140. Editor's Note: Appendix B, Lot Design Standards, is attached to this chapter.
§ A263-7 CHARTER § A263-7
C:747
of East Greenwich as the Comprehensive Community Plan as specified (in
§ 45-22.2-3 of the Rhode Island General Laws).
DEDICATION, FEE IN LIEU OF — Payments of cash which are authorized in
the local regulations when requirements for mandatory dedication of land
are not met because of physical conditions of the site or other reasons. The
conditions under which the payments will be allowed and all formulas for
calculating the amount shall be specified in advance in the local regulations.
See R.I.G.L. § 45-23-47.[Amended 12-9-2015]
DEVELOPMENT REGULATION — Zoning, subdivision, land development
plan, development plan review, historic district, Official Map, floodplain
regulation, soil erosion control or any other governmental regulation of the
use and development of land.
DIVISION OF LAND — A subdivision.
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS — Natural features, resources or land
characteristics that are sensitive to change and may require conservation
measures or the application of special development techniques to prevent
degradation of the site, or may require limited development or, in certain
instances, may preclude development. See also "physical constraints to
development."
FINAL PLAN — The final stage of the land development and subdivision
review process. See § A263-21.
FINAL PLAT — The final drawing(s) of all or a portion of a subdivision to be
recorded after approval by the Permitting Authority and any accompanying
material as described in this chapter and/or required by the Planning Board.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — See Rhode Island State Building Code.141
GOVERNING BODY — The East Greenwich Town Council.
IMPROVEMENT — Any natural or built item which becomes part of, is
placed upon, or is affixed to real estate.
IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEE — A security instrument in a form acceptable
to the Town to ensure that all improvements, facilities or work required
by the land development and subdivision regulations, or required as a
condition of approval, will be completed in compliance with the approved
plans and specifications of a development. See § A263-25.
LOCAL REGULATIONS — The development and subdivision review
regulations adopted under the provisions of the Act. Where reference is
made to local regulations, it shall be understood as the development and
subdivision review regulations and all related ordinances and rules properly
adopted pursuant to the Act.
LOT — Either: 1) the basic development unit for determination of lot area,
depth and other dimensional regulations; or 2) a parcel of land whose
boundaries have been established by some legal instrument such as a
141. Editor's Note: See R.I.G.L. § 23-27.3-100.1 et seq.
§ A263-7 EAST GREENWICH CODE § A263-7
C:748
recorded deed or recorded map and which is recognized as a separate legal
entity for purposes of transfer of title.
LOT FRONTAGE — That portion of a lot extending along a street right-ofway.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — A security instrument which may be
required and accepted by the Town to ensure that necessary improvements
will function as required for a specific period of time. See "improvement
guarantee."
MAJOR LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN — Any land development plan not
classified as a minor land development plan.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as either an
administrative subdivision or a minor subdivision.
MASTER PLAN — An overall plan for a proposed project site outlining
general, rather than detailed, development intentions. It describes the basic
parameters of a major development proposal rather than giving full
engineering details. Required in major land development or major
subdivision review.
MINIMUM BUILDABLE AREA (M.B.A.) — The amount of land required
by zone to constitute the building envelope for each lot. The minimum
buildable area is defined by taking the minimum lot size for a zone and
subtracting the required setbacks. The M.B.A. shall be free of all wetlands,
drainage structures or other features which would impair its use for
purposes allowed under the Zoning Ordinance. See Appendix B.142
MINOR LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A development plan for a
residential project, as defined in local regulations, provided that such
development does not require waivers or modifications as specified in this
chapter. All nonresidential land development projects shall be considered as
major land development plans.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — A plan for a subdivision of land consisting of
five or fewer units or lots, provided that such subdivision does not require
waivers or modifications as specified in this act.
MODIFICATION OR WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS — See § A263-38.
PARCEL — A lot or contiguous group of lots in single ownership or under
single control and usually considered a unit for purposes of development.
PARKING AREA OR LOT — All that portion of a development that is used
by vehicles, the total area used for vehicular access, circulation, parking,
loading and unloading.
PERMITTING AUTHORITY — The Planning Board.
PHASED DEVELOPMENT — Development, generally of a large scale, where
construction of public and/or private improvements proceeds in sections or
phases according to an approved master plan for the entire site.
142. Editor's Note: Appendix B, Lot Design Standards, is attached to this chapter.
§ A263-7 CHARTER § A263-7
C:749
PHYSICAL CONSTRAINTS TO DEVELOPMENT — Characteristics of a site
or area, either natural or man-made, which preclude or present significant
difficulties to construction of the uses permitted on that site or would
require extraordinary construction methods. See also "environmental
constraints."
PLANNING BOARD — The official planning agency of the Town of East
Greenwich.
PLAT — A drawing or drawings of a land development or subdivision plan
showing the location, boundaries and lot lines of individual properties, as
well as other necessary information as specified in these Regulations.
PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE — An initial meeting between developers
and municipal representatives which affords developers the opportunity to
present their proposals informally and to receive comments and directions
from the municipal officials and others. See § A263-9.
PRELIMINARY PLAN — The required stage of land development and
subdivision review, which shall require detailed engineered drawings and
all required state and federal permits. See §§ A263-13 and A263-19.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT — Any street or other roadway, sidewalk,
pedestrian way, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, drainage feature, or
other facility for which the local government or other governmental entity
either is presently responsible or will ultimately assume the responsibility
for maintenance and operation upon municipal acceptance.
PUBLIC INFORMATIONAL MEETING — A meeting of the Permitting
Authority or governing body preceded by a notice, open to the public and at
which the public shall be heard. See § A263-16D(1) and (2).
RESUBDIVISION — Any change of an approved or recorded subdivision plat
or in a lot recorded in the Town land evidence records, or that affects the
lot lines of any areas reserved for public use, or that affects any map or plan
legally recorded prior to the adoption of these regulations.
STORMWATER DETENTION — A method for storage of stormwater runoff
and the controlled release of such runoff during and after a flood or storm
event.
STORMWATER RETENTION — A provision for storage/holding of
stormwater runoff.
STREET — A public or private thoroughfare used, or intended to be used,
for passage or travel by motor vehicles. See street classification.
STREET, ACCESS TO — An adequate and permanent way of entering a lot.
All lots of record shall have access to a public street for all vehicles normally
associated with the uses permitted for that lot.
STREET ALLEY — A public or private thoroughfare primarily designed to
serve as secondary access to the side or rear of those properties, whose
principal frontage is on some other street.
§ A263-7 EAST GREENWICH CODE § A263-7
C:750
STREET CLASSIFICATION — A method of roadway organization which
identifies a street hierarchy according to function within a road system,
that is, types of vehicles served and anticipated volumes, for the purposes
of promoting safety, efficient land use and the design character of
neighborhoods and districts. Local classifications shall use the following as
major categories:
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC — A local street with only one outlet and having
an appropriate vehicular turnaround, either temporary or permanent, at
the closed (bulb) end. Culs-de-sac shall not exceed 1,000 feet in length.
Minimum length for culs-de-sac shall consist of the base frontage for the
zone in which it lies plus the dimensions of the full bulb. The "bulb" of the
cul-de-sac shall provide frontage for a maximum of three lots.
STREET, LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY — A freeway or expressway
providing for through traffic. Owners or occupants of abutting property on
lands and other persons have no legal right to access, except at such points
and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having
jurisdiction over the highway. Frontage on a limited access highway shall
not constitute legal frontage for zoning or subdivision purposes.
STREET, PRIVATE — Private streets shall be prohibited in all single-family
residential developments.
STREET, PUBLIC — All public property reserved or dedicated for street
traffic.
STREET STUB — A portion of a street reserved to provide access to future
development, which may provide for utility connections.
SUBDIVIDER — Any person who (1) having an interest in land, causes it,
directly or indirectly, to be divided into a subdivision; or who (2) directly
or indirectly sells, leases or develops, or offers to sell, lease or develop,
or advertises to sell, lease or develop, any interest, lot, parcel, site, unit
or plat in a subdivision; or who (3) engages directly or through an agent
in the business of selling, leasing, developing or offering for sale, lease or
development a subdivision or any interest, lot, parcel, site, unit or plat in a
subdivision.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
into two or more lots, tracts or parcels. Any adjustment to existing lot
lines of a lot of record by any means shall be considered a subdivision.
ARTERIAL — A major street that serves as an avenue for the circulation
of traffic into, out of, or around the Town and carries high volumes of
traffic.
A.
COLLECTOR — A street whose principal function is to carry traffic
between local streets and arterial streets but that may also provide
direct access to abutting properties.
B.
LOCAL — Streets whose primary function is to provide access to
abutting properties.
C.
§ A263-7 CHARTER § A263-7
C:751
All resubdivision activity shall be considered a subdivision. The division of
property for purposes of financing constitutes a subdivision.
TECHNICAL REVIEW COMMITTEE — A committee comprised of the Town
Manager, Director of Public Works, Chief of Police, Fire Chief, Director
of Parks and Recreation, Building Official/Zoning Enforcement Officer, and
the Director of Planning, or their assigns, for the purpose of reviewing,
commenting and making recommendations to the Planning Board with
respect to approval of land development and subdivision applications. The
Director of the Kent County Water Authority is an advisor to the Technical
Review Committee.
TEMPORARY IMPROVEMENT — Improvements built and maintained by a
developer during construction of a development project and prior to release
of the improvement guarantee that are not intended to be permanent.
VEGETATED BUFFER — A naturally vegetated, landscaped or revegetated
area retained as such and wherein construction and land disturbance, such
as clearing trees, cutting brush or grading, is prohibited, and new buildings
or structures, including but not limited to roads, septic systems, sheds and
utilities are not allowed. See also § A263-23.[Added 11-6-2013]
VESTED RIGHTS — The right to initiate or continue the development of
an approved project for a specified period of time, under the regulations
that were in effect at the time of approval, even if, after the approval, the
regulations change prior to the completion of the project.
WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS — See § A263-38.
§ A263-8. General provisions applicable to all land developments
and subdivisions.
A. Required findings. In approving all administrative, minor and major
development applications the Permitting Authority or the
Administrative Officer shall address each of the general purposes of
these regulations and shall make positive findings relative to the belowlisted
provisions. If an adverse or negative finding for any of these
standards is made, the Permitting Authority or Administrative Officer
shall have grounds for denial of the project design. All findings shall be
in writing and shall be part of the project's record of review.
(1) All subdivisions shall be consistent with the requirements of the
East Greenwich Comprehensive Community Plan and/or shall
satisfactorily address the issues where there may be
inconsistencies;
(2) All proposed lots in a subdivision shall conform to the minimum
standards and applicable provisions of the East Greenwich Zoning
Ordinance. Note: Lots donated to the Town to comply with
requirements relating to recreational facilities may, at the
discretion of the Permitting Authority, not meet all dimensional and
other requirements of the zone in which the lot is situated. In such
cases the following shall apply:
§ A263-7 EAST GREENWICH CODE § A263-8
C:752
§ A263-9. General provisions: preapplication meetings and concept
review.
(a) The recorded plat shall contain a statement that the lot being
created is not a buildable lot; and
(b) The lot is granted to the Town of East Greenwich or East
Greenwich Municipal Land Trust as a passive or active
recreational site for use in the furtherance of the policies of the
East Greenwich Open Space and Recreation Plan (EGORP).
(3) All lots proposed for development shall meet the minimum
buildable area standards of these regulations. (See Appendix B,
Table 1.143)
(4) There will be no significant adverse environmental impacts from
the proposed development as shown on the final plan, with all
required conditions for approval.
(5) The subdivision, as proposed, will not result in the creation of lots
that due to environmental or physical limitations to development
that construction or use would be impracticable. (See Appendix B,
Lot Design Standards, and Definition Section; Minimum Buildable
Area). Lots characterized as such may be allowable only as
permanent open space or for passive natural or recreational
purposes with notation of same made on the record plat [see
§ A263-8A(2)(b)].
(6) All proposed land developments and subdivision lots shall have
adequate and permanent physical access to a public street. Lot
frontage on a public street without the ability to physically access
same shall not be allowed.
(7) Each subdivision shall make provisions for: safe circulation of
pedestrians; bicycles and vehicular traffic; the adequate detention
of surface water runoff and storm flow; building sites meeting the
minimum buildable area requirements of these regulations; and
preservation of natural, visual, historic or cultural features of the
site and surrounding community.
(8) The design, location and construction of streets, building lots,
utilities, drainage improvements and any other improvements in
each subdivision shall not increase flooding or cause excessive soil
erosion or sedimentation to occur.
B. Except for administrative subdivisions, findings of fact must be
supported by legally competent evidence on the record which discloses
the source and character of the observations upon which the factfinders
acted.
143. Editor's Note: Appendix B, Lot Design Standards, is attached to this chapter.
§ A263-8 CHARTER § A263-9
C:753
§ A263-10. General provisions; application for development and
certification of completeness.
A. A minimum of one or more preapplication meetings shall be held for all
major land development or subdivision applications. One preapplication
meeting may be held for administrative subdivisions, upon request of
the Town officials or the applicant. A minimum of one preapplication
meeting shall be required for all minor subdivisions prior to submission
of any application for minor subdivision review. Preapplication
meetings shall allow the applicant to meet with appropriate Town
officers, boards, commissions, planning staff for advice and guidance
relative to the required steps in the approval process, review of local
plans, ordinances, regulations, rules and procedures, and standards
which may impact the proposed development project.
B. At the preapplication stage, the applicant may request an informal
concept plan review for a development. The purpose of the concept plan
review is also to provide Town professional staff and the Permitting
Authority the opportunity for input during the formative stages of major
subdivision and development concept design.
C. Applicants seeking a preapplication meeting or an informal concept
review shall submit general, conceptual materials, an application, all
required fees and information required by the Preapplication
Checklist144 20 days in advance of the meeting(s).
D. The purpose of preapplication meetings is to promote the sharing and
discussion of project concepts among all participants. Preapplication
discussions are intended to provide guidance to project applicants and
do not constitute approval of the project or its constituent parts.
E. Provided that at least one preapplication meeting has been held for
major land development or subdivision application or 60 days have
elapsed from the filing of the preapplication submission and no
preapplication meeting has been scheduled to occur within said 60
days, nothing shall be deemed to preclude an applicant from thereafter
filing and proceeding with an application for a land development or
subdivision project in accordance with § A263-10 of these regulations.
F. Preapplication Checklist. (Editor's Note: The Preapplication Checklist
is attached to this chapter.)
A. Classification. The Administrative Officer shall advise the applicant as
to which process steps and approvals are required and the appropriate
body or board(s) for hearing an application for a land development or
subdivision project. Applications fall into three classifications:
(1) Administrative subdivision;
(2) Minor subdivision or minor land development plan; and
144. Editor's Note: The Preapplication Checklist is attached to this chapter.
§ A263-9 EAST GREENWICH CODE § A263-10
C:754
§ A263-11. General provisions: administrative subdivision.
(3) Major subdivision or major land development plan.
B. Certification of a complete application. An application shall be complete
for purposes of commencing the applicable time frame for formal
consideration upon certification by the Administrative Officer. Every
certification of completeness required by this chapter shall be in
writing. If such certification of the application is not made within the
time specified in these regulations, the application shall be deemed
complete for purposes of commencing the review period. This shall be
the case unless the application lacks information required as specified
in these regulations and the Administrative Officer has notified the
applicant, in writing, of such deficiencies. [Amended 12-9-2015]
C. Notwithstanding the above subsections, the Permitting Authority may
require correction of any information found to be in error and/or
submission of additional information specified in the regulations but not
required by the Administrative Officer prior to certification.
D. Where review is postponed with the consent of the applicant, pending
further information or revision of information, the time period for
review shall be stayed and shall resume when the Administrative
Officer or the Planning Board determines that the required application
information is complete.
A. Any applicant requesting approval of an administrative subdivision
shall submit a completed application form and required application fee
to the Administrative Officer and all items in complete form as required
by these regulations for such proposals. See Checklist I, Administrative
Subdivisions.145
B. The application shall be certified, in writing, as complete or incomplete
by the Administrative Officer within a fifteen-day period from the date
of its submission. [Amended 12-9-2015]
C. Review process.
(1) Within 15 days of certification of completeness, the Administrative
Officer shall review the application and approve, deny or refer it to
the Permitting Authority with analysis and recommendations. The
Officer shall report his/her actions to the Permitting Authority at its
next regular meeting, to be made part of the record.
(2) If no action is taken by the Administrative Officer within the 15
days, the application shall be placed on the agenda of the next
regular Permitting Authority meeting.
D. If referred to the Permitting Authority, the Board shall consider the
application and the recommendations of the Administrative Officer and
145. Editor's Note: Checklist I, Administrative Subdivisions, is attached to this chapter.
§ A263-10 CHARTER § A263-11
C:755
§ A263-12. General provisions: minor land development and minor
subdivision review.
shall either approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application
within 65 days of certification of completeness. Failure of the
Permitting Authority to act within the period prescribed shall constitute
approval of the administrative subdivision plan. A certificate from the
Administrative Officer as to the failure of the Permitting Authority to
act within the required time and the resultant approval shall be issued
on request of the applicant.
E. Denial of an application by the Administrative Officer shall not be
appealable and will require the plan to be submitted as a minor
subdivision application to the Permitting Authority.
F. Any approval of an administrative subdivision shall be evidenced by a
written decision which shall be filed and posted in the office of the city
or town clerk.
G. Approval of an administrative subdivision shall expire 90 days from the
date of approval unless within such period a plat in conformity with
such approval is submitted for signature and recording in accord with
the standards of these regulations.
A. Review stages. Minor plan review shall consist of two principal stages,
preliminary and final. If a street creation or extension is involved, a
public hearing is required. The Permitting Authority, at its discretion,
may combine the approval stages, providing all requirements for both
stages have been met by the applicant to the satisfaction of the
Administrative Officer.
B. Submission requirements. Any applicant requesting approval of a
proposed minor subdivision or minor land development, as defined,
shall submit to the Administrative Officer all items required for
certification. (See Checklist II, Preliminary Plat: Minor Land
Development and Minor Subdivisions, and Checklist III, Final Plat:
Minor Land Development and Minor Subdivisions. A minimum of three
sets of application shall be required.)
C. Certification. The application shall be certified, in writing, as complete
or incomplete by the Administrative Officer within 25 days, or within 15
days if no street creation or extension is required according to the
provisions of § A263-10. The running of the time period set forth herein
shall be deemed stopped upon the issuance of a certificate of
incompleteness of the application by the Administrative Officer and
shall recommence upon the resubmission of a corrected application by
the applicant; however, in no event shall the Administrative Officer be
required to certify a corrected submission as complete or incomplete
less than 14 days after its resubmission. [Amended 12-9-2015]
§ A263-11 EAST GREENWICH CODE § A263-12
C:756
§ A263-13. Preliminary plat checklist: minor land development and
minor subdivisions.
(Editor's Note: Checklist II, Preliminary Plat: Minor Land Development and
Minor Subdivisions, is attached to this chapter.)
D. The Administrative Officer and Town professional staff and/or Town
boards shall review the complete application and forward analysis,
comment and recommendations to the Permitting Authority. The plans
shall also be forwarded to the Technical Review Committee for advisory
review.
E. Technical Review Committee. The Technical Review Committee shall
review all minor land development projects and subdivisions and
forward its analysis and recommendations to the Permitting Authority.
F. Reassignment to major review. The Permitting Authority may reassign a
proposed minor proposal to major review if its review does not result in
positive findings required outlined in § A263-8A(1) through (8).
G. Decision. If no street creation or extension is required, the Permitting
Authority shall approve, deny or approve with conditions the
preliminary plan within 65 days of certification of completeness, or
within such further time as is agreed to by the applicant and the
reviewing body. If a street extension or creation is proposed, a public
hearing shall be held prior to approval according to the requirements in
§ A263-20. The Permitting Authority shall approve, deny or approve
with conditions the preliminary plan within 95 days of certification of
completeness, or within such further time as is agreed to by the
applicant and the Board.
H. Failure to act. Failure of the Permitting Authority to act within the
period prescribed shall constitute approval of the preliminary plan, and
a certificate of the Administrative Officer as to the failure of the
Permitting Authority to act within the required time and the resulting
approval shall be issued on request of the applicant.
I. Final plan. The Permitting Authority may delegate final plan review and
approval to the Administrative Officer. The Officer shall report his
actions, in writing, to the Permitting Authority at its next regular
meeting, to be made part of the record. [Amended 12-9-2015]
J. Vesting. Approval of a minor land development or subdivision plan shall
expire 90 days from the date of approval unless, within such period, a
plat or plan in conformity with such approval and as defined in this act
is submitted for signature and recording into Town land evidence
records. Approval may be extended for a longer period, if requested by
the applicant in writing and approved by the Permitting Authority.
§ A263-12 CHARTER § A263-14
C:757
§ A263-14. Final plat checklist: minor land development and minor
subdivisions.
(Editor's Note: Checklist III, Final Plat: Minor Land Development and Minor
Subdivisions, is attached to this chapter.)
§ A263-15. General provisions: major land development and major
subdivision review stages.
§ A263-16. General provisions: major land development and major
subdivision; master plan.
A. Major plan review shall be required of all applications for land
development and subdivision approval subject to these regulations,
unless the proposal is classified as an administrative subdivision or as a
minor land development or a minor subdivision.
B. Major plan review shall consist of three stages of review; these are:
master plan, preliminary plan and final plan. These steps may
commence only after the preapplication meetings referenced in
§ A263-9 have taken place. For this type of proposal a public
informational meeting and a public hearing are required.
C. The Permitting Authority, at its discretion, may vote to combine review
stages and to modify and/or waive requirements as specified in
§ A263-39. Review stages may be combined only after the Permitting
Authority determines that all necessary requirements have been met by
the applicant.
D. Review by the Technical Review Committee shall be required for all
major land developments and major subdivisions. This review shall
occur concurrently with the initial review referenced below in
§ A263-16A(3).
A. Requirements for submission.
(1) The applicant(s) shall first submit to the Administrative Officer the
items required for master plans. (A minimum of seven sets shall be
submitted for initial review by staff.)
(2) Requirements for the master plan and supporting material for this
phase of review shall include, but not be limited to the information
materials and supporting documents required on the Master Plan
Checklist.146
(3) Initial review and comments shall be solicited by the Administrative
Officer from the following: a) local agencies, including, but not
limited to, the Planning Department, the Department of Public
Works, Division of Wastewater Treatment, Fire Department and
146. Editor's Note: Checklist IV, Master Plan Checklist: Major Land Development and Major
Subdivisions, is attached to this chapter.
§ A263-14 EAST GREENWICH CODE § A263-16
C:758
Police Department, Town Department of Public Works, Building
Official, Tax Assessor, Tax Collector, Kent County Water Authority;
b) adjacent communities; if applicable; c) state agencies, as
appropriate, including the Departments of Environmental
Management and Transportation. The Administrative Officer shall
coordinate this review and comments by local officials, adjacent
communities and other agencies. [Amended 12-9-2015]
B. Certification. The application shall be certified, in writing, complete or
incomplete by the Administrative Officer within 60 days of receipt. The
running of the time period set forth herein will be deemed stopped upon
the issuance of a certificate of incompleteness of the application by the
Administrative Officer and will recommence upon the resubmission of a
corrected application by the applicant. However, in no event will the
Administrative Officer be required to certify a corrected submission as
complete or incomplete less than 14 days after its resubmission.
[Amended 12-9-2015]
C. The Administrative Officer shall provide a coordinated review
document and summary of staff recommendations to the Permitting
Authority. The Administrative Officer shall also refer the proposal to the
Technical Review Committee, which shall forward its review and
recommendations to the Permitting Authority not less than 14 days
prior to the hearing at which the proposal shall be considered.
D. Informational meeting. A public informational meeting shall be held
prior to the Permitting Authority decision on the master plan, unless the
master plan and preliminary plan approvals are being combined, in
which case the public informational meeting shall be optional, based
upon Permitting Authority's determination.
(1) Public notice for the informational meeting is required and shall
appear in a newspaper of general circulation within the Town at
least seven days prior to the meeting. The Administrative Officer
shall instruct the Town Clerk to advertise same. Postcard notice
shall be mailed by the applicant to all property owners within the
notice area. A list of property owners within the notice area,
certified by the Tax Assessor, shall be provided by the applicant to
the Administrative Officer.
(2) At the public informational meeting, the applicant shall present the
proposed development project. The Permitting Authority shall
allow oral and written comments from the general public. All public
comments shall be made part of the public record of the project
application.
E. Decision. The Permitting Authority shall, within 120 days of
certification of completeness, or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant, approve of the master plan as submitted,
approve with changes and/or conditions, or deny the application.
§ A263-16 CHARTER § A263-16
C:759
§ A263-17. Master plan checklist: major land development and
major subdivisions.
(Editor's Note: Checklist IV, Master Plan Checklist: Major Land
Development and Major Subdivisions, is attached to this chapter.)
§ A263-18. General provisions: major land development and major
subdivision; preliminary plan.
F. Failure to act. Failure of the Permitting Authority to act within the
period prescribed shall constitute approval of the master plan. A
certificate issued by the Administrative Officer regarding the failure of
the Permitting Authority to act within the required time frame and the
resulting approval shall be issued upon request of the applicant.
G. Vesting. [Amended 12-9-2015]
(1) The approved master plan shall be vested for a period of two years,
with a right to extend for two one-year extensions upon written
request by the applicant, who must appear before the Permitting
Authority for the annual review. Vesting may be extended for a
longer period, for good cause, if requested by the applicant, in
writing, and approved by the Permitting Authority. Master plan
vesting shall include the zoning requirements, conceptual layout
and all conditions shown on the approved master plan drawings
and supporting materials.
(2) The initial four-year vesting for the approved master plan shall
constitute the vested rights for the development.
A. Submission requirements.
(1) The applicant shall, as a first step, submit a completed application
form and the required application fee to the Administrative Officer
with the items required for preliminary plans.
(2) Requirements for the preliminary plan and supporting materials for
this phase of the review shall include, but not be limited to, the
information and materials required on the Preliminary Plan
Checklist:147 engineering plans depicting the existing site
conditions; engineering plans depicting the proposed development
project; a perimeter survey; all permits which may be required by
state or federal agencies prior to commencement of construction,
including permits related to freshwater wetlands, floodplains,
preliminary suitability for individual septic disposal systems, public
water systems, and connections to state roads.
(3) Final written comments on the preliminary plan. At the preliminary
plan review phase, the Administrative Officer shall solicit final
147. Editor's Note: Checklist V, Preliminary Plat: Major Land Development and Major
Subdivisions, is attached to this chapter.
§ A263-16 EAST GREENWICH CODE § A263-18
C:760
written comments and/or approvals of the Department of Public
Works, the city or town engineer, the city or town solicitor, other
local government departments, commissions or authorities, as
appropriate.
(4) Prior to approval of the preliminary plan, copies of all legal
documents describing the property, proposed easements and
rights-of-way.
B. Certification. The application shall be certified as complete or
incomplete by the Administrative Officer within 60 days, according to
the provisions of the enabling act. The running time period set forth
herein shall be deemed stopped upon the issuance of a certificate of
incompleteness of the application by the Administrative Officer and
shall recommence upon the resubmission of a corrected application by
the applicant; however, in no event shall the Administrative Officer be
required to certify a corrected submission as complete or incomplete
less than 14 days after resubmission.
C. Technical Review Committee. The Technical Review Committee shall
review the application and shall comment and make recommendations
to the Permitting Authority prior to the date scheduled for the
Permitting Authority meeting at which the application is to be
considered.
D. Public hearing. Prior to the Permitting Authority's decision on the
preliminary plan, a public hearing with notice must be held. A
representative from the Town Solicitor's office shall be present at the
public hearing.
E. Public improvement guarantees. Proposed arrangements for
completion of the required public improvements, including construction
schedule and type of proposed financial guarantees, shall be reviewed
and approved by the Permitting Authority at preliminary plan approval
hearing.
F. Decision. A complete application for a major subdivision or
development plan shall be approved, approved with conditions, or
denied within 120 days of the date when it is certified complete, or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
G. Failure to act. If the Permitting Authority fails to act on the application
within the period prescribed, such failure shall constitute approval of
the preliminary plan. A certificate of the Administrative Officer as to the
failure of the Permitting Authority to act within the required time and
the resulting approval shall be issued on request of the applicant.
H. Vesting. The approved preliminary plan shall be vested for a period of
one year and vesting may be extended for a longer period, for good
cause shown, if requested in writing by the applicant and approved by
the Permitting Authority. The vesting for the preliminary plan approval
§ A263-18 CHARTER § A263-18
C:761
§ A263-19. Preliminary plat checklist: major land development and
major subdivisions.
(Editor's Note: Checklist V, Preliminary Plat: Major Land Development and
Major Subdivisions, is attached to this chapter.)
§ A263-20. General provisions: major land development and major
subdivision; public hearing and notice.
§ A263-21. General provisions: major land development and major
subdivision; final plan.
shall include all general and specific conditions as shown on the
approved preliminary plan drawings and supporting material.
A. A public hearing shall be required for a major land development project
or a major subdivision or where a street extension or creation requires
a public hearing for a minor land development project or minor
subdivision.
B. Notice requirements. Public notice of the hearing shall be given a
minimum of 14 days prior to the date of the hearing in a newspaper of
general circulation within the Town. In addition, notice shall be sent to
the applicant and to each property owner of record within a twohundred-
foot radius of the subject property, by certified mail, return
receipt requested, of the time and place of the hearing not less than 10
days prior to the date of the hearing. Notice shall also be sent to any
individual or entity holding a recorded conservation or preservation
restriction on the property that is the subject of the application. Mail
notice shall include the street address of the subject property or, if no
street address is available, the distance from the nearest existing
intersection in tenths of a mile. The applicant shall advertise for the
public hearing upon instruction from the Administrative Officer in
writing. [Amended 12-9-2015]
C. Notification area.
(1) Watersheds. Additional notice within watersheds shall also be sent
as required in Rhode Island General Laws § 45-23-53(b) and (c).
(2) Adjacent municipalities. Notice of the public hearing shall be sent
by the Administrative Officer to the administrative officer of an
adjacent municipality if: a) the notice area extends into the
adjacent municipality; or b) the development site extends into the
adjacent municipality; or c) the Permitting Authority determines
there may be a potential for significant negative impact on the
adjacent municipality.
D. Notification cost. The cost(s) of such notice shall be borne in full by the
applicant.
A. Submission requirements.
§ A263-18 EAST GREENWICH CODE § A263-21
C:762
(1) The applicant shall submit to the Administrative Officer a final
application package that contains all items required for final plans,
as well as all material required by the Permitting Authority when
the application was given preliminary approval.
(2) Arrangements for completion of the required public improvements,
including construction schedule and/or financial guarantees.
(3) A certification statement from the East Greenwich Tax Collector
that all property taxes are current.
(4) For projects proposed for phased construction, the final plan shall
indicate the phase components.
B. Certification. The application for final plan approval shall be certified
complete or incomplete by the Administrative Officer, in writing, within
25 days of submittal. This time period may be extended to 45 days by
written notice from the Administrative Officer to the applicant where
the final plans contain changes to or elements not included in the
preliminary plan approval. The running of the time period set forth
herein shall be deemed stopped upon the issuance of a certificate of
incompleteness of the application by the Administrative Officer and
shall recommence upon the resubmission of a corrected application by
the applicant; however, in no event shall the Administrative Officer be
required to certify a corrected submission as complete or incomplete
less than 14 days after its resubmission. If the Administrative Officer
certifies the application as complete and submission to the Permitting
Authority is not required per the preliminary decision, the final plan
shall be considered approved. In all cases, the final plan shall be signed
by the Chair of the Planning Board, or by the Administrative Officer
when final plan approval is delegated by the Planning Board to the
Administrative Officer, prior to recording with the Town Clerk.
[Amended 12-9-2015]
C. Referral to the Permitting Authority. If the Administrative Officer
determines that an application for final approval does not meet the
requirements set by local regulations or by the Permitting Authority at
preliminary approval, the Administrative Officer shall refer the final
plans to the Permitting Authority for review and consideration. Within
45 days after the certification of completeness, or within such further
time as may be consented to by the applicant, the authority shall
approve or deny the final plan as submitted.
D. Failure to act. If the Permitting Authority fails to act within the period
prescribed, such inaction shall constitute approval of the final plan. A
certificate of the Administrative Officer as to the failure of the
Permitting Authority to act within the required time and the resulting
approval shall be issued on request of the applicant.
E. Recording. Approval of a major subdivision or land development project
shall expire one year from the date of approval with the right to extend
§ A263-21 CHARTER § A263-21
C:763
§ A263-22. Final plat checklist: major land development and major
subdivisions.
(Editor's Note: Checklist VI, Final Plat: Major Land Development and Major
Subdivisions, is attached to this chapter).
§ A263-23. General provisions: physical design requirements.
for one year upon written request by the applicant, who must appear
before the Planning Board for the annual review, unless, within that
period, the plat or plan shall have been submitted for signature and
recording as specified in these regulations. Thereafter, the Permitting
Authority may, for good cause shown, extend the period for recording
for an additional period at its discretion. [Amended 12-9-2015]
F. Acceptance of public improvements. Signature and recording as
specified in § A263-41 shall constitute the acceptance by the Town of
East Greenwich of any street, other public improvement or land
intended for dedication. Final plan approval shall not impose any duty
upon the municipality to maintain or improve those dedicated areas
until the Town Council accepts the completed public improvements as
constructed in compliance with the final plans as approved.
G. Validity of recorded plans. The final plan, once recorded, shall remain
valid as the approved plan for the parcel unless and until an
amendment to the plan is approved in accord with these regulations or
a new plan is approved by the Permitting Authority.
A. General requirements. In addition to the general purposes and
provisions of these regulations, the Permitting Authority (or
Administrative Officer in the case of an administrative subdivision) shall
make positive findings on each of the standards listed below. These
findings shall become part of the proposed project's record. Any
negative finding relative to any of these standards shall constitute
grounds for denial of the project design by the Permitting Authority or
Administrative Officer.
B. Site design standards.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of good subdivision and site design is to
create an efficient, functional and aesthetically pleasing
development, to minimize adverse impacts, and to ensure that a
project will be an asset to the Town. In this regard, land
development projects and subdivisions shall conform to the
following standards, which are designed to result in a well-planned
community without adding unnecessarily to development costs.
(2) Site analysis. An analysis of the subdivision site and nearby areas
shall be required for all major subdivisions. The scope and content
of the required site analysis shall be discussed during the
preapplication meeting and shall be presented by the subdivider
§ A263-21 EAST GREENWICH CODE § A263-23
C:764
during the master plan stage of review. A site analysis may also
be required for minor subdivisions if the Permitting Authority finds
that the proposed development may have a negative impact on the
existing natural and built environment or would be inappropriate
for the quality of life of the surrounding neighborhood. The site
analysis shall address in graphic and written form the following
characteristics of the subject parcel and immediate vicinity: site
context/locus, geology and soil; agricultural lands, woodlands;
surface water and wetland features; topography; habitat; ecology;
existing vegetation; structures and road networks; visual features
and past and present use of the site. Historic sites, archaeological
features and cemeteries shall also be identified. Tree groves and
significant specimens shall be identified on the plan of existing
conditions.
(3) Subdivision design standards.
(a) The development design shall be compatible with the East
Greenwich Comprehensive Community Plan and state guide
plan and comprehensive plans for adjacent communities.
(b) Development of the site shall be based on the characteristics of
the site and upon the site capacity analysis. Development shall
be located to preserve and enhance outstanding natural
features of the site, to avoid and buffer sensitive environmental
areas, and to minimize negative impacts and/or alteration of
natural, historic and cultural resources. Subdivision design
should also preserve, to the maximum extent feasible, scenic
values, viewsheds and scenic roadways.
(c) To the greatest extent practical, plans should be consistent
with the reasonable utilization of land. The below-listed land
forms and environmental features shall remain in an
undeveloped or open space status:
[1] Land under water;
[2] Unique and/or fragile areas, including freshwater
wetlands and coastal wetlands as defined in Title 2,
Chapter 1, of the General Laws of Rhode Island;
[3] Lands in the floodplain or flood hazard areas as defined by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and
Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management
(RIDEM);
[4] Steep slopes in excess of 15% as measured over a ten-foot
interval;
[5] Habitats of endangered wildlife, as defined by Rhode
Island Department of Environmental Management or
Federal Agencies;
§ A263-23 CHARTER § A263-23
C:765
[6] Historically significant structures and sites, as listed on
federal or state or East Greenwich inventory of historic
places;
[7] Significant archaeological sites as identified by the State
Archeologist; and
[8] Significant trees or stands of trees or rare vegetative
species.
(d) The development shall be designed in a manner to avoid
adverse water impacts, especially in terms of protecting the
Hunt River Aquifer drainage basin, wellhead and aquifer
recharge area; to minimize cut and fill; to avoid unnecessary
impervious cover, to prevent flooding, to provide adequate
access to lots and sites; and to mitigate adverse effects of
shadow, traffic, drainage and utilities on neighboring
properties.
(4) Residential subdivision design standards.
(a) The Permitting Authority, at its discretion, may change street
locations, lot configurations and dimensions, yards and
setbacks. Such design alterations shall be made to achieve
sound design principles, economy in the use of impervious
surfaces and for environmental purposes.
(b) Residential lots shall front on local streets wherever possible.
Lots fronting on state highways should be avoided.
(c) Every lot shall have sufficient access to it for emergency
vehicles. Curb cuts shall be sited to avoid traffic conflicts.
(d) Building envelopes of dwelling units in residential
developments shall take into consideration topography,
building height, orientation, drainage and scenic values.
(e) Lots shall be designed to ensure to the maximum extent
possible that the proposed buildings have adequate privacy
from adjacent streets and uses.
(f) Vegetated buffer areas shall be required, as necessary, to
protect adjacent uses from adverse impacts and to retain the
functional habitat for wildlife by providing food, cover and
nesting areas. The Permitting Authority shall determine the
extent, location and size of such buffers and may designate
such areas as "no-cut" buffers. Augmentation of natural
vegetation to improve buffers may be required as needed and
any supplemental planting shall be with native species.
[Amended 11-6-2013]
[1] Mowing existing Town-approved lawn within such buffers
is permitted as is pruning of existing trees and shrubs.
§ A263-23 EAST GREENWICH CODE § A263-23
C:766
[a] Pruning shall not involve removal of greater than 20%
of existing limbs in any given year.
[b] Mowing shrub scrub vegetation, marsh vegetation, or
forest understory vegetation is not permitted, and new
areas of lawn cannot be created in the buffer.
[c] Even where locally permitted, alterations to regulated
freshwater or coastal wetlands are not permitted
without prior approval by RIDEM or CRMC, as
required.
[d] Within buffer areas, no tree with a two-inch or greater
caliper may be removed unless it is diseased, dying,
invasive or considered a hazardous or dangerous tree.
Evidence of such disease or hazard may be required
from a licensed arborist or like professional. A
replacement plan shall first be approved by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer (ZEO) prior to removal and
planting, except in case of emergency as addressed
below in Subsection B(4)(f)[2].
[2] When vegetation, including invasive species, is removed in
the buffer, it must be replaced with native species — at
least three feet high for large shrub species and 18 inches
high for small shrubs, and at least a two-inch caliper for
trees.
[a] No more than 25% of trees planted as replacement
shall be of any one species, and replacement trees
must be staked, fertilized, mulched and watered as
necessary to ensure survival.
[b] Dead trees do not require replacement, but any stump
removal area should be stabilized with native ground
cover or other native vegetation.
[c] Removal action made necessary by an emergency,
such as windstorm, flood, freeze, utility damage, or
other like disasters, in order to prevent imminent
injury or damage to persons or property, must be
reported to the ZEO within seven business days of the
action and a replacement plan proposed.
(g) Lots shall conform to the minimum buildable standards
outlined in Appendix B.148
(5) Industrial or commercial subdivision design standards. All
industrial and commercial subdivisions shall be designed according
to the same principles governing the design of residential
148. Editor's Note: Appendix B, Lot Design Standards, is attached to this chapter.
§ A263-23 CHARTER § A263-23
C:767
developments; these being, that buildings shall be located in a
manner that considers topography, avoids environmentally
sensitive areas, with proper drainage facilities and surrounding
land uses considered in siting buildings; sufficient access shall be
provided and adverse impacts mitigated.
(6) Vehicular and pedestrian circulation system design.
(a) The road system shall be designed to allow the safe, efficient
and orderly movement of traffic in an economical and logical
manner that is respective of natural features and topography
and to present an attractive streetscape and viewshed.
(b) For residential subdivisions, the road system shall be designed
to serve neighborhood needs to accommodate service and
public safety vehicles and to discourage use by through traffic.
(c) Pedestrian circulation systems shall be segregated from
conflict with vehicular traffic. Sidewalks and paths shall be
placed per the typical street cross sections, with exceptions
permitted to preserve or enhance natural features. Walks and
paths may be established away from the road system with
permission of the Permitting Authority.
(7) Landscape design principles.
(a) Landscaped entranceways may be provided at subdivision
accesses. The type and amount of landscaping, signage and
other improvements shall be subject to review and approval of
the Permitting Authority. Plans for same shall be submitted at
the preliminary project stage.
(b) All plants or other landscaping material shall be compatible
with the local climate and meet accepted nursery standards.
(c) Water conservation principles shall be utilized in subdivision
and site development landscaping. Topsoil shall have a
minimum of six inches of depth and shall have a composition
and pH appropriate for the type of plant materials selected for
the site. Irrigation requirements shall be minimized.
(8) Site lighting.
(a) Site lighting shall adhere to the "dark skies" principle and shall
confine all exterior building, driveway and parking lot lighting
to the site, not allowing light to adversely impact abutting
properties or public ways. Light poles, bases, stanchions and
luminaries shall not exceed 16 feet in height.
(b) Lighting design shall be of a style appropriate to the site and
the building architecture while providing for adequate lighting
for pedestrian and vehicular safety. Cobra-head-style lights are
not allowed.
§ A263-23 EAST GREENWICH CODE § A263-23
C:768
§ A263-24. General provisions: public improvement design
standards.
(9) Building architecture.
(a) The guiding principle of architectural design shall be the
appropriateness of the massing, scale, materials and details of
the building for the proposed use, the site, within the context
of the neighboring properties and the general location, within
the height limitations established by the Zoning Ordinance,
and within the standards of review for buildings within the
Historic District.
(b) The building shall utilize appropriate energy conservation
measures in its design and construction, providing for solar
gain, and allowing for solar access for adjacent properties.
(c) Rooftop building systems mechanical equipment, including but
not limited to HVAC equipment and elevator equipment
enclosures, shall be screened from view.
C. Land unsuitable for development.
(1) When designing the proposed use of any parcel, land included in all
of the following categories shall be considered unsuitable for
development and shall not be considered to contribute to the
minimum building acreage of the parcel:
(a) Wetlands, water bodies (as defined by Rhode Island state law)
and drainage facilities.
(b) All streets or rights-of-way.
(c) Easement areas for access, utility use or drainage.
(2) Land described in Subsection C(1)(a), (b) and (c) above may be
included as part of any lot in any subdivision or land development
project; however, such land may not be used to meet the minimum
buildable area (MBA) standards of these regulations (see Appendix
B).149
A. General. The subdivider, at his own expense, shall construct all
improvements as required by the Permitting Authority in its decision
granting approval for any subdivision or project subject to these
regulations.
B. Street design standards. The following design standards shall be
followed where applicable in the design and construction of any
subdivision.
149. Editor's Note: Appendix B, Lot Design Standards, is attached to this chapter.
§ A263-23 CHARTER § A263-24
C:769
(1) Frontage on improved streets. All areas to be subdivided shall have
frontage that meets the minimum requirements of the relevant
zone on an existing improved Town street. If such street frontage is
substandard to the specifications of these regulations or to the
minimum engineering standards, the Permitting Authority may
require the subdivider to improve the part of the street abutting or
leading to the property being subdivided as necessary to ensure for
proper drainage, promote public safety, or avoid adverse
development impacts to the surrounding community.
(2) Street classification. Street design within a proposed subdivision
shall conform to the street classification system discussed below.
Rights-of-way and pavement width, curbing, parking, drainage,
location of utilities, sidewalks, bicycle or walking paths and general
road design standards shall be consistent with street function. All
street classifications shall be established by the Permitting
Authority. Streets shall fall within one of the following major
categories:
(a) Arterial. A major public street that serves as an avenue for the
circulation of traffic into, out of or around the Town and carries
high volumes of traffic. All industrial and major commercial
subdivision streets shall be classified as arterial and conform
to such standards.
(b) Collector. A public street whose principal function is to carry
traffic between local streets and arterial streets but that may
also provide direct access to abutting properties. These streets
provide a balance between land access and mobility.
(c) Local. Public streets whose primary function is to provide
access to abutting properties.
(3) Street rights-of-way specifications. All street rights-of-way and road
construction shall conform to the standards shown and
specifications by type of street as noted and illustrated in Appendix
C of these regulations. Figures I, II and III depict typical cross
sections by street type proposed for acceptance and maintenance
by the Town. Paving specifications for streets shall be in accord
with Town Standards as noted in Appendix C.150
(4) Engineering standards. See Appendix C, Table 1.
(5) Street layout and arrangement. The arrangement of streets shall be
considered in relation to existing Town streets and in relation to
topographic and natural systems. The road system shall be
designed: to allow for safe, efficient and orderly movement of
traffic; to have a simple and logical circulation pattern; to respect
natural features and topography; to improve the visual quality of
the subdivision; to increase privacy and reduce unnecessary noise
150. Editor's Note: Appendix C, Road Design, is attached to this chapter.
§ A263-24 EAST GREENWICH CODE § A263-24
C:770
and traffic. Within residential subdivisions, the road system shall
be designed to serve the needs of the neighborhood and not
encourage use by through traffic. However, in major subdivisions,
access shall be designed to avoid street systems which have only
one principal means of egress. In order to provide for alternative
access, at least two vehicular access streets may be required in
major subdivisions when determined by the Permitting Authority to
be feasible and appropriate. Proposed streets in major subdivisions
shall provide for their continuation or projection to intersect with
principal streets on the perimeter of the subdivision or with
adjacent vacant property in order that the streets may be extended
in the future.
(6) Private streets. Private streets shall be prohibited in all singlefamily
residential developments.
(7) Culs-de-sac. All cul-de-sac streets shall end in a permanent
turnaround constructed to the standards listed in Appendix C. Culsde-
sac shall not exceed 1,000 feet in length. Culs-de-sac shall have
a minimum length consisting of the frontage required for the base
zone in which the property lies plus the bulb itself. The "bulb" shall
not provide frontage for more than three lots. This standard may be
waived by the Permitting Authority to promote access to landlocked
parcels, to allow for future connection to the existing road network
in the Town or for other cause.
(8) Street names. An extension of an existing street shall have the
same name as the existing street. Names of new streets shall be
determined by the Town Council. Streets shown for proposed
subdivisions that are not extensions of existing streets shall be
referred to as Street "A," Street "B," etc.
(9) Access to adjoining properties. When it is considered desirable by
the Permitting Authority to provide access to adjoining property,
proposed streets shall be continued and improved to the property
line. Access to adjacent parcels for pedestrian and/or bicycle
circulation or promotion of the Town of East Greenwich Linear Park
System shall be required wherever the Permitting Authority
determines that such connection is in the interest of the
community.
(10) Street signs. Street name and traffic control signs, constructed to
Town of East Greenwich specifications, shall be installed by the
developer at his/her expense.
(11) Streetlighting. In all subdivisions, utilities including provision for
streetlighting shall be installed underground.
(12) Landscaping standards.
(a) Landscaping shall be provided as part of project plan and
design. It shall be conceived in a total pattern throughout the
§ A263-24 CHARTER § A263-24
C:771
site, integrating the various elements of a site design,
preserving and enhancing the particular identity of the site and
creating a pleasing site character. Landscaping and natural
vegetative buffers shall be utilized to separate residential
areas from major roadways, commercial and manufacturing
areas.
(b) Landscaping may include plant materials such as trees, shrubs,
ground covers, grass and flowers; other materials to be used
may include rocks, planted berms, stone walls, paving
materials, planters and signage. Areas which may be required
to provide landscaping or screening shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
[1] Drainage facilities, such as retention/detention basins or
drainage swales;
[2] Subdivision entranceways;
[3] Open space/natural areas;
[4] Recreational facilities;
[5] Buffers; and
[6] Areas subject to regrading or stabilization for soil erosion
and sediment control purposes.
(c) Landscape plan. A landscape plan prepared by a registered
landscape architect shall be submitted to the Permitting
Authority when it is determined that: a) existing landscaping is
insufficient; b) the site of the proposed subdivision requires
restoration; or c) adding landscaping would enhance the visual
aspect of the area or would preserve existing outstanding
landscape features. If submittal of a landscape plan is
required, the applicant shall be advised of this requirement at
the preliminary review stage of an administrative or minor
subdivision and at the master plan stage of a major subdivision.
The plan shall identify existing and proposed trees, stone walls
and rock outcroppings; signs; proposed grading at two-foot
intervals; lighting and other proposed landscaping elements.
The plan shall indicate the location of all proposed landscaping
and shall include construction details. A planting schedule
shall be included to indicate proposed planting by species, size
at time of planting, and maintenance requirements. Where
existing plantings are to be retained, the plan shall indicate
methods for protecting during construction.
(13) Monuments/bounds. Monuments or bounds (granite or concrete
boundary markers) shall be of the type approved by the Town and
paid for by the developer and placed by a registered land surveyor
as approved by the Permitting Authority. Monuments shall be set
§ A263-24 EAST GREENWICH CODE § A263-24
C:772
with the finished grade at the right of-way and may be required to
be raised at other locations.
(14) Sidewalks. Sidewalks may be required to be installed on one or
both sides of all proposed new public streets in subdivisions and in
all multifamily developments. This requirement may be waived for
cul-de-sac streets serving five or fewer lots or dwellings or if the
Permitting Authority determines such waivers appropriate.
Sidewalk construction shall be in conformity with the standards
outlined in Appendix C. The Permitting Authority may require that
sidewalks be connected to existing sidewalks on collector or
arterial roads abutting the subdivision.
(15) Bicycle paths. Bicycle paths shall be incorporated into the
proposed subdivision where necessary to extend an existing bicycle
path, to intersect with proposed state or Town bicycle facilities, or
to connect adjacent subdivisions, schools or recreation areas.
(16) Curbing. Concrete curbing, meeting RIDOT Standard 7.11, or
granite curbing, meeting RIDOT Standard 7.51, shall be installed
on all proposed streets.
(17) Curbing at intersection fillet curves. Precast concrete wheelchair
ramp curbs meeting RIDOT Standard 7.19 shall be installed in
conformity with requirements of the Rhode Island Americans with
Disabilities Act.
C. Easements.
(1) In general. All easements shall be appropriately marked with
monuments.
(2) For watercourses. Where a subdivision is traversed by a
watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, a stormwater
easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with
the lines of such watercourse shall be provided, together with
access strips; such right-of-way or public utility easement shall be
shown on the drainage plan and on the final plan with proper
bearings and distances indicated.
(3) For sanitary sewers. Easements shall be provided for sanitary
sewers where they are anticipated. The Permitting Authority shall
determine the locations and widths of such easements.
(4) For storm drains and drainage channels. Easements through lots
for drainage channels and storm drains shall be provided.
Whenever possible, they shall be located along lot lines and shall be
at least 20 feet in width. Access easements shall be provided where
such facilities are remote from streets or where conditions exist
that require ramps for maintenance vehicles.
§ A263-24 CHARTER § A263-24
C:773
(5) For street widenings. Where a subdivision abuts an existing
substandard Town street, the Permitting Authority may require the
subdivider to convey land to the Town to enable such street to be
widened.
(6) Frenchtown Brook. Whenever Frenchtown Brook passes through
any subdivision, between Saw Mill Pond on Frenchtown Road and
the East Greenwich/West Greenwich town line, the developer shall
transfer and convey to the Town of East Greenwich a fifty-foot-wide
easement along each side of and abutting the mean high-water
bank of Frenchtown Brook, and such easement shall provide for
public access and use of the land area along said brook and be
described in the easement for passive recreation.
(7) Sight distance easements. Where deemed necessary by the
Permitting Authority to establish adequate sight distances for
vehicular traffic, the dedication of an easement to the Town may be
required which would prohibit the erection or maintenance of any
visual obstruction such as structure, tree, shrub, wall, earthen
embankment or other obstruction.
(8) Bicycle or pedestrian access easements. Bicycle and pedestrian
access shall be provided where required on a separate strip of land
dedicated to the Town or on an easement having a minimum width
of 10 feet to 20 feet, depending upon location.
(9) Other easements. All other required easements shall be of
sufficient width and area to serve their intended purpose.
D. Lot configuration. The Permitting Authority and/or Administrative
Officer shall have the right to reject or require modification to lots
which are shaped or configured in such a manner as to conflict with the
use of the land for the intended purposes. The Permitting Authority or
Administrative Officer may require changes or modification to the
proposed layout as deemed necessary to achieve the purposes of these
regulations (see Appendix B).151
E. Stormwater drainage systems and plans.
(1) Stormwater drainage systems.
(a) All proposed subdivisions shall make adequate provision to
properly contain and handle storm flow generated by the
project. All drainage systems shall be designed in accord with
Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management
regulations and to the standards of the Town of East
Greenwich. The drainage system may be comprised of natural
and man-made elements. These may include grass swales,
retention and detention basins, curbs. Applicants are
encouraged to incorporate natural elements into the drainage
151. Editor's Note: Appendix B, Lot Design Standards, is attached to this chapter.
§ A263-24 EAST GREENWICH CODE § A263-24
C:774
design wherever possible and feasible. All drainage structures
shall be in conformance with the accepted state RIDOT
standards or Town-approved equals.
(b) Drainage plans and drainage calculations shall be prepared by
a registered professional engineer. The stormwater drainage
calculations, runoff rates and system design shall be based on
the application of the appropriate method, as follows:
[1] The Rational Method. This method is the preferred method
for small systems of three acres or less, where no
wetlands, ponds or other storage depressions are present,
and where drainage is toward the point of analysis.
[2] TR-55. This is the preferred method for calculating runoff
volumes, peak discharge rate, and flood storage
requirements for site development over three acres.
(2) All drainage plans and drainage calculations shall provide the
following information:
(a) An estimate of the quantity of stormwater surface runoff
currently flowing from the land proposed to be subdivided
compared to storm flow which would be generated by the
proposed subdivision. (To be calculated on the basis of a
twenty-five-year frequency rainfall.)
(b) An estimate of the quantity of stormwater surface runoff
entering the subdivision naturally from upstream areas within
the watershed under present conditions calculated on the basis
of a twenty-five-year frequency rainfall.
(c) An analysis of the capability of existing watercourses, catch
basins, culverts and other drainage facilities within the land
proposed to be subdivided to handle the runoff as calculated
above and proposals to handle such surface runoff. Design
criteria for drainage improvements shall conform to the State
of Rhode Island specifications cited above as may be modified
by the Town of East Greenwich Department of Public Works.
Culvert and storm sewers shall be designed for a twenty-fiveyear
frequency rainfall (one-hundred-year frequency in a
special flood hazard zone), with a minimum pipe size of 12
inches so that the minimum velocity shall not be less than three
feet per second calculated for the ten-year design storm.
(d) Proposals for disposal of surface runoff downstream from the
subdivision in a manner that will not damage off-site property,
natural features or existing drainage structures and facilities.
(e) The drainage plan shall further indicate how the following
specific requirements will be met:
§ A263-24 CHARTER § A263-24
C:775
[1] That each lot will be adequately drained;
[2] That natural drainage patterns will be maintained
whenever possible;
[3] That all existing watercourses will be left open, unless
approval to enclose is granted by Rhode Island
Department of Environmental Management and the Town
of East Greenwich;
[4] That all new open watercourses will be properly stabilized
using vegetation or stone, depending on soil conditions
and grades;
[5] That a continuous drainage system will be installed and
connected to a natural or man-made watercourse or to an
existing piped storm drainage system. The ultimate
destination of such continuous drainage shall be a
permanent natural body of water or wetland. Where the
Permitting Authority determines that such ultimate
destination is impractical, the Board shall require the
construction of a retention area capable of accommodating
proposed stormwater volumes based on a one-hundredyear
frequency rainfall;
[6] When any part of the drainage system is sited outside the
public street right-of-way, provisions for future access to
and maintenance of same shall be approved by the Town
Council;
[7] That any necessary easements to off-street watercourses
will be obtained by the subdivider and approved by the
Town Solicitor; and
[8] Where volume velocity of the surface runoff is high, the
flow thereof shall be controlled by riprap, sedimentation
basins, flow spreaders or other applicable devices and/or
techniques as recommended in the Rhode Island Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook.
(f) The proposed drainage system shall be designed to
accommodate stormwater such that post-construction
conditions do not result in peak runoff increases in rate from
preconstruction conditions.
F. Utilities.
(1) Sanitary sewers. Sanitary sewers shall be required in all
subdivisions and land development projects where such sewer
service is available to or may be extended to the site in a costeffective
manner.
§ A263-24 EAST GREENWICH CODE § A263-24
C:776
(2) Water service. Water service, where available, shall be provided for
each lot in accordance with the requirements of the Kent County
Water Authority. The Permitting Authority may require the
extension of service to a proposed subdivision when such
extensions are possible and could be extended. Dry capped lines
may be required for developments that may have future access to
service due to capital improvements made by the Kent County
Water Authority.
(3) Gaslines. Natural-gas lines may be installed in any subdivision or
land development project at the discretion of the subdivider. If
proposed, gaslines shall be located on the opposite side of the
street from the waterline or as required by the utility.
(4) Other utilities (electric, telephone and cable TV). All electric,
communication (telephone, fire alarm and cable TV) and
streetlighting lines shall be installed underground. Such utilities
shall be installed to the specifications of the appropriate utility.
(5) Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed in all subdivisions
where public water supply systems are installed. Hydrant type,
location and spacing shall meet the minimum requirements of the
East Greenwich Fire Department. Amended 12-9-2015]
G. Erosion and sediment control plan permit(s). A soil erosion and
sedimentation control plan and permit application shall be submitted
for all applications meeting the threshold requirements as listed in
Chapter 207 of the Town of East Greenwich Code. Such plan shall meet
the standards of the Code.
H. Requirements for off-site improvements.
(1) Purpose. This section is intended to ensure that subdividers
provide off-site infrastructure improvements in order to mitigate
the impacts which are directly attributable to the new
development. Such improvements may be required by the
Permitting Authority if the Board finds that there is a reasonable
relationship between the requested improvement and the proposed
new development. Off-site improvements may include but not be
limited to the following categories:
(a) Sanitary sewer systems extension.
(b) Water supply systems extension.
(c) Roads.
(d) Sidewalks.
(e) Bicycle paths and pedestrian improvements.
(f) Drainage systems.
§ A263-24 CHARTER § A263-24
C:777
§ A263-25. General provisions: construction and/or improvement
guarantees.
(g) Public safety improvements.
(2) Definition, criteria and principles. As a condition of final approval,
the Permitting Authority may require a subdivider to construct
such improvements that are reasonable and necessary to mitigate
impacts relating to the land being subdivided. Necessary
improvements are those that directly and substantially relate to the
subdivision or land development being proposed. The Permitting
Authority shall provide in its resolution of final approval a finding
that forms the basis for such off-site improvements. The finding
shall be that a significant adverse impact on existing conditions will
result if the off-site improvements are not constructed. The
mitigation required as a condition of approval must relate to the
significance of the identified impact. Required off-site
improvements must be consistent with the character defined for
the affected neighborhood in the Comprehensive Community Plan
or address a particular situation or problem that is raised and
discussed during the consideration of the project.
A. Definition and purpose.
(1) The purpose of this section is to provide a guarantee to the Town
that the required improvements will be constructed.
(2) An improvement guarantee is a security instrument in a form that
is acceptable to the Town to ensure that all improvements, facilities
or work required as a condition of approval of a subdivision plan
will be completed in conformity with the approved plans and
specifications.
(3) Improvement guarantees shall be provided to ensure the proper
installation and maintenance of required street, utility and other
physical improvements and to ensure compliance with other
conditions of final plat approval.
B. General procedures. Before any land development or subdivision plan is
endorsed by the Permitting Authority, and before the recording of any
subdivision plat, the Permitting Authority shall review and approve
agreements for the completion of all required improvements. Such
agreements shall, at the option of the subdivider, take the form of: 1)
completion of actual construction of all improvements; 2) improvement
guarantees; or 3) a combination thereof. At the preliminary plat review
stage, the subdivider shall submit either of the following: 1) a letter to
the Permitting Authority indicating his/her intent to complete the
required improvements prior to the Permitting Authority's endorsement
of the final plat; or 2) a letter requesting that security sufficient to cover
the cost of required improvements be established by the Board,
§ A263-24 EAST GREENWICH CODE § A263-25
C:778
(1) If improvements are to be constructed without a financial
guarantee, all work shall be completed prior to endorsement and
recording. Inspections shall be made by the Public Works
Department at all required stages of construction as specified in
§ A263-24 above. Written inspection reports shall be prepared by
the inspector(s) and maintained by the Department of Public
Works. All inspection reports shall be submitted to the
Administrative Officer. An inspection fee equal to 2% of the
estimated cost of construction for all public improvements as
determined by Public Works Director shall be paid to the Finance
Director prior to construction. All construction shall be inspected
and approved by the Public Works Director under the direction of
the Administrative Officer and according to the procedures in
§ A263-24. Upon completion of all required improvements, the
Public Works Director shall notify, in writing to the Administrative
Officer, of such completion, and a copy shall be provided to the
subdivider upon request. The final plat shall be endorsed by the
appropriate Permitting Authority member or Administrative
Officer, and the plat shall be recorded as provided in § A263-40, at
which time the lots within the subdivision may be transferred or
sold. The applicant shall be required to post a bond in the amount
of 10% of the construction estimate prior to acceptance of all
required improvements by the Town. Such bond shall be held by
the Town Finance Director for a period of one year to be released
upon written request of the applicant following final inspection by
Public Works and acceptance of the required improvements by the
Town Council with the approval of the Planning Board.
(2) If improvements are to be guaranteed, the below-listed procedures
shall apply.
C. Procedures for financial guarantees.
(1) Amount. All improvement guarantees shall be of sufficient amount
to insure the actual construction and complete installation of all of
the required improvements and the satisfactory completion of all
conditions of final approval within the time periods required for
completion provided in said approval. The amount shall be based
upon actual cost estimates which would be required for the Town to
complete all improvements. These estimates shall be prepared by
the Department of Public Works and forwarded to the
Administrative Officer. In the event the subdivider disagrees with
the estimated amount, he/she shall have the opportunity to submit
a revised estimate along with supporting justification for the
revisions. The Permitting Authority may set the guarantee in a
reasonable amount in excess of the estimated costs in order to
anticipate for increases in economic or construction costs.
However, the amount of such increase shall not exceed more than
20% over the total estimated cost of improvements. At the
expiration of the final plan approval period, if all required
§ A263-25 CHARTER § A263-25
C:779
improvements are not complete the Permitting Authority Board
shall review the status of improvements and may: a) require the
subdivider to extend the duration of the entire improvement
guarantee; b) reduce the amount of the improvement guarantee
to reflect the estimated costs of completed improvements; or c)
authorize the Administrative Officer to take the steps necessary to
ensure completion of the remaining work by using improvement
guarantee funds. If during the guarantee period the procedures,
implementation measures, methods, materials, and/or schedules of
construction are determined by the Permitting Authority not to
be in compliance with the approved plans, the Town may, after
notification to the developer, authorize the use of improvement
guarantee funds to insure proper compliance.
(2) Required form. The security shall be in the form of a financial
instrument acceptable to the Finance Director and Town Solicitor
and shall enable the Town to gain timely access to the secured
funds when necessary. Performance and maintenance guarantees
may consist of, but not be limited to, the following forms:
(a) Security bond. The subdivider may obtain a security bond from
a surety bonding company authorized to do business in the
State of Rhode Island.
(b) Letter of credit. The subdivider may submit to the Town an
irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or other recognized
institution that names the Town of East Greenwich as loss
payee.
(c) Escrow account. The subdivider may deposit cash, or other
instruments readily convertible into cash at face value, either
with the Town or in escrow with a bank with the Town
controlling access to same.
(3) Releases/reductions. At the expiration of the final plan approval
period, if all required improvements are complete, any
improvement guarantee shall be returned to the subdivider. Partial
releases or reductions in the guarantee amount may also be
authorized at any time prior to the expiration of final approval. A
written request for release or reduction of any improvement
guarantees shall be made to the Administrative Officer. After
inspection of all required improvements, the Administrative Officer
shall recommend that the Town Council: a) authorize the Finance
Director to return all improvement guarantees; b) reduce the
guarantee to reflect the estimated cost of completed
improvements; or c) make no release or reductions.
(4) "As-built" plans.
(a) Within 30 days after the completion of all public
improvements, the developer shall submit final "as-built" plans
§ A263-25 EAST GREENWICH CODE § A263-25
C:780
(two sets), and an electronic copy thereof in the most current
release of AutoCAD®, which shall contain:
[1] All of the information required on the final plan and
decisions on the proposal;
[2] Exact locations, as installed, of all:
[a] Sidewalks and streets.
[b] Monuments, bounds and other survey marks.
[c] Water, sewer, gas and drainage pipes and easements.
[d] Other underground utilities, if any, and the location of
all aboveground fixtures.
[e] Any other public improvements.
[f] Open space areas, recreation sites or reserved areas.
(b) The cost of preparing the as-built plans required by this section
shall be included in the bond amounts.
(5) Phased subdivisions. For subdivisions which are approved and
constructed in phases, the Permitting Authority shall specify
improvement guarantees related to each particular phase. If any
off-site improvements or other improvements or conditions which
are not directly related to a particular phase are required as a
condition of approval, the Authority shall, in setting the guarantee
amount for each phase, clearly specify when and where guarantees
are to be provided.
(6) Maintenance guarantees. The Permitting Authority may also
require that a maintenance guarantee be provided by the
subdivider for all improvements which are being dedicated to the
Town. The amount of the maintenance guarantee shall be 5% of the
original performance bond or other original guarantee amount.
Absent such a guarantee, 5% of the total estimated cost of all
required improvements shall be required. The initial period for
such maintenance guarantee shall be one year. At the end of the
one-year maintenance period, the Director of Public Works shall
inspect all improvements subject to the guarantee and shall certify
in writing to the Administrative Officer as to their condition. If
found to be unacceptable, the Administrative Officer shall
recommend an extension of the guarantee period to the Finance
Director, and the original funds shall not be returned to the
subdivider. If public improvements are in good condition and have
not been damaged due to the fault of the subdivider, or through
faulty workmanship or design, the maintenance guarantee shall be
returned to the subdivider. In cases where it is determined there
are extenuating circumstances, the maintenance period may be
established for a period longer than one year. The rationale for
§ A263-25 CHARTER § A263-25
C:781
§ A263-26. General provisions: requirements for dedication of
public land, public improvements and fees.
establishing a longer maintenance period and the nature of the
circumstances requiring same shall be made a part of the record.
(7) Acceptance of improvements.
(a) Upon completion of all required improvements, the subdivider
shall convey all public improvements to the Town for
ownership and maintenance. Before conveyance, the applicant
shall first request the Department of Public Works to conduct a
final inspection of all improvements. The Director of Public
Works shall certify to the Administrative Officer, in writing,
that all required improvements have been satisfactorily
completed.
(b) The applicant shall also request, in writing to the
Administrative Officer, that public improvements, streets, land
easements or other facilities be accepted by the Town.
(c) This request shall contain a description of all facilities to be
accepted and shall be accompanied by an accurate description
of all streets, easements, land or other facilities by metes and
bounds and by reference to the final plat drawing(s) and by a
warranty deed transferring ownership to the Town and
describing any special conditions or other requirements.
(d) Upon certification of completion of all required improvements,
and upon receipt of all required information from the
applicant, the Administrative Officer shall place the request for
acceptance upon the next available agenda of the Town
Council. In such recommendation for acceptance by the Town
Council, the Administrative Officer shall also recommend an
amount for a maintenance bond in accordance with these
regulations and shall recommend to the Town Council that no
public improvements or facilities be accepted for ownership
and maintenance until the maintenance bond has been
submitted as required above.
(e) Upon their acceptance by the Town Council, all improvements
shall be permanently owned and maintained by the Town as
part of the municipal system, and the subdivider shall be no
longer responsible for the repair or maintenance of these
improvements.
(f) Private streets and other private improvements shall not be
conveyed to the Town.
A. Subdivider must provide open space. The Permitting Authority shall
require all land developments and subdivisions subject to the provisions
of these regulations to dedicate a portion of the land being subdivided
§ A263-25 EAST GREENWICH CODE § A263-26
C:782
for the purpose of providing open space, conservation, park and
recreational facilities to serve present and future residents. The
Permitting Authority may, at its discretion, require the payment of a
fee in lieu of land dedication or a combination of land dedication and
payment of a fee as an alternative to the dedication of land.
B. Relationship to EGORP. The requirement for dedication of land for open
space, conservation, park and recreation facilities shall be based upon
the policies and standards set forth in the East Greenwich Open Space
and Recreation Plan (EGORP) and shall reflect the character defined for
the neighborhood or district in which the subdivision is located. The
land dedication must be suitable for the intended use. Land dedications
proposed for park and recreation land shall be entirely usable land, not
containing any land that is constrained for its intended use for
development. If payments in lieu of land dedication are required, they
shall be kept in a restricted account and shall only be spent for the
intended purpose of providing open space, conservation, park and
recreational facilities.
C. Amount of land to be dedicated. Conveyances of land for recreational
impact shall be in an amount that will be suitable to the intended use of
same. As a general guide, such conveyances shall be minimally at the
ratio of one acre for each 20 lots for all zones requiring minimum lot
sizes of one acre or less or two acres for subdivisions in all other zones.
For subdivision of less than 20 lots, the Permitting Authority
requirements for recreation impact shall be tailored to the
circumstances and location of the proposal. In general, if a parcel that
is suitable and useful for recreational purposes cannot be
accommodated, a fee in lieu of land donation shall be preferred. In
addition the nature, location and amount of land to be conveyed must
be satisfactory to the Permitting Authority and determined appropriate
by the Town Manager for the proposed use.
D. Ownership of land. Land dedications required by this section may be
made by transfer of fee simple ownership to any of the following:
(1) The Town of East Greenwich.
(2) A private homeowners' association.
(3) The East Greenwich Land Trust.
E. Condition of land. The Permitting Authority in requiring the donation of
land for recreational purposes may also require that such land be
cleared and rough-graded by the developer. In addition, the installation
by the developer of signage denoting the intended future use of the land
may be a condition of approval.
F. Fees in lieu of land dedication. Where a fee is required by the
Permitting Authority to be paid in lieu of land dedication, the amount of
such fee shall be based upon the Code of Ordinances Chapter 93,
§ A263-26 CHARTER § A263-26
C:783
§ A263-27. Special provisions: phasing of projects.
Article II, Development Impact Fees. The determination to require a fee
in lieu of land donation shall rest entirely with the Permitting Authority.
A. When a major land development or major subdivision is submitted for
master plan approval, the Permitting Authority shall review the
existence and adequacy of existing and proposed improvements,
services and facilities which may be affected by the proposed
development. If the Permitting Authority determines that such
improvements, services, infrastructure and facilities will not be
adequate to serve the residents of the subdivision or development at
the time of recording of the plat, the Permitting Authority shall have the
authority to establish a rate of development of the entire subdivision by
requiring it to be built in phases and/or placing limits on the issuance of
building permits over a specified time period, thereby relating the rate
of development to the ability of the Town to provide the required
services to the residents of the subdivision or development.
B. For all master plan approval applications, the applicant shall submit a
copy of the master plan narrative report for review and comment to all
relevant Town and other agencies and relevant utilities. Each agency
notified by the applicant shall be requested to provide its comments on
the application by the Administrative Officer. All comments shall be
received from each agency prior to the date of the informational
meeting. If the public informational meeting on the master plan and the
public hearing on the preliminary plan are combined, all comments
from reviewing agencies shall be received prior to the date of the public
hearing.
C. Each department, agency or utility to which such a request for
comments is made shall provide to the Administrative Officer written
comments and any supplementary material requested which describes:
(1) An estimate of the impact of the subdivision on the facilities and/or
services provided by the department or agency;
(2) A determination as to the adequacy of existing facilities and/or
services relative to the anticipated subdivision's residents;
(3) A discussion as to whether plans for the required improvements to
existing facilities and/or services are included in the department or
agency's capital improvement program;
(4) A time line for provision of such improvements to existing facilities
and/or services.
D. Upon consideration of the responses received from the various
departments and agencies, the Permitting Authority shall establish, at
the time of master plan approval, a rate of development of the entire
subdivision or development that will permit residential construction
only when improvements, services and facilities will be adequate to
§ A263-26 EAST GREENWICH CODE § A263-27
C:784
§ A263-28. (Reserved)
§ A263-29. (Reserved)
§ A263-30. Local regulations: procedure for adoption and
amendment.
§ A263-31. Local regulations: public hearing and notice
requirements. [Amended 12-9-2015]
serve the residents of the subdivision or development. As part of such
growth rate plan, the Permitting Authority may require that
improvements be installed or lots sold in two or more phases.
E. If phasing is required, the Permitting Authority shall approve the entire
master plan first. Thereafter, the applicant shall be required to submit
plans for preliminary and/or final review and/or approval indicating the
development of the entire site in two or more phases as required above.
In such review and approval, the Authority may, in its discretion, impose
conditions for determining the physical limits of phases, for allowing
progression to additional phases, for allowing two or more phases to
proceed in review or construction simultaneously, for interim public
improvements or construction conditions, for changes to master or
preliminary plans, and may include other provisions as needed,
including the applicant actually providing the necessary improvements
or payment to a dedicated restricted account in lieu of actual provision.
F. The master plan documents shall contain information on the physical
limits of the phases, the schedule and sequence of public improvement
installation, improvement guarantees, and the work and completion
schedules for approvals and construction of the phases.
G. Vesting of phased projects. The master plan shall remain vested as long
as it can be demonstrated, to the satisfaction of the Permitting
Authority, that work is proceeding on either the approval stages or on
the construction of the development as shown in the approved master
plan documents. Vesting shall extend to all information contained in the
approved master plan and related documents.
A. The Permitting Authority, as authorized by the enabling statute and
Town Charter, shall adopt, amend or repeal and provide for the
administration, interpretation, and enforcement of land development
and subdivision review regulations.
A. These regulations shall not be adopted, repealed or amended until after
a public hearing has been held relative to same by the Permitting
Authority. The Authority shall first give notice of the public hearing by
publication of notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the
municipality at least once each week for three successive weeks prior to
the date of the hearing, which may include the week in which the
hearing is to be held. At this hearing, opportunity shall be given to all
§ A263-27 CHARTER § A263-31
C:785
persons interested to be heard upon the matter of the proposed
regulations. Written notice, which may be a copy of the newspaper
notice, shall be mailed to the Associate Director of the Division of
Planning of the Rhode Island Department of Administration at least
two weeks prior to the hearing. Advertising shall be conducted by
the Town Clerk upon written request of the Administrative Officer.
The newspaper notice shall be published as a display advertisement,
using a type size at least as large as the normal type size used by the
newspaper in its news articles, and shall:
(1) Specify the place of said hearing and the date and time of its
commencement;
(2) Indicate that adoption, amendment or repeal of local regulations is
under consideration;
(3) Contain a statement of the proposed amendments to the
regulations that may be printed once in its entirety or which may
summarize or describe the matter under consideration as long as
the intent and effect of the proposed regulation is expressly written
in that notice;
(4) Advise those interested where and when a copy of the matter under
consideration may be obtained or examined and copied; and
(5) State that the proposals shown thereon may be altered or amended
prior to the close of the public hearing without further advertising
as a result of further study or because of the views expressed at the
public hearing. Any such alteration or amendment must be
presented for comment in the course of said hearing.
B. Notice of the public hearing shall be sent by first-class mail to the city
or town planning board of any municipality where there is a public or
quasi-public water source or private water source that is used or is
suitable for use as a public water source located within 2,000 feet of the
East Greenwich municipal boundaries.
C. Notice of a public hearing shall be sent to the governing body of any
state or municipal water department or agency, special water district,
or private water company that has riparian rights to a surface water
resource and/or surface watershed that is used or is suitable for use as
a public water source located within either the municipality or within
2,000 feet of the East Greenwich municipal boundaries; provided,
however, that a map survey has been filed with the Building Official as
specified in R.I.G.L. § 45-24-53(e).
D. Notwithstanding any of the requirements set forth in Subsections A
through C above, each municipality shall establish and maintain a
public notice registry allowing any person or entity to register for
electronic notice of any changes to the local regulations. Municipalities
shall annually provide public notice of existence of said registry by
publication of notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the
§ A263-31 EAST GREENWICH CODE § A263-31
C:786
§ A263-32. Local regulations: publication and availability.
§ A263-33. Administration: Administrative Officer.
municipality. In addition, each municipality is hereby encouraged to
provide public notice of the existence of the public notice registry in all
of its current and future communications with the public, including, but
not limited to, governmental websites, electronic newsletters, public
bulletins, press releases, and all other means the municipality may use
to impart information to the local community.
(1) Provided, however, notice pursuant to a public notice registry as
per this section does not alone qualify a person or entity on the
public notice registry as an "aggrieved party" under R.I.G.L.
§ 45-24-31(4).
E. No defect in the form of any notice under this section shall render any
regulations invalid, unless such defect is found to be intentional or
misleading.
F. The above requirements are to be construed as minimum requirements.
A. Printed copies of these regulations shall be available to the general
public and shall be revised to include all amendments. Any appendixes
shall also be available. Costs for such copies shall be established by the
Town Council.
B. Upon publication of these regulations and/or amendments to same, the
Town Clerk shall send a copy to the Rhode Island Department of
Administration's statewide planning program and to the State Law
Library. [Amended 12-9-2015]
A. Administration. Administration of these Subdivision and Land
Development Regulations shall be under the direction of the
Administrative Officer. The Town Planner is hereby designated as the
Administrative Officer.
B. Duties and responsibilities. In addition to the duties in R.I.G.L.
§ 45-23-55, the duties and responsibilities of the Administrative Officer
shall include, but not be limited to, the following: [Amended
12-9-2015]
(1) General coordination of the review, approval, recording and
enforcement of the provisions of these regulations, including
coordinating the enforcement efforts of the Zoning Enforcement
Officer, the Building Official, the Planning Department staff, the
Department of Public Works, the Town Engineer, and other local
officials responsible for the enforcement or carrying out of the
discrete elements of the regulations.
(2) Coordination of the review and approval procedures for
subdivisions and land development projects with adjacent
§ A263-31 CHARTER § A263-33
C:787
§ A263-34. Administration: Board of Appeal.
The Town Zoning Board of Review shall serve as the Board of Appeal to
hear appeals of decisions of the Permitting Authority or the Administrative
Officer on matters of review and approval of land development and
subdivision projects.
§ A263-35. Administration: administrative fees.
municipalities as is necessary to be consistent with applicable
federal, state and local laws as directed by the Permitting
Authority.
A. The Planning Board shall set reasonable fees, in an amount not to
exceed actual costs incurred, to be paid by the applicant for the review
and hearing of applications, issuance of permits and recording of
decisions. These fees, payable to the Town of East Greenwich, shall be
due and payable at the stages established in these regulations and shall
pertain to all subdivisions of land and development projects, as follows:
(1) Preapplication conference review fee: $225, plus $15 for each acre
or fraction thereof, which shall be computed to include all streets,
easements and land to be conveyed to the Town covered by the
proposed land development or subdivision.
(2) Master plan review fee: $325, plus $20 for each acre or fraction
thereof, which shall be computed to include all streets, easements
and land to be conveyed to the Town covered by the proposed land
development or subdivision. The applicant shall also bear the costs
associated with abutter notification and advertising for the master
plan public informational meeting.
(3) Preliminary plan review fee: $425, plus $25 for each acre or
fraction thereof, which shall be computed to include all streets,
easements and land to be conveyed to the Town covered by the
proposed land development or subdivision. The applicant shall also
bear the costs associated with abutter notification and advertising
for the preliminary plan public hearing.
(4) Final plan review fee: $225, plus $15 for each acre or fraction
thereof, which shall be computed to include all streets, easements
and land to be conveyed to the Town covered by the proposed land
development or subdivision.
(5) Administrative subdivision fee: $100.
(6) Request for extension, amendment or reinstatement of an approved
plan: $100.
B. All fees shall be submitted in the form of a check payable to the Town of
East Greenwich at the time application is made.
§ A263-33 EAST GREENWICH CODE § A263-35
C:788
§ A263-36. Administration: violations and penalties.
§ A263-37. Procedure: precedence of approvals for subdivisions and
other local boards and commissions.
C. Peer review. To protect the public health, safety and welfare, the
Planning Board may require peer review of expert witness reports and
testimony on behalf of applicants. A list of peers and their fees shall be
maintained by the Town for selection by the Town, and the cost of peer
review shall be borne by the applicant. All costs associated with peer
review shall be paid in full before Planning Board approvals are
recorded in the land evidence records. The Town reserves the right to
place a lien on the subject property for any fees not paid in full.
A. Any person or corporation or other entity that fails or refuses to adhere
to the terms and conditions of these regulations or plans that have been
approved by the Permitting Authority or the Administrative Officer shall
be in violation of these same.
B. Violation of this chapter shall include any action related to the transfer
or sale of land in unapproved subdivisions. Any owner, or agent of the
owner, who transfers, sells or negotiates to sell any land by reference to
or exhibition of, or by other use, a plat of the subdivision before the plat
has been approved and recorded in the municipal land evidence records
shall be in violation of these regulations and subject to the penalties
described herein.
C. Any person who, having submitted an application for subdivision or
development approval, begins construction of the subdivision or
development, or constructs any structure or improvement on the
parcel, without having first received approval from the Permitting
Authority or the Administrative Officer, shall be in violation of these
regulations.
D. The penalty for violation shall reasonably relate to the seriousness of
the offense and shall not exceed $500 for each violation, and each day
of existence of any violation shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
Any such fine shall inure to the Town.
E. The Town may also cause suit to be brought in the Kent County Superior
Court or Municipal Court to restrain the violation of, or to compel
compliance with, the provisions of these regulations. The Town may
consolidate an action for injunctive relief and/or fines under this
chapter in Kent County Superior Court or Municipal Court.
A. Town Council. Where an applicant requires both subdivision approval
and Council approval for a Zoning Ordinance or Zoning Map change,
the applicant shall first obtain an advisory recommendation on the
zoning change from the Planning Board. The Planning Board's advisory
opinion shall be based upon the review of a submitted master plan that
shall be the basis for the request for the change of zone. A zone change
§ A263-35 CHARTER § A263-37
C:789
§ A263-38. Procedure waivers, modifications and reinstatement of
plans.
hearing for the requested zoning amendment shall follow. The applicant
shall then return to the Permitting Authority for subsequent required
approval(s).
B. Zoning Board of Review.
(1) Where an applicant requires both a variance from the Zoning
Ordinance and subdivision approval, the applicant shall first obtain
an advisory recommendation from the Permitting Authority, as well
as conditional Authority approval for the first approval stage for the
proposed project, which may be granted concurrently, then obtain
conditional Zoning Board relief, and then return to the Permitting
Authority for subsequent required approvals.
(2) Where an applicant requires both a special use permit under the
local Zoning Ordinance and Permitting Authority approval, the
applicant shall first obtain an advisory recommendation from the
Permitting Authority, as well as conditional Permitting Authority
approval for the first approval stage for the proposed project,
which may be granted concurrently, then obtain a conditional
special use permit from the Zoning Board, and then return to the
Permitting Authority for subsequent required approval(s).
A. Waiver and/or modification of requirements. The Permitting Authority
shall have the power to grant such waivers and/or modifications from
the requirements of the land development and subdivision approval
process as may be reasonable and within the general purpose and
intent of the provisions of these regulations. Such waivers and/or
modifications shall only be permitted where the literal enforcement of
one or more provisions of the regulations is impracticable and will exact
undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in
question or where such waiver and/or modification is in the best
interest of good planning practice and/or design as evidenced by
consistency with the East Greenwich Comprehensive Community Plan
and the Zoning Ordinance.
B. Reinstatement of applications.
(1) When an applicant has exceeded a deadline established by these
regulations for submission of material for subdivision or land
development, thereby rendering a previously granted approval
invalid, the application may be reinstated by the Permitting
Authority under the following conditions:
(a) The subdivision is consistent with the Comprehensive
Community Plan;
(b) The regulations pertinent to the specific proposal are
substantially the same as they were at the time of the original
§ A263-37 EAST GREENWICH CODE § A263-38
C:790
§ A263-39. Procedure: meetings; votes; decisions and records.
approval and that any changes thereto would not have affected
the previously granted approval;
(c) The zoning of the subdivision parcel is unchanged from what it
was at the time of original approval;
(d) Physical conditions on the subdivision parcel are substantially
the same as they were at the time of original approval; and
(e) Applicable state or federal regulations are substantially the
same as they were at the time of original approval.
(2) Application for reinstatement of a previously approved subdivision
shall be made in writing to the Permitting Authority by the
applicant. The Permitting Authority, in approving or denying the
request for an extension, shall make findings of fact, which shall be
made part of the record.
C. (Reserved)
D. Decisions on waivers and modifications. The Permitting Authority shall
approve, approve with conditions, or deny a request for a waiver or
modification by the following procedure:
(1) The Permitting Authority's decision shall be made within 45 days of
the date the request for waiver or modification was first considered
by the Permitting Authority, unless the applicant waives that
deadline.
(2) The Permitting Authority's decision shall be in writing and shall
contain findings of fact addressing the conditions contained in
§ A263-39.
A. All records of the Permitting Authority's proceedings and decisions
shall be written and kept permanently available for public review.
Completed applications for proposed projects under review by the
Permitting Authority shall also be available for public review.
B. Participation in a Permitting Authority meeting or other proceedings by
any party shall not be a cause for civil action or liability except for acts
not in good faith, intentional misconduct, knowing violation of law,
transactions where there is an improper personal benefit, or malicious,
wanton or willful misconduct.
C. All final written comments to the Permitting Authority from the
Administrative Officer, municipal departments, the Technical Review
Committee, state and federal agencies and local commissions shall be
part of the permanent record of the development application.
D. Votes. All votes of the Permitting Authority shall be made part of the
permanent record and shall show the members present and their votes.
§ A263-38 CHARTER § A263-39
C:791
§ A263-40. Procedure: signing and recording of plats and plans.
A decision by the Permitting Authority to approve any land development
or subdivision application shall require a vote for approval by a majority
of the current Permitting Authority membership.
E. All written decisions of the Permitting Authority shall be recorded in the
land evidence records within 35 days after the Permitting Authority
vote. A copy of the recorded decision shall be mailed within one
business day of recording, by any method that provides confirmation of
receipt, to the applicant and to any objector who has filed a written
request for notice with the Administrative Officer. [Amended
12-9-2015]
A. All approved final plans and plats for land development and subdivision
projects shall be signed by the appropriate Permitting Board official, as
authorized, with the date of approval. Plans and plats for major land
developments and subdivisions shall be signed by the Chairperson or
Vice Chair of the Permitting Authority attesting to the approval. All
minor land development or subdivision plans and plats and
administrative plats shall be signed by the Chairperson or other
designated member.
B. Upon signature, all plans and plats shall be submitted to the
Administrative Officer prior to recording and filing in the appropriate
municipal departments. The material to be recorded for all plans and
plats shall include all pertinent plans with plan notes concerning all the
essential aspects of the approved project design, the implementation
schedule, special conditions placed on the development by the Town,
permits and agreements with state and federal reviewing agencies, and
other information as required by the Permitting Authority. The final
approved and signed plat shall be affixed on a plat card in a manner
approved by the Town Clerk.
C. Other parts of the application's record for subdivisions and land
development projects, including all meeting records, approved master
plan and preliminary plans, site analyses, impact analyses, all legal
agreements, records of the public hearing and the entire final approved
set of drawings, shall be kept permanently by the municipal
departments responsible for implementation and enforcement,
including the Planning Department, Department of Public Works and
Building Official. In addition, the Town Clerk's office shall maintain a
complete copy of the record.
D. Construction drawings need not be recorded. However, a complete
blue-line or photo copy set of construction drawings, including street
plans and profiles, cross sections, grading plans, drainage plans,
landscaping plans, soil erosion and sediment control plans, utility plans
and any other construction plans, details and specifications required as
a condition of approval shall be submitted to the Administrative Officer,
who shall forward same to the Town Clerk for filing prior to the
§ A263-39 EAST GREENWICH CODE § A263-40
C:792
§ A263-41. Procedure: changes to recorded plats and plans.
subdivider recording the plat. Additional copies of all construction
drawings shall be kept by the Department of Public Works, the
Administrative Officer and any other Town departments as required in
Subsection C above.
E. The Administrative Officer shall notify the statewide "911" emergency
authority and the East Greenwich Police and East Greenwich Fire
Department of the recording of the new plat and provide such
information as required by each of the entities. [Amended 12-9-2015]
A. For all changes to the approved plans of land development projects or
subdivisions subject to this chapter, an amendment of the final
development plans is required prior to the issuance of any building
permits. Any changes approved in the final plan shall be recorded as
amendments to the final plan in accordance with the procedure
established for recording of plats in § A263-40.
B. Minor changes.
(1) Minor changes, as defined below, to a land development or
subdivision plan may be approved administratively by the
Administrative Officer, whereupon a permit may be issued. Such
changes may be authorized without additional public hearings, at
the discretion of the Administrative Officer. All such changes shall
be made part of the permanent record of the project application.
This provision shall not prohibit the Administrative Officer from
requesting a recommendation from either the Technical Review
Committee or the Permitting Authority. Denial of the proposed
change(s) shall be referred to the Permitting Authority for review
as a major change.
(2) For the purpose of this section, the term "minor changes" shall
mean any change which, in the opinion of the Administrative
Officer, is consistent with the intent of the original approval. Such
minor changes shall include, but are not necessarily limited to, the
following:
(a) Amendments or changes to utility plans which are in accord
with Town of East Greenwich specifications and approved by
the appropriate utility company.
(b) Lot line revisions, which can be reviewed and approved as an
administrative subdivision according to the provisions of
§ A263-12.
(c) Amendments or changes to grading plans or drainage plans
which are consistent with good and accepted engineering
practices and relevant Town and state standards which do not
require state or federal reviewing authorities.
§ A263-40 CHARTER § A263-41
C:793
(d) As approved by the Administrative Officer, amendments or
changes to construction plans which are required because of
unforeseen physical conditions on the parcel being subdivided
and which are consistent with good engineering practice and
Town and state standards. Modifications to any construction
plans which are consistent with good and acceptable industry
practices and Town and state standards.
(e) Modifications which are required by outside permitting
agencies, such as but not limited to the Department of
Environmental Management and the Department of
Transportation.
C. Major changes.
(1) Major changes to a land development or subdivision plan may be
approved only by the Permitting Authority. The procedure for
approval of any such major change shall follow the same review
and public hearing process as required for preliminary approval to
a major land development and major subdivision as provided in
§ A263-18.
(2) For the purpose of these regulations, the term "major changes"
shall mean changes which, in the opinion of the Administrative
Officer, are contrary to or beyond the scope of the intent of and/or
the reasoning behind the original approval. Examples of major
changes shall include, but are not necessarily limited to, the
following: [Amended 11-6-2013]
(a) Changes which would have the effect of creating additional lots
or dwelling units for development;
(b) Changes which would be contrary to any applicable provision
of the Zoning Ordinance or which require a variance or special
use permit from the Zoning Board of Review;
(c) Changes which may have significant adverse impacts on
abutting property or property in the vicinity of the proposed
subdivision or land development project by affecting such
things as traffic counts, patterns, or peak hours; by increasing
the density of population residing in the development or the
number of visitors to the site; by significantly expanding the
hours of operation; by reducing any buffer areas or other
protections to abutting properties; or other such changes;
(d) Changes which may have a significant adverse impact on any
public service, utility or road.
D. Rescission procedure. The Planning Board, only upon application by all
landowners of the plat to be affected, may determine that the
application for plat rescission is not consistent with the Comprehensive
Community Plan and is not in compliance with the standards and
§ A263-41 EAST GREENWICH CODE § A263-41
C:794
§ A263-42. Appeals: right of appeal.
§ A263-43. Appeals: process of appeal.
provision of the municipality's Zoning Ordinance and/or land
development and subdivision review regulations and shall hold a public
hearing which adheres to the requirements for notice established by
§ 45-23-42 of the General Laws of Rhode Island. The Planning Board
shall approve, approve with conditions or modifications, or deny the
application for rescission of the plat. If it is necessary to abandon
any street covered under Chapter 6, Title 24, the Planning Board
shall submit to the Town Council the documents necessary for the
abandonment process. Once the required process for rescission or for
rescission and abandonment has been completed, the revised plat shall
be signed and recorded as required by these regulations.
A. An appeal from any decision of the Permitting Authority or
Administrative Officer charged in the regulations with enforcement of
any provisions, except as provided herein, may be taken to the Board of
Appeal by an aggrieved party. Appeals from a decision granting or
denying approval of a final plan shall be limited to elements of such
approval or disapproval contained in the decision reached by the
Planning Board at the preliminary stage, provided that a public hearing
has been held on the plan.
B. An appeal from a decision of the Board of Appeal (Zoning Board of
Review) may be taken by an aggrieved party to the Kent County
Superior Court.
A. An appeal to the Board of Appeal from a decision or action of the
Permitting Authority or Administrative Officer may be taken by an
aggrieved party to the extent provided in § A263-42. Such appeal must
be taken within 20 days after the decision has been filed and posted in
the office of the Town Clerk.
B. The appeal shall be in writing and shall clearly state the issue or
decision which is being appealed, the reason for the appeal, and the
form of relief sought. At the time of filing, the appellant from any
decision of the Planning Board, the Zoning Official or the
Administrative Officer shall file a statement of the law and the facts on
which it relies to claim: 1) prejudicial procedural error; and/or 2) clear
error; and/or 3) lack of support by the weight of the evidence in the
record, together with 12 copies thereof. Failure to file the statement
shall be cause for the Zoning Board of Review to continue the hearing
until such statement is filed in a timely manner. Applications must be
received by the Planning Department not later than the 15th of the
month to be advertised and docketed for the Board of Appeal's next
meeting on the fourth Tuesday of the following month. The Planning
Board shall receive a copy of the appeal prior to the hearing by the
Board of Appeal. Comments on the appeal by the Planning Board, if any,
§ A263-41 CHARTER § A263-43
C:795
§ A263-44. Appeals: stay of proceedings.
An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action being
appealed.
§ A263-45. Appeals: requirements for public hearing.
§ A263-46. Appeals: standards of review.
shall be directed to the Town Solicitor. There shall be paid with the
filing of the appeal the cost, as determined by the Administrative
Officer, for the copying of the record to be transmitted to the Board of
Appeal. The appeal shall either be sent by certified mail, with a return
receipt requested, or shall be hand-delivered to the Board of Appeal.
The Town Clerk shall accept delivery of an appeal on behalf of the
Board of Appeal.
C. Upon receipt of an appeal, the Board of Appeal shall require the
Permitting Authority or Administrative Officer to transmit forthwith to
the Board of Appeal all papers, documents and plans, or a certified copy
thereof, constituting the record of the action which is being appealed.
A. The Board of Appeal shall hold a public hearing on the appeal within 45
days of the receipt of the appeal, giving public notice thereof as well as
due notice to the parties of interest. At the hearing, any party may
appear in person or may be represented by an agent or attorney. The
Board shall render a decision within 10 days of the close of the public
hearing. The cost of any notice required for the hearing shall be borne
by the appellant.
B. The Board of Appeal shall only hear appeals of the actions of the
Permitting Authority or Administrative Officer at a meeting called
especially for the purpose of hearing such appeals and which has been
so advertised.
C. The hearing may be held on the same date and at the same place as a
meeting of the Zoning Board of Review. However, it must be conducted
as a separate meeting apart from regular Zoning Board of Review
business. Separate minutes and records of votes on the appeal shall be
maintained by the Board of Appeal.
A. In instances of a Board of Appeal's review of a Permitting Authority or
Administrative Officer's decision on matters subject to these
regulations, the Board of Appeal shall not substitute its own judgment
for that of the Permitting Authority or the Administrative Officer, but
must consider the issue upon the findings and record of the Permitting
Authority or Administrative Officer. The Board of Appeal shall not
reverse a decision of the Permitting Authority or Administrative Officer
except on a finding of prejudicial procedural error, clear error or lack of
support by the weight of the evidence in the record.
§ A263-43 EAST GREENWICH CODE § A263-46
C:796
§ A263-47. Appeals to Superior Court.
B. The concurring vote of three of the five members of the Board of Appeal
sitting at a hearing shall be necessary to reverse any decision of the
Permitting Authority or Administrative Officer.
C. In the instance where the Board of Appeal overturns a decision of the
Permitting Authority or Administrative Officer, the proposed project
application shall be returned to the Permitting Authority or
Administrative Officer at the stage of processing from which the appeal
was taken for further proceedings before the Permitting Authority or
Administrative Officer for the final disposition. The application's
disposition shall be consistent with the Board of Appeal's decision.
D. The Board of Appeal shall keep complete records of all proceedings,
including a record of all votes taken, and shall place on file all decisions
on appeals in writing. The Board of Appeal shall include in the written
record the reasons for each decision.
A. An aggrieved party may appeal a decision of the Board of Appeal to the
Kent County Superior Court by filing a complaint setting forth the
reasons of appeal within 20 days after the decision has been recorded
and posted in the office of the Town Clerk. The Board of Appeal shall file
the original documents acted upon by it and constituting the record of
the case appealed from, or certified copies thereof, together with such
other facts as may be pertinent, with the Clerk of the Court within 30
days after being served with a copy of the complaint. When the
complaint is filed by someone other than the original applicant or
appellant, such original applicant or appellant and the membership of
the Permitting Authority shall be made parties to the proceedings. The
appeal shall not stay proceedings upon the decision appealed from, but
the Court may, in its discretion, grant a stay on appropriate terms and
make such other orders as it deems necessary for an equitable
disposition of the appeal.
B. The review shall be conducted by the Superior Court without a jury. The
Court shall review the record of the hearing before the Permitting
Authority and, if it shall appear to the Court that additional evidence is
necessary for the proper disposition of the matter, it may allow any
party to such appeal to present such evidence in open court, which
evidence, along with the report, shall constitute the record upon which
the determination of the Court shall be made.
C. The Court shall not substitute its judgment for that of the Permitting
Authority as to the weight of the evidence on questions of fact. The
Court may affirm the decision of the Board of Appeal or remand the
case for further proceedings or may reverse or modify the decision if
substantial rights of the appellant have been prejudiced because of
findings, inferences, conclusions or decisions which are:
§ A263-46 CHARTER § A263-47
C:797
§ A263-48. Appeals to Superior Court; enactment of or amendment
of local regulations.
(1) In violation of constitutional, statutory, ordinance or Permitting
Authority regulations or other provisions;
(2) In excess of the authority granted to the Permitting Authority by
statute or ordinance;
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure;
(4) Affected by other error of law;
(5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable, probative and substantial
evidence of the whole record; or
(6) Arbitrary or capricious or characterized by abuse of discretion or
clearly unwarranted exercise of discretion.
A. An appeal of an enactment of or an amendment of these East Greenwich
Land Development and Subdivision Regulations may be taken to the
Kent County Superior Court by filing a complaint, as set forth herein,
within 30 days after such enactment or amendment has become
effective. The appeal may be taken by any legal resident or landowner
of the Town or by any association of residents or landowners of the
Town. The appeal shall not stay the enforcement of the local
regulations, as enacted or amended, but the Court may, in its discretion,
grant a stay on appropriate terms, which may include the filing of a
bond, and make such other orders as it deems necessary for an
equitable disposition of the appeal.
B. The complaint shall set forth with specificity the area or areas in which
the enactment or amendment is not consistent with the Comprehensive
Planning Act, Chapter 22.2 of Title 45 of the General Laws; the Zoning
Enabling Act of 1991, R.I.G.L. § 45-24-27 et seq.; the East Greenwich
Comprehensive Community Plan, or the East Greenwich Zoning
Ordinance.
C. The review shall be conducted by the Court without a jury. The Court
shall consider whether the enactment or amendment of the local
regulations is consistent with the Comprehensive Planning Act, Chapter
22.2 of Title 45 of the General Laws; the Zoning Enabling Act of 1991,
R.I.G.L. § 45-24-27 et seq.; the East Greenwich Comprehensive
Community Plan, or the East Greenwich Zoning Ordinance. If the
enactment or amendment is not consistent, then the Court shall
invalidate the enactment or the amendment, or those parts of such
enactment or amendment which are not consistent. The Court shall not
revise the regulations to be consistent but may suggest appropriate
language as part of the Court decision.
§ A263-47 EAST GREENWICH CODE § A263-48
C:798
§ A263-49. Appeals to Superior Court; priority in judicial
proceeding.
Upon the entry of any case or proceeding brought under the provisions of
this chapter, including pending appeals and appeals hereinafter taken to
the Court, the Court shall, at the request of either party, advance the case,
so that the matter shall be afforded precedence on the calendar and shall
thereupon be heard and determined with as little delay as possible.
§ A263-50. Severability.
D. The Court may, in its discretion, upon motion of the parties or on its own
motion, award reasonable attorneys' fees to any party to an appeal, as
set forth herein, including a municipality.
A. If any provision of this chapter or of any rule, regulation or
determination made thereunder, or the application thereof to any
person, agency or circumstances, is held invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the chapter, rule, regulation or
determination and the application of such provisions to other persons,
agencies or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. The invalidity
of any section or sections of this chapter shall not affect the validity of
the remainder of the chapter.
B. Applicability of prior subdivision regulations. Subdivisions and land
developments which were submitted to the Permitting Authority for
approval under the provisions of these regulations in effect prior to the
date of passage of these regulations (August 16, 1999) may be
continued to be reviewed by the Platting and Subdivision Board and
approved under said prior regulations in accordance with the following;
(1) Final approvals. Any subdivider who at the time of adoption of
these regulations has received final approval or final approval with
conditions from the Permitting Authority may initiate or construct
any part of the development or record said plans in accordance
with the subdivision regulations in effect at the time final approval
was granted.
(2) Preliminary approvals. Any subdivision which at the time of
adoption of these regulations has received approval from the
Permitting Authority may continue to be reviewed in accordance
with the subdivision regulations in effect at the time preliminary
approval was granted, provided that the final plat must be
approved and recorded within one year from the date of
preliminary approval unless an extension of time is granted by the
Planning Board for good cause shown.
(3) Other. Any subdivision which at the time of adoption of these
regulations has not received final or preliminary approval or has
been reviewed by the Permitting Authority for preliminary review
but no approval therefor has been granted, or which has received
§ A263-48 CHARTER § A263-50
C:799
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
KEY:
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. IV.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
751 Comprehensive Community
Plan amendment
NCM
752 2-28-2005 Cove Management
Commission amendment
Ch. 34, Art. II
753 5-23-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 260
754 5-23-2005 Zoning Map amendment See § 260-10
755 6-6-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 260
756 6-13-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 248
757 6-13-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 248
758 7-11-2005 Purchasing policy Ch. 187
759 9-26-2005 Fee schedule amendment Ch. 93, Art. I
760 1-23-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 248
761 2-27-2006 Zoning Map amendment See § 260-10
762 2-27-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 260
763 5-1-2006 Zoning Map amendment See § 260-10
only preapplication approval, and any division of land which has
not received final approval shall be reviewed under the terms of
these regulations.
C. The Permitting Authority shall determine which regulations apply for
subdivisions submitted for approval prior to the date of passage of
these regulations (August 16, 1999). Appeals from a decision regarding
the application status and applicable regulation shall be made to the
Zoning Board of Review as herein provided.
§ A263-50 EAST GREENWICH CODE § DL-1
C:800
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
764 5-8-2006 Adoption of Code; general
penalty
NLP (see Ch. 1,
Art. IV); Ch. 1, Art.
III
765 5-22-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 260
766 5-22-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 260
767 5-22-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 260
768 6-12-2006 Zoning Map amendment See § 260-10
769 7-10-2006 Tax increase deferral
program for senior resident
homeowners
Ch. 227, Art. XIV
770 7-10-2006 Zoning Map amendment See § 260-10
771 8-28-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 248
772 8-28-2006 Taxation amendment Ch. 227, Arts. III,
IV, V, VII, VIII, IX
and X
772.1 8-28-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 248
773 9-11-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 248
774 9-25-2006 Fee schedule amendment Ch. 93, Art. I
775 9-25-2006 Comprehensive permits Ch. 63
776 10-30-2006 Streets and sidewalks: use
and maintenance
amendment
Ch. 218, Art. I
777 10-30-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 248
778 11-6-2006 Affordable housing
development fees
REP
779 11-6-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 260
780 11-6-2006 Affordable Housing
Commission
Ch. 34, Art. VIII
781 11-6-2006 Fee schedule amendment;
stormwater pollution
prevention amendment
Ch. 93, Art. I; Ch.
207
782 3-26-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 248
783 4-9-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 260
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:801
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
784 4-9-2007 Department of Senior and
Human Services
Ch. 78, Art. III
785 5-14-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 248
785.1 6-25-2007 Affordable housing
development fees
amendment
REP
786 7-9-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 248
786.1 12-10-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 260
786.2 12-17-2007 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 38
786.3 12-17-2007 Fee schedule amendment Ch. 93, Art. I
786.4 12-17-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 260
786.5 12-17-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 260
787 2-11-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 260
788 2-11-2008 Fee schedule amendment Ch. 93, Art. I
789 6-9-2008 Tax credit for aged, totally
disabled, veteran disabled
and blind amendment
Ch. 227, Art. IV
790 6-9-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 248
791 6-23-2008 Affordable housing
development fees
amendment
REP
792 7-14-2008 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 170
793 7-14-2008 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 179
794 9-8-2008 Sewers amendment Ch. 197
795 11-5-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 248
796 12-15-2008 Zoning Map amendment See § 260-10
797 12-15-2008 Comprehensive Community
Plan amendment
NCM
798 2-9-2009 Harbor management
amendment
Ch. 128
799 2-9-2009 Cove Management
Commission amendment
Ch. 34, Art. II
§ DL-1 EAST GREENWICH CODE § DL-1
C:802
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
800 2-9-2009 Industrial wastewater
discharges amendment
Ch. 134
801 3-9-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 248
802 3-9-2009 Affordable Housing
Commission amendment
Ch. 34, Art. VIII
803 8-24-2009 Taxation amendment Ch. 227, Arts. III,
V, VI, VII, VIII and
IX
804 11-9-2009 Noise amendment Ch. 152
805 6-14-2010 Zoning Map amendment See § 260-10
806 9-13-2010 Zoning Map amendment NCM
807 9-27-2010 Tangible household personal
property tax exemption
amendment
Ch. 227, Art. I
808 9-27-2010 Taxation amendment Ch. 227, Arts. III,
V, VI, VII, VIII and
IX
11-2-2010 Charter amendment § C-33
809 11-8-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 260
810 11-8-2010 Flood hazard areas
amendment
Ch. 113
811 11-8-2010 Town, school, park and
recreation facilities and
Land Trust properties
Ch. 166, Art. III
812 1-10-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 260
813 1-24-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 248
814 5-9-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 260
815 9-12-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
816 9-12-2011 Taxation amendment Ch. 227, Arts. III,
IV, V, VI, VII, VIII
and IX
817 9-26-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 248
818 9-26-2011 Fee schedule amendment Ch. 93, Art. I
819 3-26-2012 Jukeboxes, electronic or
video games and
mechanical devices
amendment
Ch. 19, Art. II
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:803
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
820 4-9-2012 Development impact fees Ch. 93, Art. II
821 5-29-2012 Taxation amendment Ch. 227, Arts. III,
V, VI, VII, VIII and
IX
822 7-30-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 248
823 9-10-2012 Animals amendment Ch. 23
824 9-24-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 248
825 1-14-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 248
826 2-4-2013 Sewers amendment Ch. 197
827 4-22-2013 Taxation amendment Ch. 227, Arts. III,
V, VI, VII, VIII and
IX
828 7-8-2013 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 15
829 9-9-2013 Historic Cemetery Advisory
Commission
Ch. 34, Art. IX
830 9-9-2013 Flood hazard areas
amendment
Ch. 113
831 12-9-2013 Historic Cemetery Advisory
Commission amendment
Ch. 34, Art. IX
832 12-16-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
833 3-24-2014 Department of Information
Technology
Ch. 78, Art. IV
834 4-14-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 260
835 5-12-2014 Noise amendment Ch. 152
836 7-14-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 248
837 8-25-2014 Taxation: payment of taxes,
liens and assessments
amendment
Ch. 227, Art. XI
838 9-22-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 260
839 10-6-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 260
840 11-10-2014 Town, school, park and
recreation facilities and
Land Trust properties
amendment
Ch. 166, Art. III
§ DL-1 EAST GREENWICH CODE § DL-1
C:804
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
841 4-27-2015 Taxation amendment Ch. 227, Arts. III,
V, VI, VII, VIII and
IX
842 5-11-2015 Zoning Map amendment See § 260-10
843 7-13-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 248
844 9-8-2015 Flood hazard areas
amendment
Ch. 113
845 10-26-2015 Affordable housing
development fees repealer;
zoning amendment
Ch. 93, Art. III; Ch.
260
Planning
Board
12-9-2015 Development and
subdivision review
regulations amendment
Ch. A263
846 1-11-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 260
847 1-25-2016 Alcoholic beverages
amendment; streets and
sidewalks: use and
maintenance amendment
Ch. 15; Ch. 218,
Art. I
848 1-25-2016 Zoning Map amendment See § 260-10
849 3-4-2016 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. IV
E-56 3-14-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 248
850 4-11-2016 Building Code Board of
Appeals repealer
Ch. 34, Art. I
851 4-11-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 248
852 4-25-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 248
853 5-9-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 260
854 5-9-2016 Zoning Map amendment See § 260-10
855 6-13-2016 Fee schedule amendment Ch. 93, Art. I
856 6-13-2016 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 38
857 6-13-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 248
858 7-11-2016 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 15
859 10-24-2016 Zoning Map amendment See § 260-10
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:805
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
860 10-24-2016 Fee schedule amendment Ch. 93, Art. I
861 10-24-2016 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 15
862 10-24-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 248
863 10-24-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 248
864 1-9-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 248
865 3-13-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 248
866 3-13-2017 IT Governance Council Ch. 34, Art. X
867 4-24-2017 Noise amendment Ch. 152
868 4-24-2017 Fee schedule amendment Ch. 93, Art. I
869 5-22-2017 Tax exemption for
renewable energy systems
Ch. 227, Art. XV
870 6-12-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 260
871 6-12-2017 Charter amendment;
Affordable Housing
Commission amendment;
Land Trust amendment
Charter; Ch. 34,
Art. VIII; Ch. 143
872 9-11-2017 Alcoholic Beverages
Amendment
Ch. 15
873 11-6-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 260
874 2-12-2018 Taxation: Exemption for
Renewable Energy Systems
Amendment
Ch. 227, Art. XV
875 2-26-2018 Parks and Recreation:
Tobacco-Free Facilities
Ch. 166, Art. IV
876 6-4-2018 Fire Prevention, Inspection
and Investigation: Fire
Marshal
Ch. 100, Art. I
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
877 7-23-2018 Building
Construction
Amendment
Ch. 38 5
878 11-5-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 248 5
§ DL-1 EAST GREENWICH CODE § DL-1
C:806
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
879 11-29-2018 Harbor Management
Amendment
Ch. 128 5
880 4-22-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 260 5
881 5-28-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 260 5
882 6-10-2019 Taxation: Tiered Tax
Classification Plan;
Small Business
Tangible Property
Tax Exemption
Ch. 227, Art.
XVI; Ch. 227,
Art. XVII
5
883 6-10-2019 General Obligation
Bonds
NCM 5
884 6-10-2019 General Obligation
Bonds
NCM 5
885 6-10-2019 General Obligation
Bonds
NCM 5
886 8-26-2019 Taxation: Exemption
for Vehicles of
Persons With
Disabilities
Ch. 227, Art.
XVIII
5
887 8-26-2019 Fire Prevention,
Inspection and
Investigation:
Connection of Fire
Alarms to Municipal
Systems
Ch. 100, Art.
II
5
888 10-15-2019 Solid Waste
Management:
Reusable Carryout
Bags
Ch. 212, Art.
VI
5
889 11-12-2019 Noise Amendment Ch. 152 5
890 1-13-2020 Capital
Improvements
Amendment
Ch. 55 5
891 2-24-2020 General Provisions:
General Penalty
Amendment
Ch. 1, Art. III 5
892 2-24-2020 Alcoholic Beverages
Amendment
Ch. 15 5
893 2-24-2020 Peace and Good
Order Amendment
Ch. 170 5
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:807
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
894 2-24-2020 Peddling and
Soliciting
Amendment
Ch. 174 5
§ DL-1 EAST GREENWICH CODE § DL-1
C:808