CODE OF ORDINANCES TOWN OF EXETER, RHODE ISLAND 
____________ 
Published in 1999 by Order of the Town Council 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
TOWN OF 
EXETER, RHODE ISLAND 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Kenneth L. Fernstrom 
President, Town Council 
____________ 
Calvin A. Ellis 
Vice-President, Town Council 
____________ 
William J. Devanney, DDS 
Kathleen M. Staley 
Wayne E. Cross 
Town Council Members 
____________ 
James P. Marusak, Esq. 
Town Attorney 
____________ 
Cheryl A. Chorney, CMC 
Town Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the Town of Exeter, Rhode Island. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the town council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of any ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Alyce A. Whitson, Supervising Editor, and Robert MacNaughton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Cheryl A. Chorney, Town Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the town readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the town's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Exeter, Rhode Island. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Exeter, Rhode Island. 
(c)  Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Exeter, Rhode Island. 1999. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 8 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE TOWN OF EXETER, RHODE ISLAND. 
IT IS HEREBY ORDAINED BY THE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF EXETER, RHODE ISLAND AS FOLLOWS: 
    Section 1. The "Code of Ordinances, Town of Exeter, Rhode Island," (hereinafter referred to as "The Code") published by Municipal Code Corporation and consisting of chapters 1 through 50, inclusive is hereby adopted. 
    Section 2. Ordinances adopted after November 2, 1998, which amend or refer to ordinances which have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. Other ordinances adopted after November 2, 1998, shall also remain in full force and effect and shall be construed as if a part of the Code until repealed. 
    Section 3. This ordinance shall become effective upon passage. 
    Passed and adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Exeter, this 7th day of June, 1999. 
/s/   
      President   /s/   
      Town Clerk   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Date 
Adopted Include/ 
Omit Supp. No.  5-12-08 Include 17  8-19-08 Include 17 10- 4-10 Include 17 11- 2-10 Include 17 12- 6-10 Include 17 12- 6-10 Include 17 12- 5-11(Amd.) Include 18  2- 6-12(Amd.) Include 18  5-22-12(Ord.) Include 18  9-27-12(Ord.) Include 19 11- 5-12(Ord.) Include 19 12- 3-12(Ord.) Include 19  3- 4-13(Ord.) Include 20  6-25-13(Amd.) Include 20  8- 4-14(Amd.) Include 21  3- 2-14(Ord.) Include 22 10- 6-14(Amd.) Include 22 12- 1-14(Ord.) Include 22 12- 7-15(Ord.) Include 23  4- 7-16(Ord.) Include 23  7- 5-16(1)(Ord.) Include 23  7- 5-16(2)(Ord.) Include 23  7- 5-06(Amd.) Include 24 11- 8-16(Amd.) Include 24  1- 3-17(Amd.) Include 24  2-20-17(Amd.) Include 24  3- 6-17(Amd.) Include 24  6- 5-17(Amd.) Include 24  8- 7-17(1)(Amd.) Include 24  8- 7-17(2)(Amd.) Include 24 10- 2-17(Amd.) Include 24  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
EXETER HOME RULE CHARTER 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Charter for the Town of Exeter, Rhode Island, as adopted by referendum on November 5, 1996, and effective on January 6, 1997. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference- Home rule, R.I. Const., art. XIII; code of ethics, G.L. 1956, § 36-14-1 et seq.; public records, G.L. 1956, § 38-2-1 et seq.; open meetings law, G.L. 1956, § 42-46-1 et seq. 

PREAMBLE 
    We, the people of the Town of Exeter, in order to preserve and enhance the freedoms and right of self-government which we have long enjoyed, and to guarantee and transmit that right and those freedoms to future generations, do adopt and establish this Home Rule Charter for the Town of Exeter, pursuant to the power granted to us by the provisions of Article XIII of the Constitution of the State of Rhode Island. 
ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS OF THE TOWN 

Sec. 101. - Incorporation. 
    The inhabitants of the Town of Exeter in the State of Rhode Island, within the corporate limits as now established or as hereafter established in the manner provided by law, shall continue to be a municipal body politic and corporate under the name of the Town of Exeter in perpetuity, to be governed under the provisions of this Home Rule Charter as adopted and as it may be amended from time to time. 
Sec. 102. - Powers of the Town. 
    The Town shall have all powers possible for a town to have under the Constitution and laws of this State, now or as amended in the future, as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Charter. All powers which the Town may exercise shall be construed liberally in favor of the Town, and the specific mention of particular powers in this Charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general power stated in this article. 
Sec. 103. - Town Property. 
    The Town may acquire property within or without its corporate limits for any municipal purpose, in fee simple or any lesser interest or estate, by purchase, gift, devise or lease, and within its limits by condemnation, and may sell, mortgage, lease, exchange, hold, manage and control such property as its interests may require, provided that any acquisition by gift or devise shall be approved by the Town Council after due and diligent inquiry and a determination that same shall be a beneficial acquisition, provided further that any other such acquisition or lease other than in the ordinary course of the Town's business affairs, or any sale, mortgage, or exchange of property must first be authorized by a financial town meeting. 
Sec. 104. - Intergovernmental Relations. 
    The Town may exercise any of its powers or perform any of its functions, and may participate in the financing thereof, jointly or in cooperation, by contract or otherwise, with any one or more towns, cities or civil divisions or agencies thereof, or another state, or the United States or any agency thereof, provided, that any such contract or agreement other than in the ordinary course of the Town's business affairs, shall first be authorized by a financial town meeting upon recommendation of the Town Council. 
ARTICLE II. - ELECTIONS 

Sec. 201. - Election Laws and Conduct of Elections. 
    The provisions of the Constitution and the General Laws of the State, now or hereafter in effect, pertaining to elections, special, general, and primary, and also any special acts pertaining to elections in the Town of Exeter, now or hereafter in effect, shall govern all Town elections, special, general and primary, so far as they may be applicable, excepting those provisions which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter affecting the form of government. 
Sec. 202. - Canvassing Authority. 
    There shall be a multipartisan canvassing authority, to be called the Board of Canvassers, whose members shall be appointed by the Town Council as provided by the Constitution and Laws of the State. The Board of Canvassers shall be vested with all the powers and duties now or hereafter vested by law in the canvassing authority of the Town. All members of the Board of Canvassers in office upon the effective date of this Charter [January 6, 1997] shall continue in office as members thereof until the expiration of the terms for which they were respectively appointed. 
Sec. 203. - Initiative, Referendum, and Recall. 
(a)  [Rights of electors.] The electors of the Town shall have the right to petition to initiate and repeal ordinances, and to propose the recall of an elected office holder, in the following manner: 
(1)  Initiative. The electors of the Town may propose ordinances to the Council and, if the Council fails to adopt an ordinance so proposed without any change in substance, to adopt it at a special or general election; provided, however, that such power shall not extend to the budget or capital program or to any ordinance relating to the appropriation of money, levy of taxes, zoning or salaries of Town officials or employees. 
(2)  Referendum. The electors of the Town shall have power to require reconsideration by the Council of any adopted ordinance and, if the Council fails to repeal an ordinance so reconsidered, to repeal it at a special or general election; provided, however, that such power shall not extend to the budget or capital program, to any emergency ordinance or to any ordinance relating to appropriation of money, levy of taxes, zoning or salaries of Town officials or employees. 
(3)  Recall. The electors of the Town shall have the power to propose the recall of any elected Town office holder, and to cause a referendum to be held on the question of whether or not the named office holder shall be recalled and removed from office. 
(b)  Commencement of proceedings. Any five (5) qualified electors of the Town may commence initiative, referendum or recall proceedings by filing with the Town Clerk an affidavit stating that they will constitute the petitioners' committee and be responsible for circulating the petition and filing it in proper form. The affidavit shall state the names and addresses of said electors, specify the address to which all notices to the committee are to be sent, and set out in full the proposed initiative ordinance or cite the ordinance sought to be reconsidered, or name the office and office holder to be recalled. Promptly, but not more than five (5) business days after the affidavit of the petitioners' committee is filed, the Town Clerk shall issue the appropriate petition blanks to [the] petitioners' committee and make record of the date of delivery of said petitions. 
(c)  Signing and filing of petitions and Council action on them. 
(1)  Initiative, referendum and recall petitions to the Council must be signed by ten percent (10%) of the total number of electors registered at the most recent Town general election. Initiative, referendum and recall petitions must also include the names and addresses of the five (5) petitioners and must state the petitioners' reasons for having brought the petition. The Board of Canvassers shall promptly determine the sufficiency of valid signatures on any such petition, and shall certify such petition to the Town Clerk when such a determination has been made. 
(2)  When an initiative or referendum petition has been certified as sufficient, the Council shall promptly consider the proposed initiative ordinance or reconsider the referred ordinance, in either case in the same manner as provided for adoption of an ordinance proposed by a member of the Council. If the Council fails to adopt a proposed initiative ordinance without any change in substance, or fails to repeal the referred ordinance, as the case may be, within sixty (60) days after the date the petition is certified, the Council shall submit the proposal or referred ordinance to the voters of the Town. 
(3)  When a recall petition has been certified as sufficient, the Council shall submit the question of the recall of the named office holder to the voters of the Town. 
(d)  Submission to voters. The vote of the Town on a proposed or referred ordinance shall be held at the next regular or at a special election, but in any event, not earlier than sixty (60) days and not later than one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of certification of the petition by the Board of Canvassers. The proposed or referred ordinance shall be published by the Town Clerk not less than twenty (20) days prior to the election. The vote of the Town on a proposed recall question shall be at a special election scheduled not earlier than twenty (20) days nor later than sixty (60) days from the date of certification of the petition by the Board of Canvassers. Notice of any such recall election shall be published by the Town Clerk at least three times on separate days with no less than a three day interval between publications. 
(e)  Submission and withdrawal of petitions. 
(1)  No petition for recall of an elected office holder shall be accepted by the Town Clerk or may be circulated less than one hundred eighty (180) days following the date on which said office holder was sworn in to his or her office; nor shall any such petition by accepted or circulated less than one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the expiration of the term of said office holder. 
(2)  If an initiative, referendum or recall petition bearing the signatures of at least ten percent (10%) of the total number of the electors has not been submitted to the Town Clerk within one hundred and twenty (120) days after the issuance of the petition blanks, then the initiative, referendum or recall petition shall be considered as withdrawn and shall have no further force or effect and all proceedings thereon shall be terminated. 
(3)  An initiative, referendum or recall petition may be withdrawn at any time prior to the fifteenth (15th) day preceding the day scheduled for a vote of the Town by filing with the Town Clerk a request for withdrawal signed by at least four (4) members of the petitioners' committee. Upon the filing of such request the petition shall have no further force or effect and all proceedings thereon shall be terminated. 
(f)  Results of vote on initiative, referendum or recall questions. 
(1)  Initiative. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a proposed initiative ordinance vote in its favor, it shall be considered adopted upon certification of the election results, and it shall be treated in all respects in the same manner as ordinances of the same kind adopted by the Council, provided, however, that any ordinance enacted pursuant to subsection (c)(2) or (f)(1) of this section may not be repealed or amended as to substance less than one (1) year following its adoption. If conflicting ordinances are approved at the same election, the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict. 
(2)  Referendum. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a referred ordinance vote against it, it shall be considered repealed upon certification of the election results. No referred ordinance repealed pursuant to subsection (c)(2) or (f)(2) of this section shall be reenacted by the Council less than one (1) year following its repeal. 
(3)  Recall. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a question for the recall of an office holder vote in favor of such recall, the office holder shall be considered to have vacated his or her office upon certification of the election results. The resulting vacancy shall be filled in the manner provided in this Charter for that office. 
ARTICLE III. - FINANCIAL TOWN MEETING 

Sec. 301. - Date and Purpose of Annual Financial Town Meeting. 
(a)  The electors of the Town of Exeter shall assemble annually in financial Town meeting on the second Tuesday in the month of June of each year. The purpose of the annual financial Town meeting shall be for the imposing of a tax, providing for the expenditure of such sums of money as may be necessary to pay the Town's debts and interest thereon, for the support of the Town services for the ensuing fiscal year, and for all other lawful purposes, and for transacting such other business as may lawfully come before such meeting. 
(b)  No money shall be drawn from the general fund, nor from moneys in any other Town fund, during the fiscal year, except pursuant to appropriations made at the annual or a special financial town meeting. This subsection shall not be interpreted to restrict the Town Treasurer from making transfers of funds for investment purposes. 
(Amd. of 11-3-98; Amd. of 11-7-06, § 1) 
Sec. 302. - Recessed and Special Town Meetings. 
    The annual financial town meeting may be recessed to a subsequent date and time by vote of the electors present, provided, however, that if any such recess is for more than fifteen (15) days, the warrant or so much thereof as remains to be considered, shall be reposted in the manner provided by law for the original posting. Special town meetings may be called and shall be warned and limited as to subjects to be considered as provided in state law. 
Sec. 303. - Town Moderator. 
    There shall be a Town Moderator, who shall be elected at the general election in each even-numbered year, to serve for a term of two years and until his or her successor is elected and qualified. All candidates for Town Moderator must be qualified electors of the Town, and residents thereof, and must remain qualified electors and residents throughout their term of office. The term of the Town Moderator shall begin upon the issuance of the certification of his or her election. 
    The Town Moderator shall preside at all regular and special town meetings, provided, however, if he or she shall not be present at the time set for the convening of any town meeting, the Town Clerk shall call the meeting to order and preside until the election by the voters present of a moderator pro tempore, and such election shall be the first order of business. All candidates for moderator pro tempore must have the same qualifications as candidates for Town Moderator. 
Sec. 304. - Notice and Agenda for Meetings. 
    The warrant for any town meeting shall be prepared and the meeting shall be warned as provided by law. The arrangement of items of business on the warrant as they are to be warned and taken up at the Town Meeting shall be determined by the Moderator in consultation with the Town Clerk and the Town Council President. The order of items to be considered at the meeting may be changed by a two-thirds vote of the electors present and voting. The text of the resolutions to be voted on shall be posted with the warrant and copies made available at the Town Hall. 
Sec. 305. - Conduct of Meetings. 
    The Town Moderator shall have all of the authority conferred upon moderators by state law in conducting and managing the business of town meetings. The quorum for any town meeting shall be fifty (50) electors of the Town of Exeter. Pursuant to the State open meetings law, the Moderator shall grant permission for the admission of persons who are not electors of the Town; provided, however, that all such persons shall be seated in an assigned area apart from the seating for the electors of the Town, and such persons shall have no right to vote. Such persons shall also have no right to speak except with the specific permission of the Moderator. 
Sec. 306. - Proposals for Expenditure Outside of Budget. 
    No proposal for the expenditure of money, other than those contained in the budget presented by the Council, shall be acted upon at any Financial Town Meeting unless it shall have been presented in a petition signed by at least fifty (50) electors of the Town, and shall have been filed with the Town Clerk at least twenty (20) days prior to the date of the Meeting. The warrant for the Meeting shall include notice of all such proposals for expenditure. 
ARTICLE IV. - TOWN COUNCIL 

Sec. 401. - Composition, Election and Terms of Town Council. 
    There shall be a Town Council of five members, elected at large by the qualified electors of the Town, each to serve for a term of two years, and until his or her successor is elected and qualified. 
Sec. 402. - Manner of Election; Qualifications. 
    The election of members of the Council shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November in each even-numbered year, in the manner provided by the election laws of the State. All candidates for Council member must be qualified electors of the Town, and residents thereof, and must remain qualified electors of the Town, and residents thereof, and must remain qualified electors and residents throughout their term of office. The terms of members of the Council shall begin upon the issuance of their certifications of election. The five candidates receiving the greatest numbers of votes shall be elected. 
Sec. 403. - Compensation and Expenses. 
    The Town Council shall receive such annual compensation as approved by the electors at the annual financial Town meetings, provided that no change in compensation shall take effect until after the next biennial election and installation of Town Council members. If voters at the financial Town meeting do not authorize a specific line item appropriation for Town Council compensation, then the Town Council compensation shall be that amount last approved at the most recent financial town meeting at which a line item appropriation was made for that purpose. 
(Amd. of 11-7-06, § 2) 
Sec. 404. - President and Vice-President. 
    The Council shall elect from among its members a president and a vice-president, each of whom shall serve at the pleasure of the Council. The president shall preside at all meetings of the Council and shall be recognized as the head of the Town government for ceremonial purposes and by the Governor for purposes of military law. The vice-president shall act as president during the absence or disability of the president. 
Sec. 405. - Eligibility of Council Members; Town Employment. 
    No Council member shall hold any other Exeter town office (elected or appointed), or be an employee of or employed by the Town of Exeter during his or her Council term, and no Council member shall be appointed to any paid office in the Town or employed by the Town (except in an elected position) during the term for which he or she was elected to the Council or during the one-year period immediately following the expiration of his or her Council term. If any Council member shall be an officer, director, majority shareholder, partner or principal of any corporation, partnership, limited liability company or other entity, such entity shall not be an employee of or employed by the Town of Exeter during the term for which such Council member was elected to the Council or during the one-year period immediately following the expiration of his or her Council term. 
Sec. 406. - Vacancies in Council. 
    In the event that the office of a Council member shall become vacant from any cause, such vacancy shall be filled by the Council with the candidate who received the highest number of votes among the unsuccessful candidates for the Council at the last Town election. If that individual is unavailable or refuses, the Council shall fill the vacancy with the candidate who received the second highest number of votes among the unsuccessful candidates for the Council in the last Town election. Only the highest three vote getters among the unsuccessful candidates shall be eligible for filling vacancies in this manner. In the event of a tie between two or more qualified and available candidates, the Town Council shall select the member for appointment from among such candidates. If no qualified candidate is available from the list, the Council shall appoint a qualified elector to fill the vacancy. The new member shall be sworn in at the next regular Council meeting following his or her appointment. All vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term. 
Sec. 407. - Forfeiture of Office. 
(a)  A Council member shall be required to forfeit his or her office if he or she (1) ceases at any time to fulfill any of the qualifications for the office prescribed by this Charter or by state law, (2) is disqualified from holding public office under the terms of Section 908 or (3) attends no regularly scheduled Council meetings for a period of two consecutive months without being excused by the Council. The remaining members of the Council shall fill any vacancy caused by forfeiture or disqualification from office in the manner set forth in Section 406 hereof. 
(b)  The Council shall be the judge of the qualifications of its members and of the grounds for forfeiture of the office of any member thereof, and for that purpose shall have power to subpoena witnesses, administer oaths and require the production of evidence. A member charged with conduct constituting grounds for forfeiture of his or her office shall be entitled to a public hearing on demand, and notice of such hearing shall be published in accordance with state law at least one week in advance of the hearing. Decisions made by the Council under this section shall be subject to review by the courts. 
Sec. 408. - Meetings and Procedures. 
    The first meeting of a newly elected Council shall be held on the first Monday following the certification of election of a majority of its members by the canvassing authority. The Town Clerk shall preside until the selection of a Town Council President. The Council shall determine the time and place of its regular meetings, which shall be held at least once each month. The giving and posting of notice of all meetings, including special meetings, shall be in accordance with state law. The Town Clerk shall serve as clerk of the Council. The Council President shall at all times have the same right to vote on matters before the Council as any other member. The Council shall adopt and may amend its own rules, and shall make reasonable provision to allow persons in attendance at its meetings opportunity to speak. A quorum for Council meetings shall consist of three members; provided, however, that a minimum of three affirmative votes shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, and for the approval of the budget for submission to the Financial Town Meeting. 
Sec. 409. - Legislative Powers; Ordinances. 
    The Council shall have the power to enact, amend or repeal ordinances for the preservation of the public peace, health, safety, comfort and welfare, and for the protection of persons and property; to provide reasonable penalties as allowed under state law for the violation of any ordinance; and to exercise all additional powers, consistent with the Charter and the laws and Constitution of the State. All the legislative powers vested in the Town by state law and the Constitution shall be exercised by the Town Council except those reserved to the Financial Town Meeting and to the people through the initiative and referendum procedures. 
Sec. 410. - Procedure for Adopting Ordinances. 
(a)  An ordinance or amendment to an existing ordinance may be introduced for consideration by any member of the Council at any regular or special meeting. Upon introduction of any ordinance or amendment, the Town Clerk shall distribute a copy to each Council member, file a copy in the office of the Town Clerk, publish a summary of the ordinance or amendment and cause copies of the full text to be posted in the Town Hall and in three public places around the Town prior to the meeting at which it shall be considered. 
(b)  At the meeting at which a proposed ordinance or amendment to an existing ordinance is introduced, the Council shall make provision for holding a hearing thereon as the first item of business at a duly scheduled meeting within a reasonable period of time, provided that such hearing shall occur not sooner than (5) days following publication of the summary thereof. 
(c)  The Council may adopt any ordinance or amendment to an existing ordinance following the hearing thereon at the same meeting, or at a subsequent meeting, provided, however, if the proposed ordinance or amendment is materially altered following the hearing thereon, a summary of the altered portion of the ordinance or amendment must be published, and subjected to a hearing as provided above before final adoption by the Council. 
Sec. 411. - Emergency Ordinances. 
(a)  To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property or the public peace, the Council may adopt one or more emergency ordinances. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form and manner prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted with or without amendment or may be rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, without following the publication and hearing procedures set forth in Section 410, but the affirmative vote of at least three (3) members shall be required for adoption. All emergency ordinances shall be published as soon as practicable following adoption. 
(b)  All emergency ordinances shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as may be specified therein and shall automatically stand repealed as of the sixty-first day following the date on which they took effect but may be reenacted in the manner specified in this section for a period of no more than sixty days if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
Sec. 412. - Investigations. 
    The Council may in the interest of the Town make investigations into the affairs of the Town and the conduct of any Town department, office or agency and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony and require the production of evidence. 
Sec. 413. - Additional Council Responsibilities. 
    It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Council to: 
(a)  Cause to be prepared, within two years following the effective date of this charter [January 6, 1997], a codification of all Town ordinances currently in effect which are appropriate for continuation as local laws of the Town, and a revision and updating of such codification at least every five years thereafter. Such codification and revisions shall be prepared under the supervision of the Town Solicitor, but the Council may authorize the Town Solicitor to contract for the services of persons or organizations experienced in the revision and codification of ordinances and statutes. The Council shall cause copies of such codification and revisions to be printed and made available for purchase by the public. 
(b)  Meet at least semiannually with each department head, and with the members of each board, commission or other similar Town agency for the purpose of reviewing the work and receiving recommendations from each such official or entity. The Council shall also require quarterly reports from each department head and from each board, commission or other Town agency. 
(c)  Approve every proposal for borrowing moneys for which the credit of the Town will be pledged, including any and all proposals which call for the issuance of bonds or notes, or the entering into of any lease purchase or similar agreements which extend beyond a single fiscal year and shall arrange for approval thereof by the electors of the Town either at a regular or special Town Meeting or at a town-wide referendum held at a general or special election. The credit of the Town shall not be pledged unless a majority of the electors present and voting at such Town Meeting or voting on such referendum shall have approved thereof; provided, however, that the Council may, as permitted by state law, authorize borrowing in anticipation of taxes or in anticipation of moneys to be received from the State or federal government, subject to any limit for such borrowing set by a regular or special Town Meeting. 
(d)  Provide for an independent annual audit by a certified public accountant of all Town accounts, such audit to conform with the requirements of state law for such annual audits, with generally accepted auditing standards, and shall require the inclusion by the auditors of their informed opinion of the financial practices and accounts of the Town. Such annual audit shall be completed and filed with the Town Council in accordance with State law, and a copy be filed with the Director of Administration of the State. The Council may provide for such additional audits as it may deem appropriate and for which the Town meeting may have made appropriation. 
(e)  Serve as a licensing authority of the Town and as such to exercise all authority conferred upon towns, or which may be exercised by towns, under state law, to issue licenses and permit for the conduct of businesses or professions, or for all other purposes as authorized by law, and to make necessary rules and regulations pertaining thereto. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCIAL PROCEDURES 

Sec. 501. - Fiscal Year. 
    The fiscal year of the Town shall begin on the first day of July of each calendar year and end on the last day of the following June, provided, however, that the Financial Town Meeting, upon recommendation of the Town Council, may change the dates of the fiscal year. 
Sec. 502. - Preparation of the Budget. 
    All budget requests from town officials and agencies shall be submitted to the Council not later than March 1st in each year. The Council shall be supplied by the head of each department, office or agency with estimates of its revenues and expenditures together with such supporting information as may be requested. In preparing the proposed budget, the Council shall review all such estimates, and may revise them as it may deem advisable. The proposed budget prepared by the Council shall show all anticipated revenues by source, and all proposed expenditures by line item, and the total of proposed expenditures shall not be greater than the sum of anticipated revenues and grants from all sources, plus such portions of the available surplus in the general fund and moneys from reserve funds as the Council shall recommend for use in supporting the budget. 
Sec. 503. - Public Hearings on Budget. 
    The Town Council shall hold a public hearing on its preliminary recommended budget prior to final adoption of the proposed budget to be presented to the Financial Town Meeting, which hearing shall take place at least thirty (30) days prior to the date for the Financial Town Meeting. Sufficient copies of the preliminary recommended budget shall be made available by the Town Clerk for use of all offices, departments and agencies, and for use by all other interested persons. At least ten (10) days prior to the date for the Financial Town Meeting the Council shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town a summary of the proposed budget as adopted for presentation to the Financial Town Meeting, as prescribed in the State Property Tax and Fiscal Disclosure Law. The Council shall ensure that all other provisions of said Law, and the provisions of state law pertaining to the maximum tax which towns may levy, as the said laws may be amended from time to time, are complied with. 
Sec. 504. - Capital Program. 
    The Council shall provide for the adoption of a multiyear program for capital expenditures by the Town and for annual written reviews thereof. Such program and annual reviews shall provide for projections and planning by Town departments, offices, boards, commissions and other agencies, to be submitted to the Council in writing for adoption by the Council after [a] public hearing. 
Sec. 505. - Purchasing and Accounting Control. 
(a)  The Council shall provide by ordinance policies and procedures to govern the making of purchases by and on behalf of the Town, in conformity with G.L. 1956, § 45-55-1 et seq., relating to the award of municipal contracts, and other applicable provisions of state law, now or hereafter in effect. Such policies and procedures shall be designed to ensure that Town funds are expended in the most efficient and economical matter possible, and to provide maximum value per dollar expended in all purchases of goods and services. 
(b)  The purchasing procedures shall require that all purchases and contracts executed on behalf of the Town be made pursuant to a written requisition from the head of the office, department or agency whose appropriation will be charged, accompanied by a certification that there is sufficient unencumbered appropriation balance to the credit of such office, department or agency to pay for the supplies, material, equipment or contractual services for which the contract or order is to be issued. The Council shall not authorize final payment in any such instance until it is satisfied that proper procedures have been followed and payment is in order. No increase in the total cost of any contract for goods or services which has been entered into on behalf of the Town shall exceed ten percent (10%) of such total cost, and any increase shall be made pursuant to a written requisition, certified as aforesaid for available funds, and approved by the Council before payment is made. 
(c)  The Town Clerk shall serve as the purchasing officer of the Town, provided however, that the Council may make other provision for the discharge of those responsibilities under G.L. 1956 § 45-55-1 et seq., "Award of Municipal Contracts." The purchasing officer shall be responsible for insuring that the required bidding process and the other pertinent provisions of state law and local ordinance relating to purchasing are followed. Procurements for all purchases shall be made as follows: 
if the amount is more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) but no more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), a minimum of three verified and recorded telephone bids shall be solicited and the award made on the basis thereof; 
if the amount is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less, bids shall not be required. All purchases and contracts exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) shall be made pursuant to the competitive sealed bidding process set forth on G.L. 1956 § 45-55-5, as amended from time to time. Purchases and contracts shall not be artificially divided to evade the dollar limits set herein. 
(d)  Any contract, verbal or written, made in violation of any provision of this Charter, or any regulation made under the authority thereof or of applicable state law, shall be null and void, and any cost incurred thereby shall be borne by the Town official or employee responsible for such violation. 
(Res. of 11-7-00) 
Sec. 506. - Budget Administration. 
    At such time following the adoption of the annual budget as the Council shall specify, each department, office or agency shall submit work programs for the ensuing fiscal year showing the requested allotments of its appropriation by quarters or other prescribed periods within the year. The Council shall review and authorize such work programs and allotments with or without revision as early as possible in the fiscal year, and may revise such allotments during the year as it may deem advisable. 
Sec. 507. - Lapse of Appropriations. 
    Every appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital expenditure, shall lapse at the close of a fiscal year to the extent that it has not been expended or encumbered. An appropriation for a capital expenditure shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made has been accomplished or abandoned; the purpose of any such appropriation shall be deemed abandoned if two fiscal years following the date of appropriation pass without any disbursement from or encumbrance of the appropriation. 
Sec. 508. - Emergency Appropriations. 
    To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property or the public peace, the Council may make emergency appropriations. Such appropriations may be made by emergency ordinance in accordance with the provisions of Section 411 of this Charter. To the extent that there are not available unappropriated revenues to meet such appropriations, the Council may by such emergency ordinance authorize the issuance of emergency notes, which may be renewed from time to time, but the emergency notes and renewals of any fiscal year shall be paid not later than the last day of the fiscal year next succeeding that in which the emergency appropriation was made. 
Sec. 509. - Fees Paid to the Town. 
    All fees or other funds received by any office or employee of the Town shall belong to the Town and shall be recorded, receipted for and conveyed at such intervals as the Council may require to the Town Treasurer for deposit in the general fund or in such specifically designated funds as may have been established by the Financial Town Meeting, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. All fees and other funds so received shall be deposited into an account of the Town maintained at a financial institution within (5) business days of its receipt by the Town or in special circumstances after completion of departmental processing. 
(Amd. of 11-3-98) 
Sec. 510. - Council Discretionary Fund. 
    There may be included by the Council in the budget to be proposed to the Financial Town Meeting a line item to provide a discretionary fund to be used by the Council to meet unanticipated expenses for which there is no provision or insufficient provision in the budget as adopted or to meet emergency needs for expenditure which might arise during the fiscal year. All expenditures from the discretionary fund must be considered and approved by the Town Council in open session at a Town Council meeting. 
Sec. 511. - Reserve Fund. 
    There shall be established by the Financial Town Meeting a fund to be designated the Reserve Fund into which there may be transferred from time to time by vote of the Town Meeting the whole or any portion of the surplus funds which the Town may have at the end of any fiscal year, or to which direct appropriations may be made, or which may be augmented by both means. The purpose of the Reserve Fund shall be to make moneys available for temporary borrowings in anticipation of taxes, and/or for capital expenditures, but for no other purpose. The Council may authorize borrowing from the Reserve Fund in anticipation of taxes within such limits as the Financial Town Meeting shall set for each fiscal year. Moneys from the Reserve Fund may be used for capital expenditures only upon specific authorization of the Financial Town Meeting. The Town Treasurer shall have the authority, with the approval of the Council, to make such prudent investments of moneys in the Reserve Fund as may seem appropriate. 
Sec. 512. - Budget Cap. 
(a)  Every effort shall be made by the various town officials, departments, agencies, boards, commissions and other bodies in submitting their annual budget requests pursuant to Section 502 of this Article, to limit those requests to an amount or amounts which exceed the comparable appropriation or appropriations for the current fiscal year by no more than five and one-half percent (5.5%) thereof. In like manner the Council, in its review and inclusion of the budget requests in the annual Town budget to be recommended to the Financial Town Meeting, shall insofar as possible keep all appropriation resolutions at no more than a five and one-half percent (5.5%) increase over the comparable current year appropriations, and in all instances in which it recommends a greater than five and one-half percent (5.5%) increase, or a new item of expenditure, prepare an explanation and justification thereof. 
(b)  As the Financial Town Meeting considers each appropriation resolution, the Moderator shall inform the electors present as to whether or not it exceeds the five and one-half percent (5.5%) limit provided in this section, and if so, by how much in percent and in dollars. The Moderator shall advise the electors that any appropriations except that for school purposes, which does exceed the five and one-half percent (5.5%) limit, requires a two-thirds vote of those present for adoption. 
(c)  In the event that an appropriation resolution which exceeds the five and one-half percent (5.5%) limit fails of approval by a two-thirds vote, the Moderator shall entertain amendments from the floor thereto and following discussion shall put any such amendment to a vote until an amendment and the amended resolution receive the votes necessary for adoption by majority or a two-thirds vote, as may be required. 
Sec. 513. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- An amendment adopted Nov. 8, 2016, repealed § 513, which pertained to animal shelter facility fund and derived from Ref. of 11-2-04. 
Sec. 514. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- An amendment adopted Nov. 8, 2016, repealed § 514, which pertained to transfer station facility fund and derived from Ref. of 11-2-04. 
ARTICLE VI. - TOWN OFFICIALS 

Sec. 601. - Council Appointments. 
(a)  As to any town official appointed pursuant to the provisions of this Article or Article VIII, the Town Council shall appoint the best qualified candidate to such position or to fill any vacancy in such position consistent with the provisions of Section 705 of this Charter. In the event of a vacancy in one of the elective offices provided for in this Article, the Council shall fill such vacancy with a qualified elector of the Town for the balance of the unexpired term, except that Town Council vacancies shall be filled in accordance with Section 406 of this Charter. 
(b)  A minimum of three (3) affirmative votes of the Town Council shall be required for the appointment or removal of any Town official appointed pursuant to this Article VI. 
(c)  The appointment of the Town Solicitor and the appointment of the Probate Judge of the Town shall not be subject to the provisions of this Section. 
Sec. 602. - Town Clerk. 
(a)  There shall be a Town Clerk, who shall be elected at the general election in each even-numbered year, to serve for a term of two years and until his or her successor is elected and qualified. The Town Clerk shall have all the duties and responsibilities of Town Clerks as provided by state law, shall be the Clerk of the Council and of the Probate Court, and shall have such other duties and responsibilities as may be prescribed by the Council not in conflict with state law. The Town Clerk shall have the authority to employ a deputy Town Clerk with the approval of the Council, and such deputy Town Clerk shall in the absence or inability of the Town Clerk, discharge all of the duties and responsibilities of that office. 
(b)  The Town Clerk shall have responsibility for the Town Hall facility and any other facilities in which Town offices may be located, for the establishment and maintenance of a central records system for Town offices, departments, boards and commissions, and for ensuring that persons coming to the Town Hall receive the assistance, services, forms or access to public records to which they are entitled. 
Sec. 603. - Town Treasurer. 
    There shall be a Town Treasurer who shall be elected at the general election in each even-numbered year, to serve for a term of two years and until his or her successor is elected and qualified. The Town Treasurer shall have all the duties and responsibilities conferred upon town treasurers, and who shall give bond before assuming the duties of that office, as provided in State law. The office of the Town Treasurer shall have such personnel and equipment as provided for in the annual Town budgets. the Town Treasurer may appoint a Deputy Town Treasurer with the approval of the Council, whenever the appointment shall be necessary, and any such Deputy Treasurer shall, in the absence or inability of the Town Treasurer, have all the powers and responsibilities of the Town Treasurer, provided, however, that in no case shall the Deputy have the power to sign the bonds, notes, or other evidences of indebtedness of the Town, except with the approval of the Council. The Deputy Town Treasurer shall also give bond before assuming the duties of the Town Treasurer in the event of such absence or inability. 
    Qualifications and conditions of employment for election and/or appointment to either the Town Treasurer or Deputy Town Treasurer are set forth in the job descriptions and qualifications for said positions as developed by the Town Council. 
    Duties and Responsibilities of the Town Treasurer: 
1.  Direct, coordinate and supervise the financial activities for the Town including accounting, debt administration, payroll, tax collection, cash flow analysis, investments and general ledger review. 
2.  Record all monies received and disbursed in the Town. Keep a itemize account of all moneys received and disbursed. Deposit as soon as practicable, the funds of the Town in the name of the Town. Manage the loans and bonds as authorized for Town purposes. Conduct banking transactions and reconciliations for Town accounts. Administer and monitor the Town's short and long terms investments. Maintain the Town investment policy. 
3.  Process accounts payable and receivable. Audit receipts and disbursements. Reconcile accounting records and allocate payments to various accounts. Receive all purchase invoices, ensure their proper coding, record them in the computer system and prepare payments vouchers. Co-sign all checks. Maintain a system of control to ensure that expenditures do not exceed appropriations. 
4.  Process payroll checks for distributions. Maintain and update payroll records. Prepare federal, state and deferred compensation reports and payments. Prepare monthly and annual Town reports. 
5.  File quarterly and annual employment tax reports to the Federal and State. Prepare annual W2's and 1099's. 
6.  Comply with mandates and processes as directed by the State of Rhode Island. 
7.  Prepare monthly financial reports for the Town Council showing the current operational and capital budget. Provide the Town Council with monthly invoices and checks to be issued for payment. Provide the Town Council and department heads with timely and informative financial reports on a regular basis and as needed for review of current budget. 
8.  Assist Town Council in preparing the Annual operational and capital budget. Update financial reporting and data systems with the approved budget amounts for the annual operational and capital budget. 
9.  Prepare policies, procedures and systems necessary to ensure that effective controls are in place to protect the financial affairs of the Town. 
10.  Complete the annual Audit. Works closely with the Town staff to obtain all information needed for the Town auditors. Provide assistance and advice to the auditors during the audit review. Complete reports as needed to meet the GASB 34 regulations. 
11.  Maintain and monitor the Town's Capital Asset program. Prepare annual Capital Asset reports as required to meet the GASB 34 government - wide financial statements. Conduct yearly inventory on all Capital Assets. 
12.  Retains all public records that are required by Rhode Island General Laws and/or Federal regulations. 
13.  Attend Town Council meetings as requested. 
(Amd. of 11-4-08) 
Sec. 604. - Tax Collector. 
    There shall be a Collector of Taxes who shall be appointed according to G.L. 1956, § 45-4-1, as amended. The Tax Collector shall have the duties and responsibilities pertaining to that office, and who shall give bond before assuming the duties of the office, as provided in State Law. The office of the Collector of Taxes shall have such personnel, equipment and facilities as may be authorized by the Council and for which provision is made in the annual town budgets. 
Sec. 605. - Town Solicitor. 
    There shall be [a] Town Solicitor who shall be appointed by the Council to serve at the pleasure of the Council. The Town Solicitor shall be an attorney at law in good standing who has been admitted to the bar in Rhode Island. The Council in its discretion may retain the services of a law firm to provide the legal services of Town Solicitor and may retain or authorize the retention of special counsel for the Town or for a board, commission, department or officer for extra or unusual services. The Town Solicitor shall be the legal advisor of, and attorney and counsel for, the Town and for all boards, commissions, departments and officers thereof. 
Sec. 606. - Tax Assessor. 
    There shall be a Tax Assessor, who shall be appointed by the Town Council. The Tax Assessor shall carry out all duties and discharge the responsibilities of Tax Assessor as set forth in state law. The salary of the Tax Assessor shall be established annually by the voters at the annual Financial Town Meeting at such amount deemed to be in the best interests of the Town. 
(Res. of 11-7-00; Amd. of 11-2-10) 
Sec. 607. - Town Sergeant. 
    There shall be a Town Sergeant, who shall be elected at each general election for a two-year term and until his or her successor is elected and qualified, who shall have such powers and duties as are prescribed by law and such compensation as may be fixed by the Town Meeting. 
Sec. 608. - Inspectors. 
(a)  The Council shall make provision for the conduct of all inspections which are required, or shall be required of Towns to make, including but not limited to building, electrical, plumbing and related inspections, minimum housing inspections, and the like, and shall appoint persons to conduct such inspections who are qualified by training, experience and license, where applicable, in the various professions and specialties involved. Where appropriate the same individual may be appointed with the responsibility of conducting two or more types of inspections. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing provision, there shall be a zoning inspector who shall be elected at a general election for a two-year term, who shall be responsible for zoning inspections within the Town and have all other responsibilities of zoning inspectors as set forth in State law. 
Sec. 609. - Probate Judge and Probate Court. 
    There shall be a Probate Court for the Town with the powers and responsibilities prescribed by state law, and the Council shall appoint a judge for said Court from among attorneys at law licensed to practice in Rhode Island to serve for a term of two years and until his or her successor is appointed and qualified, said term to expire on the last day of January in odd-numbered years. In the absence or inability of the Probate Judge, the Town Solicitor shall act as Probate Judge; provided, however, that the Town Solicitor may be appointed to serve as Probate Judge. 
Sec. 610. - Emergency management. 
    There shall be an Emergency Management Agency in the Town headed by a Director of Emergency Management, who shall be appointed by the Town Council. The Exeter Emergency Management Agency shall have powers and responsibilities similar to those of the state disaster agency of the same name, as set forth in state law. 
(Amd. of 11-7-06, § 3) 
Sec. 611. - Director of Social Services. 
    There shall be a Director of Social Services, who shall be elected at each General Election for a two-year term and until his or her successor is elected and qualified, who shall have such duties and responsibilities as are assigned to such Directors, including Directors of Public Welfare, under State Law. 
(Amend. of 11-8-16) 
Sec. 612. - Personnel, Equipment and Facilities. 
    The officers provided for in this Article VI shall have such personnel, equipment, and such facilities as shall be mutually agreed upon between such officer and the Town Council and as may be provided for in the annual Town budgets. 
Sec. 613. - Eligibility of Elected Officials: Town Employment. 
    No Federal, State or Municipal elected official who represents the Town of Exeter in any manner, shall be a paid employee, hired or appointed by the Town of Exeter, during the term for which he/she has been elected or during the one-year period immediately following the expiration of his or her Federal, State or Municipal term. 
(Res. of 11-7-00) 
ARTICLE VII. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 

Sec. 701. - Planning board. 
    There shall be a Planning Board for the Town made up of five (5) members appointed by the Town Council, each to serve for a term of five (5) years and until his or her successor is appointed and qualified. The term of one member of the Board shall expire on the last day of June in each year. The Council may appoint two (2) auxiliary members of the Board, each to serve in said position for a term of five years, who may be called upon to sit as members of the Board in order to ensure that there are five Board members present for any hearing or decision. In the event that any matter before the Board is likely to be continued for more than one hearing, the chairperson may request that an auxiliary member participate at the hearings, and the auxiliary member shall be authorized to vote on the matter when and if an active member becomes unable to serve at those hearings. The Board shall advise the Council on all matters concerning the growth and development of the Town and the effects thereof on the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants. The Board shall have the duties and responsibilities provided by state law for such Boards, and in particular those conferred on planning boards under the Rhode Island Comprehensive Planning and Land Use Regulation Act and related legislation as amended from time to time. The Board shall play such a role in long range capital planning and the preparation of the Town capital budget as the Council may direct; shall submit recommendations on all matters referred to it relating to the Town zoning ordinance, land subdivision, and proposals for development in the Town as requested by the Council; and shall conduct such studies and other activities related to its general area of responsibility as the Council may direct. 
(Res. of 11-7-00; Amd. of 11-7-06, § 4; Amd. of 11-4-08) 
Sec. 702. - Zoning Board of Review. 
    There shall be a Zoning Board of Review made up of five (5) members appointed by the Council, each to serve for a term of five years and until his or her successor is appointed and qualified. The term of one member of the Board shall expire on the last day of June in each year. The Council may appoint two (2) auxiliary members of the Board, each to serve in said position for a term of five years, who may be called upon to sit as members of the Board in order to ensure that there are five Board members present for any hearing or decision. In the event that any matter before the Board is likely to be continued for more than one hearing, the chairperson may request that an auxiliary member participate at the hearings, and the auxiliary member shall be authorized to vote on the matter when and if an active member becomes unable to serve at those hearings. The Board shall have all the powers and duties now or hereafter vested by law in zoning boards of review. 
(Amd. of 11-7-06, § 4; Amd. of 11-4-08) 
Sec. 703. - Conservation Commission. 
    The Council may create a Conservation Commission for the purpose of promoting and developing the natural resources, protecting the watershed resources, and preserving natural esthetic areas within the Town. The Commission shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the Council, each to serve for a three-year term, with the terms so arranged that as nearly as possible one-third will expire each year on the last day of June. 
    Duly incorporated and existing wildlife, conservation, sportsmen's, horticultural or like organizations may present to the Council a list of qualified citizens from which lists the Council must select at least three (3) members of the Commission and from which list the Council may select the remainder. In the furtherance of its purposes, the Commission shall conduct research, distribute information, inventory all open space within the Town and make recommendations for their preservation and utilization, and carry out such additional responsibilities as prescribed in state law or requested by the Council. 
Sec. 704. - Board of Tax and Assessment Review. 
(a)  There shall be a Board of Tax and Assessment Review consisting of three members and one alternate who shall be appointed by the Town Council to serve for terms of three (3) years and until their successors are appointed and qualified, in accordance with G.L. 1956, Chapter 95-218 and the 1996 amendment thereto. 
(b)  The Board of Tax and Assessment Review shall hear and consider the appeal of any property owner concerning his or her assessed valuation or annual tax bill in accordance with state law, as the same may be amended from time to time, and shall have such other powers and duties as established by state law. Appeals from decisions of the Board shall be in accordance with state law. 
Sec. 705. - Personnel Board and Personnel Policies. 
(a)  There shall be a Personnel Board of five (5) members who shall be appointed by the Council for terms of five (5) years. For the initial appointment of the Board the terms shall be so arranged that the term of one member shall expire on the last day of June of each year. 
(b)  The duties of the Personnel Board shall include the following: 
(1)  Preparing personnel policies and procedures for review and consideration by the Town Council, including: 
(i)  Developing job descriptions and qualifications; 
(ii)  Defining conditions of employment; and 
(iii)  Preparing a personnel handbook; 
(2)  Reviewing the personnel policies and procedures annually; 
(3)  Is omitted. 
(c)  The personnel policies and procedures of the Town shall insure equal opportunity and non-discriminatory treatment for all Town employees and candidates for employment by the Town and mandate affirmative action practices in the advertising and solicitation of candidates for employment. 
(Amd. of 11-3-98) 
Sec. 706. - Compensation of Board and Commission Members. 
    The members of Town Boards and Commissions shall be entitled to such compensation as the Financial Town Meeting shall approve each year in the annual budget. 
Sec. 707. - Water Resources Advisory Board. 
    There may be a Water Resources Advisory Board for the Town made up of five (5) members appointed by the Town Council, each to serve for a term of five years and until his or her successor is appointed and qualified. For the initial appointment of the Board the terms shall be arranged so that the term of one member shall expire on the last day of June in each year. The Board shall advise the Council on all matters concerning the protection of the Town's water supply by reviewing all plans and proposals for construction or installation of public water distribution facilities which may affect the Town's water supply. 
(Amd. of 11-3-98) 
Sec. 708. - Library Board of Trustees 
(A)  There shall be a Library Board of Trustees for the library of the Town and shall be made up of seven (7) members appointed by the Town Council. After the appointment of the first Board, the members thereof shall meet and be divided by lot into three (3) groups the terms of office of one group expiring in one year from the date of their appointment, those of another group in two (2) years, and those of the remaining group in three (3) years. With the expiration of the term of office of any member the vacancy shall be filled by the Town Council for the term of three (3) years. Vacancies occurring by resignation, removal, death, or otherwise, shall be filled as above for the unexpired term thereof. 
(B)  The trustees shall be the legal guardians and custodians of the library. They shall provide suitable rooms for the library, arrange for the proper care of the library, choose one or more competent persons as librarians, recommend an annual operating budget, and make all needful rules and regulations for the government of the library. The Board of Trustees shall carry out all duties and discharge the responsibilities of library trustees as set forth in state law. 
(Amd. of 11-3-98) 
Sec. 709. - Rural Land Preservation Trust. 
(A)  There shall be a Rural Land Preservation Trust which shall be created pursuant to State law and established by ordinance. The Trust shall be empowered to acquire, hold, and maintain interests in property for purposes to include, but not be limited to, the preservation of open space, the protection of natural resources, the maintenance of the rural character of the Town and the provision of land and interests therein for public recreation. 
(B)  The Trust shall be administered by five Trustees appointed by the Exeter Town Council for such terms as may be established by ordinance. The Trustees shall perform such duties and exercise such powers as may be established by ordinance, shall be electors of the Town, shall serve without compensation, and shall hold office until their terms have expired and their successors have been appointed and qualified. No trustee shall be an elected officer or paid employee of the Town. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2014) 
ARTICLE VIII. - TOWN DEPARTMENTS 

Sec. 801. - Department of Public Works. 
    There shall be a Department of Public Works the head of which shall be the Director of Public Works, who shall be appointed by the Town Council. The Director shall be responsible for the operation of the Department and the discharge of its responsibilities which shall include the functions and services of the Town relating to highways, street lighting, the maintenance of public buildings and public property, and such other responsibilities as shall be assigned to the Department by the Council by Ordinance. 
Sec. 802. - Public Education. 
    The responsibility for public education of the children of Exeter shall be exercised by the Exeter-West Greenwich School Committee pursuant to the agreement entered into for a regional school district by the Towns of Exeter and West Greenwich, and pursuant to state law relating to such regional school districts, and as said agreement and state law may be amended from time to time. 
Sec. 803. - Public Safety. 
    The responsibility for the fire protection, rescue services and emergency dispatch services for fire and rescue within the territorial limits of the Town of Exeter shall be exercised by an independently funded and separately chartered Exeter Fire District pursuant to State law. 
(Amd. of 11-4-08) 
Editor's note- An amendment of November 4, 2008, amended section 803 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, section 803 pertained to fire protection, and derived from original codification. 
Secs. 804, 805. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- An amendment of November 4, 2008, repealed the former sections 804 and 805 in their entirety, which pertained to rescue and emergency dispatch, respectively, and derived from original codification. 
Sec. 806. - Police. 
    (Reserved.) 
Sec. 807. - Town Planner. 
    The Town Council may appoint a Town Planner who shall be responsible for the planning and monitoring of all residential and business development in the Town and other duties as directed by the Town Council. The Town Planner shall be hired by the Town Council in accordance with Section 601 of this Charter. Qualifications and conditions of employment for appointment to the Town Planner position are set forth in the job descriptions and qualifications for said position as approved by the Town Council. The salary of the Town Planner shall be established annually by the voters at the annual Financial Town Meeting at such amount deemed to be in the best interests of the Town. 
(Amd. of 11-3-98; Amd. of 11-2-10) 
ARTICLE IX. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 901. - Open Records. 
    The public shall be entitled to access to all records and proceedings of all agencies of the Town government of the Town of Exeter, including but not limited to the Town Council, boards and commissions, departments and offices, as the same are defined and set forth in state law pertaining to open records, G.L. 1956, § 38-2-1 et seq. The types of records to which the public is entitled to access, and the times, places and conditions under which such access shall be made available shall be as provided in said G.L. 1956, § 38-2-1 et seq., and as the same may be amended from time to time. 
Sec. 902. - Open Meetings. 
    The Town Council and all Exeter town departments, agencies, commissions, committees, boards and councils, and all subdivisions thereof, shall conduct all business in accordance with the provisions of the open meetings legislation of the State, G.L. 1956, § 42-46-1 et seq., and as the same may be amended from time to time. Pursuant to said legislation, the public shall have the right to attend all meetings of such Town public bodies, subject only to the limitations specifically allowed by law. 
Sec. 903. - Ethics. 
    All elected and appointed officials of the Town, as the same are defined in State law, shall be subject to and comply with the Code of Ethics legislation of the State as set forth in G.L. 1956, § 36-14-1 et seq., and the regulations, rules and opinions promulgated by the Rhode Island Ethics Commission from time to time, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
Sec. 904. - Amendments of Charter. 
(a)  The procedures for amending or revising this Charter shall be as prescribed in Article XIII of the Constitution of the State; provided, however, that the Council shall schedule at least one public hearing on any amendment or group of amendments or upon any proposed revision of the Charter, to be held no less than one week prior to the date of the election at which said amendment, group of amendments or revision are to be voted upon by the electors of the Town. The Town Clerk shall cause a summary of the text or texts of all proposed amendments or revisions to be published no less than thirty days before the date of the election at which said amendments or revisions are to be voted upon. The Town Clerk shall publish notice of the hearing or hearings scheduled by the Council thereon no less than one week in advance of the hearing. 
(b)  No less often than every ten years, the Council shall appoint a Charter Review Commission, the members of which shall be qualified electors of the Town, of such number of members as the Council shall deem appropriate (but not less than five members), whose duty it shall be to review the Charter and recommend to the Council any amendments or revisions which it feels the Council should consider for presentation to the electors of the Town. 
Sec. 905. - Construction of Charter. 
    The powers of the Town under this Charter shall be construed liberally in favor of the Town, and the specific mention of particular powers in the Charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general power otherwise conferred upon towns generally, or upon the Town of Exeter particularly. 
Sec. 906. - Severability. 
    If any article, section or provision of this Charter is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the Charter shall not be affected thereby. 
Sec. 907. - Appointments, Qualifications and Vacancies. 
    All appointments to Town boards and commissions shall be made from among persons who are electors and residents of the Town, and all such appointees shall remain electors and residents throughout their terms of service in the positions to which they have been appointed. Appointments to Town offices as noted in Article VI may be made from among persons who are not at the time electors and residents of the Town, but any person so appointed while a nonresident shall within a reasonable time following appointment (not to exceed twelve months) become an elector and resident of the Town; provided, however, that the Council may by affirmative vote of four (4) of its members grant an exception to this residence requirement of a particular appointee on the grounds that no appropriately qualified Town resident could be found for such appointment, and the residence requirement would work a special hardship on the person appointed. Any vacancy on a board or commission shall be filled by the Council for the balance of the unexpired term. 
Sec. 908. - Suspension and Disqualification from Office. 
(a)  Any person holding elective or appointive office in the Town, or member of any Town board or commission, who is indicted for any offense which is a felony under federal or state law, while holding any such office, shall be deemed to have been suspended from his or her office and shall cease to exercise the powers or perform the duties thereof, until completion of all legal procedures resulting from that indictment. 
(b)  Any elector shall be disqualified as a candidate for elective or appointive office in the Town, or from holding such office, if such elector has been convicted of or plead nolo contendere to a felony or if such elector has been convicted of or plead nolo contendere to a misdemeanor resulting in a jail sentence of six months or more, either suspended or to be served. Such elector shall not, once so convicted, attain or return to any office until three years after the date of completion of such sentence and of probation or parole. 
Sec. 909. - Meaning of Publication. 
    When in this Charter the Town Clerk or other official is required to publish the text or summary of a proposal, document or public notice, publication shall mean to cause the same to be printed in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town, to post it in the Town Clerk's office and to have copies available for distribution to interested citizens. 
Sec. 910. - Forfeiture of Office for Violation of Charter. 
(a)  Any elected or appointed official of the Town, or any employee, or member of any Town board or commission, who willfully violates any material provision of this Charter shall be deemed to have forfeited his or her office, subject to the confirmation of such forfeiture by the vote of a majority of the members of the Council. 
(b)  Any citizen who alleges that there has been such a Charter violation shall file a complaint citing the person responsible and the circumstances thereof with the Town Clerk. Any such complaint shall bear the notarized signature of the complaining party and his or her certification as to the truth of the allegations. The Town Clerk shall place the complaint on the Council agenda for consideration and confirmation or dismissal. The Council shall grant to the person against whom the complaint is made a public hearing pursuant to the provisions of Section 407 of this Charter. 
ARTICLE X. - TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1001. - Effective Date of Charter. 
    This Charter shall take effect on the first Monday in January, 1997, if the Board of Canvassers shall have certified that it was approved by the electors of the Town voting thereon, or upon the date of such certification if the same shall be made later than the first Monday in January, 1997. 
Sec. 1002. - Election of November, 1996. 
    This Charter shall be placed before the electors of the Town of Exeter at the general election to be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November, 1996, for their approval or rejection. At said election, all Town offices which had been filled by vote of the electors of the Town heretofore, shall be filled in the same manner as previously. All persons so elected whose office become appointive pursuant to the provisions of this Charter shall serve for terms that expire on the last day of January, 1999; and until their successors are appointed. All others elected at the general election of November, 1996 shall serve the terms prescribed for their respective offices heretofore. 
Sec. 1003. - Continuation in Office. 
    All elected officials of the Town who are in office at the time of the taking effect of this Charter shall continue to hold their offices until their respective terms have expired and their successors have been elected and qualified; provided, however, that those elected officials whose offices become appointive pursuant to the provisions of this Charter shall hold their offices until the last day of January, 1999, and until their successors are appointed. 
Sec. 1004. - Transfer of Appropriations. 
    The Council shall have authority to make any changes or transfers in appropriations in the budget for the fiscal year during which this Charter takes effect that may be required for the operation of the Town government under the provisions of this Charter. 
Sec. 1005. - Continuation of Laws and Ordinances. 
    As of the effective date of this Charter [January 6, 1997], all special acts of the General Assembly applicable to the Town of Exeter shall continue in effect except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter or any ordinance of the Town enacted pursuant to powers conferred by this Charter. All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulation of the Town in force as of the effective date of this Charter [January 6, 1997] and not inconsistent herewith, shall continue in force until amended or repealed. 
Sec. 1006. - Continuation of Obligations. 
    All taxes levied or assessed by the Town prior to the effective date of this Charter [January 6, 1997] which have not been collected by the Town shall be collected with any interest and penalties thereon by the Town acting under this Charter in accordance with law. All licenses and permits issued by the Town, or any agency thereof, prior to the effective date of this Charter [January 6, 1997], shall continue in full force and effect until the termination date thereof, unless superseded or revoked for cause. All contracts, leases, franchises and other obligations, entered into by the Town, or for its benefit, prior to the effective date of this Charter [January 6, 1997], shall continue in full force and effect. 
Sec. 1007. - Pending Actions and Proceedings. 
    No actions or proceedings, civil or criminal, in law or in equity, pending at the time when this Charter shall take effect, brought by or against the Town, or any office, department, agency or officer thereof, shall be affected or abated by the adoption of this Charter or by anything contained in this Charter. 
Sec. 1008. - Continuation of Agencies. 
    All commissions, boards, departments, or offices, whether elective or appointed, shall continue in the performance of their powers, duties and functions unless or until their members, powers, duties or functions are changed or they have been abolished and their powers, duties or functions reassigned, pursuant to the provisions of this Charter. 
Sec. 1009. - Continuation of Present Personnel. 
    All persons employed in the service of the Town on the effective date of this Charter [January 6, 1997], shall continue in such employment until promoted, demoted or removed in accordance with the provisions of this Charter or ordinances enacted pursuant thereto. 
Sec. 1010. - Transfer of Records and Property. 
    All records, property and equipment of any office, department or agency, the powers and duties of which are assigned by or in accordance with this Charter to another office, department or agency shall be transferred and delivered to the office, department or agency to which such powers and duties are so assigned. In the event of disagreement over the transfer of same, the Council shall make the final decision. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE REFERENDUM 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Referendum 
 Date Section  Section 
this Charter 11- 5-96 101-1010 101-1010 11- 3-98 301, 509 705       Added 707, 708 807 11- 5-00       Added 613 11- 7-00 505, 606 701 11- 2-04       Added 513, 514 11- 7-06 1 301(a) 2 403 3 610 4 701, 702 11- 4-08 603 701, 702 803       Rpld 804, 805 11- 2-10 606 11- 2-10 807  3- 2-14(Ord.)       Added 709 11- 8-16(Amd.) 1 611 2       Rpld 513 3       Rpld 514  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation, citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall be designated and cited as the "Code of Ordinances, Town of Exeter, Rhode Island." 
Charter reference- Codification of ordinances, § 413. 
State Law reference- Ordinances to be printed and published in manner directed by town council, G.L. 1956, § 45-6-7. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances hereafter enacted, the following interpretations shall be placed on the words and phrases mentioned in this section, unless such construction or interpretation would be manifestly inconsistent with the evident intent of the town council or repugnant to the context or to the evident purport of any ordinance: 
    Charter. The term Charter shall mean the Charter of the Town of Exeter, Rhode Island, as printed in part I of this volume. 
    Code. The word Code shall mean the Code of Ordinances, Town of Exeter, Rhode Island, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. The time in which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day, except that, when the last day falls on a Sunday or a legal holiday, the act may be done on the next succeeding day which is not a Sunday or a legal holiday. When a public office in which an act is to be performed is closed to the public for the entire day which constitutes the last day for doing such act, or before its usual closing time on such day, then such may be performed on the next succeeding day which is not a Sunday or legal holiday. 
State Law reference- Computation of time, G.L. 1956, § 43-3-13. 
    County. The word county shall mean the County of Washington in the State of Rhode Island. 
    Corporate limits, corporation limits, town limits. Whenever the words corporate limits, corporation limits, or town limits are used they shall mean the legal boundary of the Town of Exeter, Rhode Island. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or other officer of the town to do some act or to make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer of the town, as the case may be, to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision designate otherwise. 
    G.L. 1956. The term G.L. 1956 shall mean the latest edition or reenactment of the General Laws of Rhode Island. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 43-3-3. 
    Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provisions imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
    Keeper, proprietor. The words keeper and proprietor shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
    Month. The word month shall mean a calendar month. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 43-3-12. 
    Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
    Oath. The word oath shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words swear and sworn shall be equivalent to the words affirm and affirmed. The word engaged shall be equivalent to the word sworn or affirmed. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 43-3-11. 
    Officers, departments, boards, committees, and commissions, etc. Whenever the title of an officer, department, board committee, commission or other agency is given it shall be construed as though the words of the Town of Exeter, Rhode Island were added. 
    Owner. The word owner, applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word person shall include a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, club, society, body corporate or politic, or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a natural person. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 43-3-6. 
    Preceding, following. The words preceding and following shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 43-3-16. 
    State. The word state shall be construed to mean the State of Rhode Island. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Town. The word town shall mean the Town of Exeter in the County of Washington and the State of Rhode Island. 
    Town council. The term council and town council shall mean the town council of the Town of Exeter, Rhode Island. 
    Week. The word week shall be construed to mean seven days. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and unless otherwise expressly so provided, shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections or of any part of the section, and are of no legal effect. 
Sec. 1-4. - Arrangement and numbering. 
    The ordinances shall be arranged by chapters and each subject shall be given a descriptive title and chapter number. Each chapter shall contain numbered sections pertaining to the subject. The numbering of the chapters and sections shall be by arabic numerals and may be cited by numbers separated by a dash, the first number referring to the chapter and the number following the dash referring to the section. 
Sec. 1-5. - History notes. 
    The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. 
Sec. 1-6. - References. 
    The editor's notes, cross references and state law references appearing in this Code are merely information to assist the user of the Code and are of no legal effect. 
Sec. 1-7. - Provisions considered as continuation, repeal or amendment of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. These previously established ordinances which have not been republished and incorporated herein are repealed except as otherwise provided in section 1-10 and those which have been amended, added to or deleted in part and republished as changed, shall be considered continuations of the prior ordinance or ordinances as amended. 
Sec. 1-8. - Revision does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing, before the effective date of this Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - Additions and amendments deemed incorporated in Code. 
    Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the town to make the same a part of this Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code, so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
Sec. 1-10. - Effect of repeal of ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, §§ 4-3-22-43-3-24. 
Sec. 1-11. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by the town, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the town, or any evidence of the town's indebtedness, or any contract, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or obligation assumed by the town or creating interest and sinking funds; 
(2)  Any right or franchise, permit or other right granted by any ordinance; 
(3)  Any personnel regulations; any ordinance establishing salaries of town officers and employees or civil service rules; 
(4)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, alley or other public way in the town; 
(5)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades in the town; 
(6)  Any appropriation ordinance or any ordinance levying or imposing taxes; 
(7)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(8)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the town; 
(9)  Any ordinance establishing the official plat of the town; 
(10)  Any zoning map amendment or land use, rezoning or zoning ordinance; 
(11)  Any ordinance prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, prescribing through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones, not inconsistent with such Code; 
(12)  Any subdivision regulations adopted by the planning board; 
(13)  Any ordinance creating special districts or assessing taxes therefor; 
(14)  Any ordinance granting specific tax exemptions; 
(15)  Any temporary or special ordinance; 
(16)  Any administrative ordinance; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this section. A copy of the ordinance is on file in the town clerk's office. 
Sec. 1-12. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code, which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code, or in the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission thereof from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent ordinances, as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the town council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section of the Code in substantially the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, Town of Exeter, Rhode Island, is hereby amended to read as follows: ____________ (Set out new provisions in full) ____________ ." 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, Town of Exeter, Rhode Island, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article, chapter or other designation, as the case may be), to be numbered ____________ , which reads as follows: ____________ (Set out new provisions in full) ____________ ." 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or other provisions of this Code desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section number, article number, chapter or other number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-13. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by town personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the town council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the town council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-14. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the town council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the town council without incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
Sec. 1-15. - General penalty. 
    Except where otherwise provided in this Code, whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the town any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 and cost of prosecution or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, and/or require restitution in cases involving property damage or personal injury in an amount up to $2,500.00 and/or for voluntary community service for a town or city agency for not more than ten days for any one offense, unless other penalties therefor, or penalties within other limits, are specially prescribed by statute, to be prosecuted by some officer appointed for that purpose, and to be recovered to the use of the town, or of such person and in such proportions, as they in such ordinances and regulations shall designate. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
State Law reference- Authority to enact general penalty, limitations on penalties, G.L. 1956, § 45-6-2. 
Sec. 1-16. - Recovery of fines and penalties. 
    All fines and penalties for the violation of this Code or other town ordinances, rules or regulations shall be recoverable by complaint and warrant, or other appropriate legal process, and when recovered shall inure to the use of the town, unless otherwise provided by general law or the ordinance respecting the same. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any administrative ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-11(16); administration and enforcement of animal regulations, § 10-36 et seq.; administration and enforcement of earth removal regulations, § 30-56 et seq.; taxation, ch. 42; administration and enforcement of traffic regulations, § 46-36 et seq.; administration procedures for zoning, app. A, art. I. 
State Law reference- Towns and cities, G.L. 1956, Title 45. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1-2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ORDINANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Ordinance adoption procedure, §§ 409-411. 

Sec. 2-31. - Ordinance enacting style. 
    The enacting style of all ordinances of this town shall be: "It is ordained by the Town Council of the Town of Exeter as follows:". 
(Ord. of 3-4-46, ch. 9, § 1) 
Secs. 2-32-2-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Town council, art. IV; town officials, art. VI; departments, art. VIII. 
Cross reference- Any personnel regulations and any ordinance establishing salaries of town officers and employees or civil service rules saved from repeal, § 1-11(3). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-51. - Indemnification and defense of town officials, officers and employees. 
(a)  Definitions: The phrase "official, officer or employee" as herein shall be construed to include any person in any public station, trust or employment conferred by election or by act or appointment of the town council. The phrase shall also be construed to include all duly appointed members of boards, commissions and committees whether paid or volunteer. 
(b)  The town shall provide defense counsel for any official, officer or employee of the town whenever such official, officer or employee shall be sued for damages arising out of the discharge, in good faith, of his or her public duties. 
(c)  The town shall indemnify and save harmless any official, officer or employee of the town for loss and expense arising out of any claim, demand or judgment by reason of negligence, defamation, or other act resulting in injury to a person or damage to reputation or a business or commercial interest, or damage to or destruction of property, and for loss and expense arising out of any claim, demand, suit or judgment by reason of any act or omission constituting a violation of the civil rights of an employee, teacher or student or any other person under federal law if such act or omission was not committed with malice, provided, that the indemnified person at the time of the accident resulting in injury, damage or destruction, or at the time of the act or omission constituting a violation of civil rights was acting in good faith and within the scope of his/her authority or employment, and provided further, that where timely notice of the claim, demand or suit is not given to the town council such indemnification shall be provided only at the discretion of the town council. 
(d)  Defense, counsel and/or indemnification shall be provided pursuant to the terms of this section to an official, officer or employee after his/her authority or employment has been terminated; provided, that such official, officer or employee was in the employ of, or was acting pursuant to authority granted by the town at the time the cause of action accrued; provided, further, in case of a tort action it shall be sufficient if such official, officer or employee was in the employ of, or was acting pursuant to, and within the scope of, authority granted by the town on the date the official, officer or employee committed the act or omission which ultimately produced the injury or damage which gave rise to the cause of action. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as abrogating the discretion of the town council to provide for the indemnification or any official, officer or employee of the town under circumstances not specifically provided for by this section where such indemnification is not repugnant to the constitution or laws of this state or the United States and is deemed by the town council to be in the best interests of the town. 
(Ord. of 4-8-03, § 1) 
State Law reference- Indemnification of municipal officials and employees, G.L. 1956, 45-15-16. 
Secs. 2-52-2-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TAX COLLECTOR[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference- Tax collector, § 604. 
Cross reference- Taxation, ch. 42. 
State Law reference- Tax collector, G.L. 1956, § 45-4-1. 

Sec. 2-81. - Office established. 
    Pursuant to P.L. 1996, ch. 48, there is hereby established the office of appointed tax collector to be appointed by the town council and who is to serve at the pleasure of the town council or until his successor shall be appointed and qualified to serve. 
(Ord. of 11-4-96, § 1) 
Sec. 2-82. - Powers and duties. 
    The tax collector shall be duly appointed and qualified to act and shall have all the powers, and perform all the duties as prescribed by law of the state for a tax collector of any town. 
(Ord. of 11-4-96, § 2) 
Sec. 2-83. - Removal for cause. 
    The tax collector may be removed by the town council for cause shown pursuant to G.L. 1956, § 44-7-5. 
(Ord. of 11-4-96, § 3) 
Sec. 2-84. - Qualifications and compensation. 
    The qualifications for such position shall be determined by the town council and compensation shall be paid as approved by the financial town meeting. 
(Ord. of 11-4-96, § 4) 
Sec. 2-85. - Other duties. 
    The tax collector shall perform such other and further duties not repugnant to law as the town council may from time to time order and determine. 
(Ord. of 11-4-96, § 5) 
Secs. 2-86-2-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - AFFORDABLE HOUSING ADVISORY COMMISSION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of March 6, 2006, § 1, amended the Code by, in effect, repealing former div. 3, §§ 2-91-2-95, and adding a new div. 3. Former div. 3 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from an ordinance of July 6, 2004. 

Sec. 2-91. - Advisory commission established; terms of members. 
    There is hereby established an affordable housing advisory commission for the town consisting of five members. Four members shall be ex-officio members and one member shall be an "at large" member appointed by the town council for a three-year term. Ex-officio appointees shall serve during the tenure of their terms on the corresponding town boards from which they have been designated pursuant to this division. 
    In the event of a vacancy, interim appointments may be made by the town council to complete the unexpired term of such position. 
(Ord. of 3-6-06) 
Sec. 2-92. - Composition-Membership. 
    The membership of the advisory commission shall consist of the town council president, planning board chair, zoning board chair, economic development commission chair, or designees, and a member of the community at large. 
(Ord. of 3-6-06) 
Sec. 2-93. - Mission, duties and responsibilities. 
    The affordable housing advisory commission shall: 
(1)  Act as a clearinghouse both in the near and long term for ideas, feedback and constructive critique with respect to the issue of affordable housing in the town. 
(2)  Shall meet and monitor progress on a quarterly basis toward achievement of the specific goals with respect to affordable housing in the town as may be set forth in the affordable housing component of the comprehensive plan. 
(3)  Submit advice and recommendations for adoption of the mission and scope of work of the affordable housing advisory commission for consideration, ratification and implementation by the town council. 
(4)  Make request of the town council for fiscal or staff resources as may be necessary to accomplish its mission as described above. 
(5)  Keep accurate records of its meetings and actions and file with the town clerk an annual report thereof. 
(6)  Hold all meetings in accordance with the provisions of the open meetings law. 
(Ord. of 3-6-06) 
Secs. 2-94-2-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - AFFORDABLE HOUSING TRUST[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- An amendment of May 12, 2008, enacted provisions intended for use as division 4, §§ 2-116-2-122. Inasmuch as there are already provisions so designated as §§ 2-116-2-122, and at the discretion of the editor, the provisions have been redesignated as division 4, §§ 2-101-2-107. 

Sec. 2-101. - Established; purpose. 
    There is hereby established an affordable housing trust (hereafter called "trust" in this division). The trust is organized for the purpose of creating and preserving affordable housing in the town for the benefit of low and moderate income households. 
(Amd. of 5-12-08) 
Sec. 2-102. - Membership; terms; compensation; election of officers. 
(a)  The town planning board shall act as the interim trust. 
(b)  Thereafter, the trust shall be administered by five trustees appointed by the town council, and shall include two members of the town council, two members of the planning board, and one member at-large. 
(c)  Of the trustees, one member of the town council and one member of the planning board shall be appointed to serve for coterminous terms of one year, and the remainder of the trustees shall be appointed to serve for coterminous terms of two years. Thereafter, the trustees shall be appointed to serve for coterminous terms of two years. The terms of the trustees shall be staggered so that as nearly one-half as may be shall be appointed annually. There shall be no limit on the number of terms that a trustee may serve. 
(d)  The trustees shall receive no compensation for serving as a trustee of the trust. 
(e)  The members of the trust shall elect each July, a chairperson, vice-chairperson and secretary from among its members. 
(Amd. of 5-12-08) 
Sec. 2-103. - Authority to adopt regulations; decisions; annual report; meetings to be open to the public. 
(a)  The trustees may adopt with town council approval reasonable rules and regulations governing the conduct of trust affairs, including the acquisition and management of its holdings, not inconsistent with the provisions of this division. 
(b)  Decisions of the trustees shall be by majority vote of those present and voting, and no business shall be transacted without four members present. 
(c)  The trustees shall keep and accurate record of their meetings and actions and shall file an annual report. 
(d)  All meetings of the trust, except those held in closed session in accordance with the open meeting law, shall be open to the public. 
(Amd. of 5-12-08) 
Sec. 2-104. - Acquisition of property. 
    The trust shall have the authority with the consent of the town council to acquire any real property from consenting landowners in the town, or any interest therein, which it deems important to achieving its stated purposes. 
(Amd. of 5-12-08) 
Sec. 2-105. - Powers. 
    Subject to review and approval by the town council, the trust shall have the power to: 
(1)  Purchase, receive by gift, or otherwise acquire real property or any interest in real property consistent with the purposes of the trust. However, purchase of real property shall require prior consent of the town council. 
(2)  Accept gifts, grants or services from any source, public or private, and comply, subject to the provisions of this division, with any terms and conditions thereof. 
(3)  Accept from the state and/or federal agencies, grants for use in carrying out the purposes of the trust and enter into any agreements with such agencies respecting any such grants. 
(4)  Employ such personnel as needed to provide necessary services. 
(5)  Administer and manage land and interests in land held by it in a manner which allows for affordable housing. 
(6)  Otherwise do all things necessary for the performance of its duties, the fulfillment of its obligations and the conduct of its business. 
(Amd. of 5-12-08) 
Sec. 2-106. - Budget. 
    The town council may annually budget monies to be deposited into a fund to be set up as a revolving account by the town treasurer, with interest to accumulate thereon. The trust's fiscal year shall be consistent with the town's fiscal year. 
(Amd. of 5-12-08) 
Sec. 2-107. - Additional contributions. 
    Additional monies or other liquid assets received as voluntary contributions, or grants and the interest accumulated thereon, shall be deposited into such account, which shall be audited each year. 
(Amd. of 5-12-08) 
Secs. 2-108-2-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CONTRACTS AND PURCHASES[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Charter reference- Purchase and contracts, § 505. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by the town, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the town, or any evidence of the town's indebtedness, any contract, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or obligation assumed by the town or creating interest in sinking funds saved from repeal, § 1-11(1); any appropriation ordinance or any ordinance levying or imposing taxes saved from repeal, § 1-11(6); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor saved from repeal, § 1-11(7). 
State Law reference- Contracts and purchases, G.L. 1956, § 45-55-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-116. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Business means any corporation, partnership, individual, sole proprietorship, joint venture or any other legal entity through which business is conducted. 
    Change order means a written order signed by the purchasing agent or contractor directing or allowing the contractor to make changes which the changes clause of the contract authorizes the purchasing agent or contractor to order without the consent of the contractor or purchasing agent. 
    Construction means the process of building, altering, repairing, improving or demolishing any public structures or building, or other public improvements of any kind to any public real property. It does not include the routine maintenance or repair of existing structures, buildings or real property performed by salaried employees of the town in the usual course of their job. 
    Contract means all types of agreements, including grants and orders, for the purpose of disposal of supplies, services, construction or any other item. It shall include awards, contractors of a fixed-price, cost, cost-plus-a-fixed-fee, or incentive type; contracts providing for the issuance of job or task orders; leases; letter contracts, purchase orders and construction management contracts. It also includes supplemental agreements with respect to any of the foregoing. The term "contract" does not include labor contracts with employees of the town. 
    Contract modification means any written alteration in the specifications, delivery point, whether accomplished by unilateral action in accordance with a contract provision, or by mutual action of the parties to the contract. It shall include bilateral actions, such as supplemental agreements, and unilateral actions, such as change orders, administrative changes, notices of termination and notices of the exercise of a contract option. 
    Contractor means any person having a contract with the town. 
    Data means recorded information, regardless of form or characteristic. 
    Designee means a duly authorized representative of a person holding a superior position. 
    Employee means an individual drawing a salary from the town, which either elected or not, and any nonsalaried individual performing personal services for the town. 
    Municipality means the town. 
    May means permissive. 
    Negotiation means contracting by either of the methods set forth in sections 2-120, 2-178 and 2-201-2-205. 
    Person means any business, individual, organization or group of individuals. 
    Procurement means the purchasing, buying, renting, leasing or otherwise obtaining of any supplies, services or construction. It shall also include all functions that pertain to the obtaining of any supply, service or construction item, including a description of requirements, selection and solicitation of sources, preparation and award of contract, and all phases of contract administration. 
    Purchasing officer is synonymous with the term "purchasing agent" and means the town clerk or such other person designated by the town council pursuant to section 2-146. 
    Regulations means the rules and regulations adopted by the town concerning the implementation of the provisions of this article. 
    Responsible bidder or responsible offeror. In determining a responsible bidder or responsible offeror, in addition to price and responsiveness, the following factors may be considered: 
(1)  The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder or offeror to perform the contract or provide the service required; 
(2)  Whether the bidder or offeror can perform or provide the service promptly or within the time specified without a delay or interference; 
(3)  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment experience and efficiency of the bidder or offeror; 
(4)  The quality of performance of previous contracts or services; 
(5)  Previous and existing compliance by the bidder or offeror with laws and ordinances relating to the contract or service; 
(6)  The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder or offeror to perform the contract or provide the service; 
(7)  The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or contractual services to the particular use required; 
(8)  The ability of the bidder or offeror to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject contract; and 
(9)  The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid or offer. 
(Ord. of 7-7-97, § 5) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-117. - Legislative findings. 
    In accordance with the Town Charter section 505(a) and G.L. 1956, § 45-55-1 et seq., it is hereby declared that a need exists to establish a uniform system for the award of contracts by the town utilizing open competitive bids. 
(Ord. of 7-7-97, § 1) 
Sec. 2-118. - Requisitions, certifications and contract increases. 
    All purchases and contracts executed on behalf of the town shall be made pursuant to a written requisition from the head of the office, department or agency whose appropriation will be charged, accompanied by a certification that there is sufficient unencumbered appropriation balance to the credit of such office, department or agency to pay for the supplies, material, equipment or contractual services for which the contract or order is to be issued. The town council shall not authorize final payment in any such instance until it is satisfied that proper procedures have been followed and payment is in order. No increase in the total cost of any contract for goods or services which has been entered into on behalf of the town shall exceed ten percent of such total cost, and any increase shall be made pursuant to a written requisition, certified for available funds, and approved by the council before payment is made. 
(Ord. of 7-7-97, § 18) 
Sec. 2-119. - Method of source selection. 
    Except as otherwise authorized by law, and municipal contracts shall be awarded by: 
(1)  Competitive sealed bidding, pursuant to section 2-171 et seq.; 
(2)  Competitive negotiations, pursuant to section 2-201 et seq.; 
(3)  Non-competitive negotiations, pursuant to sections 2-120 and 2-178; and 
(4)  Small purchase procedures, pursuant to section 2-121. 
(Ord. of 7-7-97, § 2) 
Sec. 2-120. - Sole source procurement and emergency procurements. 
(a)  A contract may be awarded for a supply, service or construction item without competition when, under this article, the purchasing officer determines, in writing, that there is only one source for the required supply, service or construction item. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the purchasing agent may make or authorize others to make emergency procurement when there exists a threat to public health, welfare or safety under the emergency conditions as defined in those regulations or where the procurement will be in the best interest of the town, as established by this article or any other properly promulgated rules and regulations; provided, however, that such emergency procurements shall be made with such competition as is practicable under the circumstances. A written determination of the basis for the emergency, and for the selection of the particular contractor, shall be included in the contract file. 
(Ord. of 7-7-97, § 9) 
Sec. 2-121. - Small purchases. 
    Procurements, not to exceed an aggregate amount of $1,000.00 for purchases may be without bids or in accordance with small purchase regulations promulgated by the town. If the amount of the procurement is in excess of $1,000.00, but no more than $5,000.00, a minimum of three verified and recorded telephone bids shall be solicited and an award made on the basis thereof. These amounts shall be increased or decreased annually hereafter at the same rate as the Boston Regional Consumer Price Index. Procurement requirements shall not be artificially divided so as to constitute a small purchase under this section. A municipality may further reduce the aggregate purchase amount as provided for in this section by ordinance. 
(Ord. of 7-7-97, § 10) 
Sec. 2-122. - Cancellation of invitation for bids and requests for proposals. 
    An invitation for bids, a request for proposals or other solicitation may be canceled, or all bids or proposals may be rejected, if the town council determines in writing that such action, if taken, is not in the best interest of the municipality. 
(Ord. of 7-7-97, § 11) 
Sec. 2-123. - Responsibility of bidders and offerors. 
(a)  A written determination of responsibility of a bidder or offeror shall be made and it shall be made in accordance with regulations issued by the municipality. A reasonable inquiry to determine the responsibility of a bidder or offeror may be conducted. The failure of a bidder or offeror to promptly supply information in connection with such an inquiry may be grounds for a determination of nonresponsibility with respect to such bidder or offeror. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by law, information furnished by a bidder or offeror pursuant to this section may not be disclosed outside of the purchasing department and officers administering the contract without prior written consent of the bidder or offeror. 
(Ord. of 7-7-97, § 12) 
Sec. 2-124. - Prequalifications of contractors. 
    The town may provide for prequalification of suppliers as responsible prospective contractors for particular types of supplies, services and construction. The town shall adopt regulations for prequalification in the same manner provided for in the adoption of ordinances in the manner provided for in the legislative or Home Rule Charter of the town. Solicitation mailing lists of potential contractors of such supplies, services and construction shall include, but need not be limited to, such prequalified contractors. Prequalification shall not foreclose a written determination: 
(1)  Between the time of the bid opening or receipt of offers and the making of an award, that a prequalified supplier is not responsible; or 
(2)  That a supplier who is not prequalified at the time of bid opening or receipt of offers is responsible. 
(Ord. of 7-7-97, § 15) 
Sec. 2-125. - Staff consultants. 
    The procurement of the service of an attorney, physician or dentist by the town shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-7-97, § 17) 
Sec. 2-126. - Exclusion of state mandated costs. 
    The provisions of sections 2-120, 2-121, 2-122, and 2-178 inclusive shall not apply to state 
mandated costs. 
(Ord. of 7-7-97, § 16) 
Secs. 2-127-2-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 2-146. - Purchasing officer; appointment; duties. 
    The town clerk is hereby designated to act as purchasing officer so as to exercise the powers and duties as set forth in this article unless otherwise designated by the town council. The purchasing officer shall be responsible for insuring that required bidding practices and purchasing regulations are followed. 
(Ord. of 7-7-97, § 3) 
Sec. 2-147. - Purchasing committee. 
    Created. There shall be a purchasing committee which shall be a subcommittee of the town council and shall consist of at least five members of the town council. All bids received by the purchasing officer, after having been opened publicly by the purchasing officer and tabulated, shall automatically be referred to the purchasing committee with the recommendations of the purchasing officer. The purchasing committee shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Meetings. It shall meet with the administrator or head of the department requesting the purchase which is the subject of bids to be considered by the council at an upcoming council meeting prior to such meeting and shall at such committee meeting, examine all bids properly submitted to the agent. 
(2)  Reports. Unless acting as a committee of the whole, the purchasing committee shall make a report of its finding to the full council at the next council meeting. 
(Ord. of 7-7-97, § 4(a), (b); Amd. of 6-3-03) 
Sec. 2-148. - Equal bids or offers; local vendors. 
    If all bids or offers received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality, responsiveness, responsibility and service being equal, the contract shall be awarded to a local bidder or offeror. A local bidder or offeror shall be one who owns or operates a business within the town. 
(Ord. of 7-7-97, § 5(2)) 
Secs. 2-149-2-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COMPETITIVE SEALED BIDS 

Sec. 2-171. - Factors in consideration of practicability. 
    Contracts exceeding the amount provided by section 2-121 shall be awarded by competitive bidding unless it is determined by the town council, upon the recommendation of the purchasing officer, in writing, that this method is not practicable. Factors to be considered in determining whether competitive sealed bidding is practicable shall include whether: 
(1)  Specifications can be prepared that permit award on the basis of either the lowest qualified bid price or the lowest qualified evaluated bid price; and 
(2)  The available sources, the time and place of performances, and other relevant circumstances as are appropriate for the use of competitive sealed bidding. 
(Ord. of 7-7-97, § 6(a)) 
Sec. 2-172. - Invitation for bids; contents. 
    The invitation for bids shall state whether award shall be made on the basis of the lowest bid price or the lowest evaluated or responsive bid price. If the latter basis is used, the objective measurable criteria to be utilized shall be set forth in the invitation for bids, if available. 
(Ord. of 7-7-97, § 6(b)) 
Sec. 2-173. - Public notice of bid invitation. 
    Adequate public notice of the invitation for bids shall be given a sufficient time prior to the date set forth therein for the opening of bids. Such notice may include publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the state as determined by the purchasing officer for the municipality not less than seven days nor more than 21 days before the date set for opening bids. The purchasing officer may make a written determination for that 21-day limitation is being waived and shall state the number of days, giving a minimum and maximum, before the date set for the opening of bids when public notice is to be given. 
(Ord. of 7-7-97, § 6(c)) 
Sec. 2-174. - Sealed bids. 
    Bids shall be sealed when submitted to the purchasing agent and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. Bids shall remain sealed until publicly opened as stated in section 2-175. 
(Ord. of 7-7-97, § 6(d)) 
Sec. 2-175. - Opening of bids. 
    Bids shall be opened publicly by the purchasing officer in full view of the public at the time and place designated in the invitation for bids. Each bid, together with the name of the bidder shall be recorded and an abstract made available for public inspection. Subsequent to the awarding of the bid by the town council, all documents pertinent to the awarding of the bid shall be made available and open to the public inspection and retained in the bid file. 
(Ord. of 7-7-97, § 4(c); Amd. of 6-3-03) 
Sec. 2-176. - Awarding of contracts. 
    The contracts shall be awarded by the town council upon recommendation of the purchasing officer with reasonable promptness by written notice to the responsive and responsible bidder whose bid is either the lowest bid price or lowest evaluated or responsive bid price. 
(Ord. of 7-7-97, § 4(d); Amd. of 6-3-03) 
Sec. 2-177. - Correction or withdrawal of bids. 
    Correction or withdrawl of bids may be allowed only to the extent permitted by the town council or by regulations issued by the purchasing officer and approved by the town council. 
(Ord. of 7-7-97, § 4(e); Amd. of 6-3-03) 
Sec. 2-178. - Negotiations after successful bidding. 
(a)  If the bids submitted pursuant to competitive sealed bidding under sections 2-171-2-174 result in bid prices in excess of funds available for the purchase, and the purchasing officer determines in writing that: 
(1)  There are no additional funds available from any source so as to permit an award to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder; and 
(2)  The best interest of the municipality will not permit the delay attendant to a resolicitation under revised specifications, or for revised quantities, under competitive sealed bidding as provided in sections 2-171-2-174, then a negotiated award may be made as set forth in subsections (b) or (c) of this section. 
(b)  Where there is more than one bidder, competitive negotiations pursuant to sections 2-201-2-205, shall be conducted with the three (two if there are only two) bidders determined in writing to be the lowest responsive and responsible bidders to the competitive sealed bid invitation. Such competitive negotiations shall be conducted under the following restrictions: 
(1)  If discussions pertaining to the revision of the specifications or quantities are held with any potential offeror, all other potential offerors shall be afforded an opportunity to take part in such discussions; or 
(2)  A request for proposals, based upon revised specifications or quantities, shall be issued as promptly as possible, shall provide for an expeditious response to the revised requirements, and shall be awarded upon the basis for the lowest bid price, or lowest evaluated bid price submitted by any responsive and responsible offeror. 
(c)  When after competitive sealed bidding, it is determined in writing that there is only one responsive and responsible bidder, a noncompetitive negotiated award may be made with such bidder in accordance with section 2-120. 
(Ord. of 7-7-97, § 8) 
Sec. 2-179. - Bid deposits. 
    When deemed necessary by the purchasing agent, bid deposits shall be prescribed in the notices inviting bids. Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to return of surety where the purchasing agent had required such. A successful bidder shall forfeit any surety required by the agent upon failure of the bidder to enter into a contract within 15 days after the award. 
(Ord. of 7-7-97, § 13) 
Sec. 2-180. - Performance bond. 
    When deemed necessary by the purchasing officer, he shall recommend to the council that a performance bond in a particular amount be required of a successful bidder. 
(Ord. of 7-7-97, § 14) 
Secs. 2-181-2-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - COMPETITIVE NEGOTIATION 

Sec. 2-201. - Permitted when sealed bidding impracticable; notice of request for proposals. 
(a)  When under this division or any regulations adopted by the town council, the purchasing agent determines in writing that the use of competitive sealed bidding is not practicable, and except as provided in sections 2-120 and 2-121, a contract may be awarded by competitive negotiation. 
(b)  Adequate public notice of the request for proposals shall be given in the same manner as provided in section 2-173. 
(Ord. of 7-7-97, § 7(a), (b)) 
Sec. 2-202. - Conditions required. 
    Contracts may be competitively negotiated when it is determined in writing by the purchasing agent that the bid prices received by competitive sealed bidding either are unreasonable as to all or part of the requirements, or were not independently reached in open competition, and for which: 
(1)  Each competitive bidder has been notified of the intention to negotiate and is given reasonable opportunity to negotiate; 
(2)  The negotiated price is lower than the lowest rejected bid by any competitive bidder; and 
(3)  The negotiated price is the lowest negotiated price offered by a competitive offeror. 
(Ord. of 7-7-97, § 7(c)) 
Sec. 2-203. - Request for proposals. 
    The request for proposals shall indicate the relative importance of price and other evaluation factors. 
(Ord. of 7-7-97, § 7(d)) 
Sec. 2-204. - Award. 
    Award shall be made by the town council upon the recommendation of the purchasing officer to the responsible offeror whose proposal is determined in writing to be the most advantageous to the municipality taking into consideration price and the evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposals. 
(Ord. of 7-7-97, § 7(e)) 
Sec. 2-205. - Written or oral discussions. 
    Written or oral discussions shall be conducted with all responsible offerors who submit proposals determined in writing to be reasonably susceptible of being selected for award. Discussions shall not disclose any information derived from proposals submitted by competing offerors. Discussions need not be conducted: 
(1)  With respect to prices, where such prices are fixed by law or regulations, except that consideration shall be given to competitive terms and conditions; 
(2)  Where time of delivery or performance will not permit discussions; or 
(3)  Where it can be clearly demonstrated and documented from the existence of adequate competition or accurate prior cost experience with the particular supply, service or construction item, that acceptance of an initial offer without discussion would result in fair and reasonable prices, and the request for proposals notifies all offerors of the possibility that award may be made on the basis of the initial offers. 
(Ord. of 7-7-97, § 7(f)) 
Secs. 2-206-2-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - REYNOLDS CHARITABLE TRUST 

Sec. 2-221. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agency means any private, non-profit organization with tax-exempt status which is or will provide direct and qualified service to qualified town citizens. 
    Committee means the Reynolds Charitable Trust Committee. 
    Council means the Exeter Town Council. 
    Extraordinary circumstances shall mean extenuating or urgent circumstances relating to clearly demonstrated special conditions or needs which, due to catastrophe, moral imperative, public policy or emergency, require substantial charitable assistance form the trust compatible with the general intent of testator. 
    Income limits means most recent low to moderate income limits utilized by the Rhode Island Small Cities Community Development Block Grant Program, or such other generally recognized criteria as may be adopted by ordinance. 
    Needy means any qualified resident in necessitous circumstances. Such necessitous circumstances may arise out of needs including but not limited to food, clothing, shelter, senior services, literacy, education, and healthcare. 
    Qualified resident means any needy individual who meets income limits and is a resident under the meanings defined herein. 
    Resident means any person who actually and presently resides, and has also established actual domiciled residency, in the town for at least 12 consecutive months, next preceding the submission of a timely and complete application for a grant. Allowable temporary absences from residency, as defined above, shall include military, education, and medical reasons. 
    Trust means the Reynolds Charitable Trust. 
(Ord. of 11-6-00, § 1) 
Sec. 2-222. - Creation of Reynolds Charitable Trust. 
    Pursuant to the will of John Reynolds (dated August 24, 1844) and the judgment of the Superior Court of the State of Rhode Island, Washington County (rendered on April 30, 1999), the Reynolds Charitable Trust is hereby created from funds donated to the town by Captain John Reynolds and shall be considered a charitable trust as defined by G.L. 1956, § 18-9-4, as amended. The funds shall be used for the "accommodation and the betterment of unfortunate persons" of the town. The town council shall serve the trust as trustee without compensation. The trustees or their designees shall manage the trust and shall approve and award all grants and expenditures from the trust. 
(Ord. of 11-6-00, § 2) 
Sec. 2-223. - Creation of the Reynolds Charitable Trust Committee. 
    The Reynolds Charitable Trust Committee is hereby created for the sole purpose of identifying and recommending worthy recipients of grants to the council. The committee shall report its recommendations to the town council in a timely fashion. 
(Ord. of 11-6-00, § 3) 
Sec. 2-224. - Appointments. 
    The committee shall consist of five members appointed by the town council, each to serve a term of three years and until his or her successor is appointed and qualified. Persons appointed to the committee shall be chosen on the basis of merit, ability, expertise and character. The committee shall be "nonpartisan" in that political affiliation shall not be criteria of consideration in selection. After appointment of the first committee, the members thereof shall meet and be divided by lot into three groups, the terms of office of one group expiring in one year from the day of their appointment, those of another group in two years, and those of the remaining group in three years. With the expiration of the term of office of any member the vacancy shall be filled by the town council for the term of three years. Vacancies occurring by resignation, removal, death, or otherwise, shall be filled as above for the unexpired term thereof. 
(Ord. of 11-6-00, § 4) 
Sec. 2-225. - Compensation. 
    The committee shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. of 11-6-00, § 5) 
Sec. 2-226. - Duties. 
    The committee shall annually assume the following duties and commence deliberations beginning on August 1, 1999 and on each anniversary date thereafter: 
(1)  In its deliberations, the committee shall follow the qualifying criteria, priorities, requirements and guidelines delineated in this article. The committee shall make every effort to recommend funding requests meeting the criteria of section 2-227(1) on a first priority basis. 
(2)  The committee will meet quarterly, commencing on or about the thirtieth day of the fiscal year of the town, to review applications for grants and to offer recommendations to the council for recipients of grants in a timely manner. 
(3)  The committee shall also prepare an annual fiduciaries report of the trust for the last preceding fiscal year as required by G.L. 1956, § 18-9-13, as amended, showing the assets so held and administered, the receipts and expenditures in connection therewith, the names and addresses of the beneficiaries thereof, and such other information as the attorney general may require. The town council, acting as trustee, shall review and approve such annual reports and shall annually authorize payment form the trust of such annual filing fees as may be required by law. The town council may also, from time to time, retain fiscal advisers, auditors or professional assistance in preparation and examination of such reports, as it may deem necessary, in its sole discretion. The costs and fees of any such advisers and professional may be paid from trust assets as allowable expenditures. 
(Ord. of 11-6-00, § 6) 
Sec. 2-227. - Qualifying criteria; order of priority. 
    The following criteria constitute qualification for grant consideration by the committee. Prior to approving any grant, all requests will be ranked by priority according to the following: 
(1)  Programs and facilities providing services to needy town residents as defined above. 
(2)  Educational programs, facilities and services designed primarily reach needy town residents meeting income limits and residency rules. (Includes scholarships to qualified needy persons meeting residency and income requirements as defined). 
(3)  Programs and services promoting charitable, personal improvement, physical or mental health benefits or recreation, directed as closely as possible to segments of the town population referred to in paragraph (1) above, and meeting general criteria set forth in section 2-229. 
(Ord. of 11-6-00, § 7) 
Sec. 2-228. - Eligible expenditures. 
(a)  New and/or existing programs or projects meeting criteria outlined in section 2-227. Components qualified for funding include administrative, personnel, strategic planning and equipment costs. 
(b)  Materials and capital needs for projects meeting criteria outlined in section 2-227(3) above. 
(c)  Charitable and public welfare programs and organizations serving the needy and deserving of continued support meeting the general requirements of section 2-229. 
(d)  Administrative and professional fees relative to Reynolds Charitable Trust investment, management and administration. 
(e)  General municipal services (including fire, police, and schools) are not eligible for funding unless the particular proposal is specifically targeted to benefit those in need. 
(Ord. of 11-6-00, § 8) 
Sec. 2-229. - General grant recipient requirements. 
(a)  To be eligible for grant of Reynolds Charitable Trust funds, an agency must be a private, nonprofit organization with tax-exempt status, providing direct and qualified service to town citizens. 
(b)  Reynolds Charitable Trust proceeds will not fund deficits. 
(c)  Religious organizations may be funded relative to qualified, nonsectarian services. 
(d)  Personal grants will only be given to qualified residents in need according to the guideline stated herein. 
(Ord. of 11-6-00, § 9) 
Sec. 2-230. - Charitable trust disbursement guidelines. 
(a)  No grant (or series of grants to one person, agency or entity in a single fiscal year) will exceed $5,000.00, except where extraordinary circumstances, as defined, are demonstrated. Total annual expenditures shall not exceed the annual interest earned on the fund corpus without prior court approval. The fund corpus shall initially be determined as the balance of the fund as of August 1, 1998. 
(b)  No person shall make use of, or cause to be used, any personal information provided by an applicant incident to the trust's grantmaking process for process for purposes not directly related to the administration or business of the trust, except with the consent of the applicant. 
(c)  Every effort shall be made to fund requests meeting the criteria of section 2-227(1) on a first priority basis. 
(Ord. of 11-6-00, § 10) 
Sec. 2-231. - Rule making; amendments; administration. 
    All ordinances, bylaws and rules adopted by the town and all amendments thereto relative to the trust and the trust committee shall be promptly provided to the attorney general of the state upon promulgation and passage, and shall otherwise be adopted in accordance with the procedures defined by the Town Charter and Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. of 11-6-00, § 11) 
Secs. 2-232-2-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - JUVENILE HEARING BOARD[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of 1-6-03, § 1, did not specifically amend the Code. Hence, its inclusion herein as article VI, sections 2-251-2-256, was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 2-251. - Established. 
    There is hereby established within the town, a juvenile hearing board with the powers set forth in this article for the purpose of hearing all cases referred to said board by the prosecution office of the Rhode Island State Police and/or the West Greenwich Police Department, with respect to the persons resident and/or arrested within the town, who are under the age 18, who are charged with violating the criminal laws of the State of Rhode Island or the town. 
(Ord. of 1-6-03(1); Amend. of 6-5-17) 
Sec. 2-252. - Membership. 
    The membership of the juvenile hearing board shall consist of at least five regular and two alternate members, with no more than seven persons who are over the age of 18 years, to be appointed by the town council, all of whom shall be residents within the town. The town council shall appoint members for a period of service for three years provided that initial appointments shall be staggered with two members appointed for one year and three members appointed for two years and two members appointed for three years. Appointed members of the board shall be at the discretion of the town council, be eligible for reappointment, and shall continue to serve until replaced or reappointed. In the event of a vacancy on the board, interim appointments may be made by the town council to complete the unexpired term of a vacant position. No member of the juvenile hearing board shall be entitled to receive any compensation by reason of his or her service on the board. 
(Ord. of 1-6-03(1); Amend. of 6-5-17) 
Sec. 2-253. - Referral. 
    Persons who are residents of the town or arrested within the town or EWG school district, who are under the age of 18, may be referred to the juvenile hearing board established herein. if the offense is one that, if committed by an adult would be a misdemeanor; provided, however, this requirement shall not apply in the case of a person who: 
(1)  Has been charged with the offense of assault or battery, unless otherwise decided on a case-by-case basis by the Rhode Island State Police or the West Greenwich Police Department; 
(2)  Has been twice previously referred and refused or failed to abide by the sanctions imposed or make the restitutions recommended; and 
(3)  At the time of the commission of such juvenile offense shall be within the custody and control of the Rhode Island Family Court. 
The prosecution office of the Rhode Island State Police or the West Greenwich Police Department may offer referral to the juvenile hearing board any other juvenile offender where in the opinion of the Rhode Island State Police or the West Greenwich Police Department prosecution office, such referral would be beneficial to the juvenile concerned and the community at large. No referral to the juvenile hearing board shall be made by the prosecution office until such person, together with his/her legal guardian(s) and/or legal representative, shall have waived in writing said person's right to a hearing in the Rhode Island Family Court with respect to the offense charged, for the purpose of the juvenile hearing board hearing. Said person shall have already agreed to guilt and shall have agreed to abide by the decision of the Exeter Juvenile Hearing Board. 
(Ord. of 1-6-03(1); Amend. of 6-5-17) 
Sec. 2-254. - Duties. 
    The Exeter Juvenile Hearing Board shall hear cases referred to it by the Rhode Island State Police or the West Greenwich Police Department prosecution office and shall recommend sanctions (other than incarceration) and shall direct restitution for any injuries and/or damages where appropriate, resulting from the commission of such offense. Sanctions may include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Fines up to a maximum of $100.00 for each offense charged; 
(2)  Community service; 
(3)  Restitution for any injuries and/or damages where appropriate, resulting from the commission of any offense; 
(4)  Imposition of a reasonable curfew; and/or 
(5)  Denial or revocation of the juvenile's driving privileges for a period of up to two years. In any proceeding, the juvenile hearing board, prior to imposing sanctions, shall request the juvenile offender and his/her parents or legal guardians to agree to the sanctions imposed and the amount of restitution and manner of making same. In ordering restitution, the juvenile hearing board shall take into account the amount of actual damage caused as the result of the commission of such offense and the juvenile offender's ability to pay. 
(Ord. of 1-6-03(1); Amend. of 6-5-17) 
Sec. 2-255. - Meetings. 
    The juvenile hearing board shall meet once each month as is necessary. The juvenile hearing board shall elect one of its members as its chairperson and one as its vice-chairperson. In the absence of the chairperson, the vice-chairperson shall be the presiding officer. A majority of the regular board's membership shall constitute a quorum and a majority of the members present shall be required to take any action. The juvenile hearing board shall have the power from time to time to draft rules governing its proceedings or to amend or repeal rules therefore adopted to carry out its functions under this article. 
    The juvenile hearing board shall give notice of the date and time of meeting to the juvenile hearing board members, the offender, and his/her parents or guardians, no less than seven days prior to the date of the hearing. Any juvenile offender may be represented by counsel and may present evidence in his or her behalf. All juvenile hearing board matters are confidential and its proceedings shall be closed to the public. All matters and sanctions imposed by the juvenile hearing board will be permanently sealed upon completion of the sanctions imposed and/or upon completion of payment of all restitution mandated by the juvenile hearing board, but such records shall be available to the parent, legal guardians, or attorney of the juvenile for inspection. The juvenile's confidential records are not to be copied under any circumstances to maintain confidentiality. All records and case information must be returned to the hearing board's chairman at the time of case final disposition. All case information on board member's personal electronic devices must be deleted after the final hearing. 
(Ord. of 1-6-03(1); Amend. of 6-5-17) 
Sec. 2-256. - Effective date. 
    This article shall apply to all juveniles alleged to have committed an offense after the date of its enactment. 
(Ord. of 1-6-03(1); Amend. of 6-5-17) 
Secs. 2-257-2-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 2-271. - Preamble; findings. 
(a)  Federal and state policies and statutes place initial responsibility for meeting public emergency needs on local government. 
(b)  By policy and statute, the Rhode Island Emergency Management Agency (RIEMA) and the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) require the town to promulgate and emergency plan which is to serve as a basis for disaster assistance if the capability of a local government is exceeded by its needs in an emergency. 
(c)  The responsibility for fire protection, rescue services and emergency dispatch services for fire and rescue within the territorial limits of the town shall be exercised by an independently funded and separately chartered town fire district pursuant to state law. 
(d)  Servicing grants which are available to the town for various emergency management purposes are vital in order to expand the town's limited resources. Any such funding must be sought, received, managed, prudently expended and accurately accounted for. 
(e)  An effective emergency management system is essential for mitigating, preparing for, responding to and recovering from the effects of emergent hazards. This can be achieved by developing capabilities, seeking assistance, coordinating efforts, working with state and federal agencies to respond to and meet their requirements for plans and actions, and by insuring that the core responsive functions of direction and control, communications, warning, public information, evacuation, mass care, health and medical, and resource management can be accomplished by implementing the emergency operations plan. 
(Ord. of 10-4-04, § 1; Ord. of 2-2-09, § 1) 
Sec. 2-272. - Purpose. 
    In order to effectuate these policies, and to respond to the needs identified above, the town council hereby adopts this emergency management ordinance to be added to the Exeter Code of Ordinances pursuant to Charter. 
(Ord. of 10-4-04, § 2; Ord. of 2-2-09, § 1) 
Sec. 2-273. - Adoption of emergency operations plan. 
    In order to provide a framework in which the town's elected and appointed officials, department heads and emergency services personnel can plan and perform their respective emergency functions during a disaster or emergency in accordance with federal and state emergency management criteria, an emergency operations plan is hereby adopted consistent with that document entitled "Town of Exeter Emergency Management Agency, June 2004. Emergency Operations Plan" and such revisions and amendments thereto as may hereafter be adopted in conformity with local, State and Federal law. Copies of the emergency management plan and all duly adopted amendments and revisions thereto shall be maintained and available for public inspection at the office of the town clerk. 
(Ord. of 10-4-04, § 3; Ord. of 2-2-09, § 1) 
Sec. 2-274. - Creation and composition of town emergency management agency and emergency management board. 
    There are hereby created, in accordance with federal, state and local law, and in conformity with the emergency operations plan, adopted herewith and emergency management agency and emergency management board which shall perform such duties and exercise such powers as enumerated in the emergency operations plan. The members of the emergency management board shall be the members of the town council and such other ad hoc or ex officio members as they deem necessary and proper to execute the powers and duties enumerated in the emergency management plan. 
(Ord. of 10-4-04, § 4; Ord. of 2-2-09, § 1) 
Sec. 2-275. - Emergency management agency powers, duties and personnel. 
    The town emergency management agency shall serve at the direction of the town council president who shall be the chief executive official of the agency. The agency will coordinate the activities of all departments and offices having emergency management responsibilities with the resources of private organizations having emergency management functions. The emergency management agency shall be responsible for implementing all policies related to emergency management programs and activities in accordance with the emergency operations plan. The agency shall appoint a director and assistant director and such additional personnel as may be deemed necessary to perform the functions and duties enumerated in the emergency operations plan. 
(Ord. of 10-4-04, § 5; Ord. of 2-2-09, § 1) 
Sec. 2-276. - Chief executive official, powers and duties. 
    As the chief executive official, the town council president shall have the ultimate responsibility for direction and control of activities related to emergencies and disasters in the town and shall perform such other duties and functions as enumerated in the emergency operations plan, including but not limited to, the authority to declare a "state of emergency" in the town. 
(Ord. of 10-4-04, § 6; Ord. of 2-2-09, § 1) 
ARTICLE VIII. - EXETER RURAL LAND PRESERVATION TRUST 

Sec. 2-277. - Statutory authority name and purpose. 
    Pursuant to the authority contained in Chapter 75 of the 1997 R.I. Public Laws and Section 709 of the Town Charter there is hereby established an Exeter Rural Land Preservation Trust (hereinafter called "trust") for purposes including acquiring, holding, and maintaining interests in property for the preservation of open space, the protection of natural resources, the maintenance of the rural character of the town, the preservation of land and interests therein for public recreation, and for any other use or purpose similarly consistent with or contemplated by state law or Town Charter. 
(Ord. of 1-3-17) 
Sec. 2-278. - Membership. 
(a)  The trust shall be administered by five trustees who shall be appointed by the town council. The trustees first appointed shall serve the following terms: one one-year term, two two-year terms, and two three-year terms; said terms to expire March 31 st annually. Thereafter, each trustee shall be appointed for a term of four years, except that all vacancies occurring during a term shall be filled for the unexpired term. Trustees shall be residents of Exeter, qualified voters, and shall hold office until their successors have been appointed. No trustee may be an elected town officer or a paid employee of the town. 
(b)  The trustees shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. of 1-3-17) 
Sec. 2-279. - Organization. 
(a)  In April of each year, the trustees shall elect a chair, vice-chair, and clerk from among the trustees. Officers shall serve a term of one year. Promptly upon annual organization, the trustees shall file a list of the officers for the ensuing year with the town clerk. 
(b)  The trust shall be given an amount of funds to be used to establish the trust. This amount shall be determined by the town council and approved at a financial town meeting. 
(Ord. of 1-3-17) 
Sec. 2-280. - Administration. 
(a)  The trustees may adopt reasonable rules and regulations governing the conduct of the trust affairs, including the acquisition and management of its holdings, not inconsistent with the provisions of Chapter 75 of the 1997 R.I. Public Laws and Section 709 of the Charter. Decisions of the Trustees shall be by majority vote of those present and voting, and no business shall be transacted without a quorum of three members present. The trustees shall keep accurate records of their meetings and actions and shall file copies of their minutes with the town clerk. All meetings and records of the trustees shall be subject to the provisions of Title 42, Chapter 46, of the General Laws, the Open Meetings Law, as amended. 
(b)  A quorum of a minimum of three members is needed for any action or meeting. 
(c)  A minimum of three affirmative votes of the trustees shall be required for the use of any power granted pursuant to section 2-281. 
(Ord. of 1-3-17) 
Sec. 2-281. - Powers of the trust. 
    The trust shall have the power to: 
(1)  Purchase, receive by gift or otherwise acquire fee simple or any lesser interest in real property, including development rights as defined in R.I. General Laws Sec. 42-12-2, or any interest in real property consistent with the purposes of Chapter 75 of the 1997 R.I. Public Laws, provided that the Town Council approves such purchase or acquisition in advance with a minimum of three affirmative council votes and provided that any acquisition, if other than by gift or devise, shall then also be authorized by a two-thirds vote of voters convened at a special financial town meeting in which 56 or more registered Exeter voters are in attendance; 
(2)  Accept gifts, grants, funds, or services from any source, public or private, and comply, subject to the provisions of Chapter 75 of the 1997 R.I. Public Laws, with any terms and conditions, provided said terms and conditions do not obligate the town in manner financially; 
(3)  Accept from state or federal agencies grants for use in carrying out the trust's purposes, and enter into agreements with such agencies respecting any such grants; 
(4)  Employ counsel, auditors, engineers, appraisers, private consultants, advisers, secretaries, or other personnel needed to perform its duties, provided that the town council approves in advance the employment or engagement of any such person to be paid with funds held by the trust; 
(5)  Administer land and manage land and interests in land held by it in a manner consistent with the natural and scenic resources thereof including conveyance of any such land or interest in land to, and contracts with nonprofit organizations provided such land shall continue to be used in a manner consistent with the purposes of Chapter 75 of the 1997 R.I. Public Laws and with the terms of any grant or devise by which such land was acquired by the trust; 
(6)  Dispose of all or any portion of its real property or interests therein held by it, whenever in the opinion of the trustees said lands or properties have become unsuitable or have ceased to be used for the purposes set forth in Chapter 75 of the 1997 R.I. Public Laws. Such dispositions shall be made only by a vote of the trustees in which at least three members vote in favor of such a disposition, and further only after having approved by the town council and by a two-thirds vote of an annual or special financial town meeting of the Town of Exeter. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to authorize the sale, lease, or conveyance of lands or improvements held by the trust as part of charitable trust or acquired by gift or devise for public use, whether or not such gift or devise is subject to a condition subsequent or reverter. No real property such disposed shall may be purchased, received by gift, or otherwise acquired fee simple or any lesser interest by any current trustee or prior serving trustee within the previous 24 months; 
(7)  Dissolve the trust which shall result only after a vote of the trustees in which at least three members vote to recommend dissolution of the Trust to the Exeter Town Council. The town council shall hold a public hearing on any such recommendation to dissolve. At the conclusion of the hearing, the town council shall vote on the matter within 45 days of said hearing. Upon termination or dissolution of the trust, the titles to all funds and other properties owned by the trust shall vest in the Town of Exeter which shall manage the lands of the dissolved trust in keeping with the purposes for which the land, or interests, were purchased or donated; 
(8)  Otherwise do all things necessary for the performance of its duties, the fulfillment of its obligations, and conduct of its business. 
(Ord. of 1-3-17) 
Sec. 2-282. - Accounting procedures. 
(a)  There shall be established by the town treasurer a restricted fund to be designated as the rural land preservation trust fund into which all revenue, receipts, donations, gifts, fees, grants, proceeds from the disposal of real property or interests, any funds received from any source for the intended purpose of supporting the trust, and/ or funds appropriated to the trust at a financial town meeting will be deposited. 
(b)  All expenses lawfully incurred by the trust shall be evidenced by vouchers and shall be paid by the town treasurer only upon submission by warrants duly approved by the trust. 
(c)  The town treasurer shall prudently invest available assets of the fund in accordance with the town's investment policies, and all income thereon shall accrue to the fund. 
(d)  The trustees shall also prepare an annual fiduciary report of the trust holdings for the last preceding fiscal year showing the assets so held and administered, the receipts and expenditures in connection therewith, the addresses of properties owned, and such other information as the town council may require. The town council shall review and approve such annual reports. The cost of preparing the annual fiduciary report shall be from the rural land preservation trust fund. 
(Ord. of 1-3-17) 
Sec. 2-283. - Tax status of trust. 
    The trust and all its revenue, income, and real and personal property used by the trust for the furtherance of its public purpose shall be exempt from taxation and from betterment and special assessments, and the trust shall not be required to pay any tax, excise, or assessment to the state or any of its political subdivisions. 
(Ord. of 1-3-17) 
Chapter 6 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18; nonissuance and nonrenewal of licenses or permits to applicants or licensees in arrears in taxes, liens and assessments, § 42-1. 
State Law reference- Shows and exhibits, G.L. 1956, § 5-22-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1-6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Obscene and objectionable publications and shows, G.L. 1956, § 11-31-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult cabaret means an establishment that regularly or occasionally features live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities. 
    Specified anatomical areas means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areolae; 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth as noted in this definition. 
(Ord. of 11-2-92, § 3) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-32. - Serving, selling, consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages. 
    Alcoholic beverages as defined as a beverage in G.L. 1956, § 3-1-1, shall not be served, sold or permitted to be consumed or in any person's possession on the premises of any adult cabaret or any adult entertainment establishment. 
Secs. 6-33-6-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 6-56. - Required. 
    No person shall publicly, or for pay, or for any profit or advantage to himself, exhibit or promote any erotic performance, adult cabaret, erotic exhibition show, x-rated or adult film show, erotic activity, or any other form of erotic dancing, or other adult or erotic show regarding specified anatomical areas or engage in or promote such activity without first obtaining a license from the town council. 
(Ord. of 11-2-92, § 4) 
Sec. 6-57. - Conditions to be met. 
    In consideration of the application for a license, the town council shall specifically require that the following conditions be met: 
(1)  The applicant has access to sufficient off-street, privately-owned parking for use by patrons. For purposes of determination of sufficiency, one parking space shall be provided for each two patrons. The total number of patrons is to be determined by utilizing the rated capacity of the establishment as determined by the fire marshal. 
(2)  The premises, which is the subject of the application, is located a minimum of 5,000 feet from the nearest residential structure, house of worship or public or nonpublic school. 
(3)  The premises has in service full ventilation/air conditioning systems for purposes of noise control. 
(4)  There shall be no sexually explicit signage located on the premises. 
(5)  At the request of the town council there be sufficient off-duty police officers and/or firefighters utilized to ensure the public health, safety and welfare. 
(6)  The activity which is the subject of the application shall not be conducted before 5:00 p.m. and not later than 1:00 a.m. on any given day. 
(7)  Any other restrictions deemed appropriate by the town council that will ensure the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. of 11-2-92, § 5) 
Sec. 6-58. - Term. 
    An application for a license issued under this article shall be on a form provided by the town clerk. Any such license issued by the town council may be valid for one day, or for any period of time not exceeding one year. Licenses issued on an annual basis shall expire on December 31 of each year. 
(Ord. of 11-2-92, § 6) 
Sec. 6-59. - Fees. 
    The fees charged to operate any activity regulated under this article shall be $1,000.00 per night. 
(Ord. of 11-2-92, § 7) 
Sec. 6-60. - Denial; nonrenewal; revocation. 
(a)  The town council may deny an application for a new license, refuse to renew an existing license or revoke an existing license to the owner, lessee or operator, of any place at which an activity provided for in this article is conducted, if such place presents a danger to the public health, safety or welfare, or any part thereof is obscene as defined in G.L. 1956, § 11-31-1. 
(b)  No license shall be issued to a person who is not of good moral character, nor to a corporation or organization which is not represented by a person of good moral character. 
(Ord. of 11-2-92, § 8) 
Secs. 6-61-6-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OUTDOOR PLACES OF AMUSEMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-91. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Amusement park means any tract of land, together with the structures located thereon, the principal use of which is to provide a midway of amusement and recreation to the general public. 
    Outdoor entertainment site means any lots, tracts or parcels of land, the principal use of which is to provide an outdoor recreational, entertainment, cultural event or festival. 
    Track means a tract of land together with the structures thereon, the principal use of which is to provide vehicle racing or driving for public amusement upon payment of a fee. 
    Vehicle means any automobiles, go-cart, so-called motorcycle or motor bike or other motor-powered vehicle, but does not include bicycles or vehicles drawn by animals or not propelled by a motor. 
(Ord. of 7-13-70, § 11) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 6-92-6-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Licensing of amusements, G.L. 1956, § 5-22-5. 

Sec. 6-111. - Required. 
    No person shall operate a vehicle track, amusement park or any outdoor recreational, entertainment, cultural event or festival without first obtaining a license. 
(Ord. of 7-13-70, § 1) 
Sec. 6-112. - Application; contents. 
    Application for the initial issuance of such licenses shall be made in writing to the town council and shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  A metes and bounds description of the proposed location of such track, amusement park or outdoor recreational, entertainment, cultural event or festival site, and a plat of such proposed location prepared by a licensed surveyor showing the names of all adjoining property owners and the names of all property owners within 500 feet of the proposed location. 
(2)  The names and addresses of the owners of the proposed location and, if a corporation, the names and addresses of all of its officers, stockholders and directors. 
(3)  The names and addresses of the owners of the proposed track or amusement park or the promoters of an outdoor recreational, entertainment, cultural event or festival and, if a corporation, the names and addresses of all its officers, stockholders and directors. 
(4)  A statement of the types of amusements or vehicles to be used at the proposed location or the type of recreational, entertainment, cultural event or festival that will be offered. 
(5)  A statement of the dates and hours when permission is sought to operate such track, park or outdoor entertainment. 
(6)  A filing fee of $100.00, or, in the case of a vehicle track $400.00 to cover the costs of advertising, sending notice and administering such application. 
(Ord. of 7-13-70, § 2) 
Sec. 6-113. - Filing; periods for consideration. 
    An application for the initial issuance of a license shall be filed at least three weeks prior to the regularly scheduled town council meeting at which hearing on such application is sought; provided, however, that in the case of a vehicle track, the application shall not be considered or heard by the town council unless and until the application shall first have been approved by a majority of those electors of the town voting thereon at the next regular or special election held in the town more than 60 days after the application has been filed with the town council. 
(Ord. of 7-13-70, § 3) 
Sec. 6-114. - Notice of hearing. 
    Upon the receipt of such application, or, in the case of a vehicle track, upon certification to the town clerk of an affirmative vote on the question by the electors of the town, the town clerk shall send, by regular mail, notice of such application and the dates, time and place for hearing thereon to each of the property owners set forth in section 6-112(1). Such notice shall be sent at least two weeks before the council meeting at which the application is to be considered. In addition, the town clerk shall advertise notice of such application and the time, place and date for hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the town at least once and at least one week before the date set for hearing. 
(Ord. of 7-13-70, § 4) 
Sec. 6-115. - Grant, refusal or grant with conditions; conditions enumerated. 
    After a hearing upon an application for initial issuance of a license, the town council may either grant, refuse to grant or grant with certain conditions the application for such license. The conditions which the town council may impose on the granting of a license are as follows: 
(1)  The applicant shall provide adequate parking facilities. 
(2)  The applicant shall provide adequate sanitary facilities for the patrons of such park, track or outdoor entertainment site. 
(3)  The applicant shall operate such track, park or outdoor entertainment site only within the times and dates as set by the town council. 
(4)  The applicant shall provide such first aid facilities and safety measures as shall be deemed necessary by the town council. 
(5)  The applicant shall provide for the regulation of noise so that adjoining and nearby landowners and inhabitants will not be unduly disturbed in the use and enjoyment of their property, and, in the case of vehicles powered by internal combustion engines, each such vehicle shall be equipped with a muffler. 
(6)  The applicant shall provide adequate lighting where night operation is sought. 
(7)  The applicant shall use such track, park or outdoor entertainment site only for certain amusements, vehicles or entertainments, as specified by the town council. 
(8)  Other conditions shall be required as the town council deems necessary for the protection of the patrons of such track, parks or outdoor entertainment site and/or the health, safety, welfare and protection of the public, adjoining and nearby land owners and nearby inhabitants. 
(Ord. of 7-13-70, § 5) 
Sec. 6-116. - Fees. 
    The license fee shall be $200.00 annually for amusement parks and vehicle tracks, and all licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year. Such licenses shall be reviewed automatically upon the tender of such annual fee. The license fee shall be $200.00 for an outdoor recreational, entertainment, cultural event or festival and shall expire upon the closing of such recreational, entertainment, cultural event or festival. 
(Ord. of 7-13-70, § 6) 
Sec. 6-117. - Enlargement of vehicle track or amusement park area; fresh application. 
    Any enlargement of the area of any vehicle track or amusement park shall be treated insofar as the enlargement is concerned in the same manner as the application for the initial issuance of a license, and the application shall be made in a similar manner. 
(Ord. of 7-13-70, § 7) 
Sec. 6-118. - Revocation or suspension; reasons. 
    After a hearing, the town council may revoke or suspend the license of any amusement park, vehicle track or outdoor entertainment site upon a determination of the following: 
(1)  The park, track or entertainment site does not conform to the specifications as set forth in its application for a license. 
(2)  The park, track or entertainment operator, proprietor or owner has violated the terms and conditions of the license. 
(3)  The operator of such park, track or entertainment site has sold or has permitted to be sold any intoxicating liquor, wine, beer or narcotic on the premises. 
(4)  The operator of such park, track or entertainment site has permitted solicitation of prostitutes, or gambling on the premises. 
(5)  The park, track or entertainment site does not conform to the health regulations for such parks, tracks or entertainment sites established by the state. 
(6)  Such track, park or entertainment site is operated in such a way as to constitute a nuisance, or that the operator of such park, track or site has maintained or permitted a nuisance on the premises. 
(7)  Any person violated any of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-13-70, § 7) 
Sec. 6-119. - Issuance; scope and effect. 
    The issuance of a license for the operation of an amusement park, vehicle track or outdoor recreation, entertainment or cultural event or festival shall in no way be construed as an abridgement of the right of any person to prosecute legal action against such track or park or the promoters of an outdoor recreational, entertainment, cultural event or festival on the ground that such track, park or outdoor entertainment constitutes a nuisance; nor is it the intention of this article that the granting of such license shall in any way affect the question of whether such park, track or outdoor entertainment constitutes a nuisance as to any individual. 
(Ord. of 7-13-70, § 10) 
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT 

Sec. 6-120. - Intent. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and general welfare through the regulation of public entertainment. As used in this chapter, the term "public entertainment" shall mean any gathering at which music or entertainment is provided by live performances or prerecorded means or a show or exhibition which is held indoors or out of doors to which members of the public are invited or admitted for a charge, or free of charge, by any person or by any organization doing business in the town. 
(Ord. of 12-3-12) 
Sec. 6-121. - License required. 
(a)  No person or organization shall conduct or operate indoor or outdoor public entertainment without first obtaining a public entertainment license from the town council. Whenever a public entertainment license is granted by the town council, it shall be the duty of the town sergeant and fire marshal to determine whether or not the assignment of a detail police officer or detail fire fighter is needed. The costs of the detailed officer or fire marshall shall be borne by the applicant. 
(b)  Upon receipt of an application for a new or an expanded public entertainment license, an advertisement shall be placed once in a local newspaper by the town clerk, at the applicant's expense, providing notice to the public of the council meeting date on which the public hearing will be held. The notice must be published one time only and no less than seven days prior to the hearing. Notice of the hearing date shall also be mailed at the applicant's expense at least two weeks prior to the date of the hearing by the town clerk to the abutters within a 200-foot radius of the premises at which the new or expanded entertainment is to occur. 
(c)  Upon receipt of an application for a new or an expanded public entertainment license the town clerk shall also notify the town sergeant and fire marshal who shall make such determinations and notify the town clerk accordingly. 
(d)  If a public entertainment license is granted to the holder of a victualling license or alcoholic-beverage license, the license granted hereunder shall not permit such entertainment to extend beyond the authorized serving time of such victualling or alcoholic-beverage license. Unless otherwise noted, outside entertainment that involves amplification shall cease at 11:00 p.m., Sunday to Thursday, and at midnight on Fridays, Saturdays and Sundays before holidays. 
(e)  In all other instances where a public entertainment license is issued, the hours of entertainment to be held shall be as determined by the town council, having due regard for the public convenience, welfare, health and safety. 
(f)  The town council, pursuant to Title 5, Chapter 22, of the General Laws of Rhode Island, may place reasonable conditions on the issuance of a public entertainment license having due regard for the public convenience, welfare and safety of its residents. 
(g)  Any application for a public entertainment license shall identify the specific types and nature of entertainment intended, as well as specifically delineating and defining through an attached plan, the location of the proposed entertainment. The approval of a public entertainment license shall allow for those specific types of entertainment for which an application has been completed, and no other. Any type of equipment not regularly utilized at the location of the proposed entertainment or added directly as a result of this application must be approved by the town's building inspector. 
(h)  The town council may specifically require the use of audio speakers with short throw symmetrical coverage unidirectional patterns and baffling to contain and mitigate the dispersion of amplified sound as a condition to the issuance or renewal of a public entertainment license. 
(i)  The town council may also authorize the issuance of a public entertainment license to nonprofit community theater groups located in the town that have performances at the same location on a regular basis. 
(j)  The granting of any license under this article does not obviate compliance with any and all other town ordinances and state laws which may be required as a result of any proposed event. 
(Ord. of 12-3-12) 
Sec. 6-122. - License application fee. 
(a)  The fee for an annual public entertainment license shall be $100.00 yearly. 
(b)  A public entertainment license may be issued on a daily basis at a fee of $15.00 per day. 
(c)  All fees shall be payable in full when the license is issued. 
(Ord. of 12-3-12) 
Sec. 6-123. - Waiver. 
    The holder of a license issued to any outdoor amusement "park", outdoor "track", outdoor "recreational" site, "festival" site, "cultural event" site or other outdoor "entertainment" site pursuant to sections 6-91 through 6-119 may, upon sufficient proof, seek a waiver from the terms of this article which may be granted or withheld in the sound discretion of the town council after consideration thereof at any properly convened public meeting. 
(Ord. of 12-3-12) 
Sec. 6-124. - Annual license year. 
    Each license under this article shall remain in force for a period of one year starting April 1 and ending March 31 the following year. 
(Ord. of 12-3-12) 
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Kennels, § 18-91 et seq.; environment, ch. 22. 
State Law reference- Animals, G.L. 1956, § 4-4-1 et seq.; town ordinances on diseases, G.L. 1956, § 4-4-18; dogs, G.L. 1956, § 4-13-1 et seq.; regulations regarding dogs, enforcement, G.L. 1956, § 4-13-1; estrays, G.L. 1956, § 4-16-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal control officer means any person or persons designated or employed by the town as its enforcement officer(s) and shall also include the town sergeant any police officer, the animal control manager and supervisor, and any constable of the town. 
    Animal pound means any premises designated by action of the town for the purpose of impounding and caring for all animals found running at large, in violation of this chapter. Animal pound shall also include the facility known as the "Exeter Animal Shelter" 
    At large means any dog off the property of its owner and not under restraint. 
    Exposed to rabies means an animal that has been bitten by or been exposed to any animal known to have been infected with rabies. 
    Owner means any person, group of persons or corporation owning, keeping or harboring dogs. 
    Restraint means any dog controlled, or at heel beside a competent person and obedient to that person's commands, on or within a vehicle being driven or parked on the streets, or within the property limits of its owner or keeper. 
    Spayed female dog means any female dog which has been operated upon to prevent conception. 
(Ord. of 11-2-92, § 1; Ord. of 5-22-12, § 1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-2. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and G.L. 1956, § 4-13-1, any person convicted of violating any provision of this chapter may be punished by the payment of a fine. If such violation is continued, each day's violation may constitute a separate offense. The fines are as follows: 
Dog Violation Fees: 
License late fee (after June 1) ..... $25.00 
Unlicensed dogs ..... 35.00 
Running at-large without restraint within one year: 
First offense ..... 15.00 
Second offense ..... 25.00 
Third offense ..... 40.00 
Fourth offense ..... 100.00 
Fifth offense ..... 200.00 
Harboring nuisance dog (barking): 
First offense ..... Warning 
Second offense ..... 25.00 
Subsequent offenses ..... 40.00 
For violations not covered above, the fines are as follows: 
(1)  Up to $25.00 for the first offense; 
(2)  Up to $100.00 for the second offense within one year of the first offense; and 
(3)  Up to $200.00 for a third and any subsequent offense within one year from the first offense. 
(Ord. of 11-2-92, § 15; Ord. of 12-14-98; Amd. of 4-4-05; Ord. of 9-5-06; Ord. of 10-2-06; Ord. of 3-4-13) 
State Law reference- Limitation on penalties for violation of regulations regarding dogs, G.L. 1956, §§ 4-13-1, 4-13-39. 
Secs. 10-3-10-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 10-36. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Administration. All animal control facilities, operations, and personnel shall be administered within the department of public works. The director of public works, pursuant to Section 801 of the Town Charter, shall be responsible for the operation and administration thereof. 
(b)  Animal control manager and supervisor. The animal control manager and supervisor shall be responsible for the day-to-day supervision and management of all animal control operations, personnel and facilities. The director of public works, or any person otherwise appointed by the town council, shall perform the duties of the animal control manager and supervisor. In the event that the position of animal control manager and supervisor is filled by an appointee other than the director of public works, he or she shall report to, and shall be subject to the supervision of, the director of public works. He or she shall be appointed by, and shall serve at the pleasure of, the town council, with the advice of the director of public works. 
(c)  Enforcement officers. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the director of public works, the animal control manager and supervisor, the animal control officer(s), the town sergeant, and any police officer or constable of the town. 
(d)  Complaint procedures. All complaints made under the provisions of this chapter shall be made to the animal control manager and supervisor and, in absence thereof, to any animal control officer and may be made orally; provided, however, that such complaint is, within 48 hours, reduced to writing and shall be signed by the complainant, showing his address and telephone number, if any. 
(Ord. of 11-2-92, §§ 2, 11; Ord. of 5-22-12, § 1) 
Sec. 10-37. - Investigation. 
    In the discharge of the duties imposed by this chapter, the animal control officer or any police officer or constable of this town shall have the authority at all reasonable times to enter upon any premises. Such authority should not include the right to enter any residence on such premises to examine a dog or other animal which is allegedly in violation of a provision of this chapter. Such officer shall have the further authority to take possession of any such dog or other animal and remove it from such premises. 
(Ord. of 11-2-92, § 12) 
Sec. 10-38. - Interference with animal control officers. 
    No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest the animal control officer or any police officer or constable of this town in the performance of their duties, or seek to release any animal in custody of the animal control officer, any police officer or constable, except as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 11-2-92, § 13) 
Sec. 10-39. - Recordkeeping. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to keep or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of the impoundment and disposition of all animals coming into custody. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to keep, or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of all bite cases reported and investigation of the same. 
(Ord. of 11-2-92, § 14) 
Secs. 10-40-10-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DOGS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Dogs, G.L. 1956, § 4-13-1 et seq.; rabies control, G.L. 1956, §§ 4-13-26-4-13-32, Rules and Regulation Governing Rabies Control Within The State of Rhode Island, Rabies Control Board, March 1993. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-71. - Nuisance abatement. 
(a)  The keeping or harboring of any dog, whether licensed or not, which by habitual howling, yelping, barking or other noise disturbs or annoys any considerable number of persons or neighborhood is unlawful, and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Each day shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to allow or permit any dog to trespass on private or public property so as to damage or destroy any property or thing of value, and such behavior is hereby declared to be a nuisance. Any such animal may be impounded by the animal control officer. Whenever it shall be affirmed in writing by three or more residents, or persons regularly employed in the neighborhood, that any animal is an habitual nuisance by reason of trespassing, howling, barking or other noise or damage to property, being vicious or by its actions potentially vicious, or in any other manner causing undue annoyance, the animal control officer, if finding such a nuisance to exist, shall serve notice upon the owner or custodian that such nuisance must be abated. If the nuisance and/or annoyance is not thereupon abated, the animal control officer shall impound such animal. 
(Ord. of 11-2-92, § 10) 
Sec. 10-72. - At large on schoolyards or school property. 
    No dogs are allowed in school yards or on school property whether at large or under restraint, Seeing Eye dogs excepted. 
(Ord. of 11-2-92, § 11(a)) 
Sec. 10-73. - Limit on number kept. 
    It shall be unlawful to keep more than three dogs at the same residence, except as may be permitted by the town council. This section shall not apply to licensed kennels. 
(Ord. of 11-2-92, § 11(b)) 
Sec. 10-74. - Penalty for violation of article; liability insurance. 
(a)  Every person owning or keeping a dog not licensed according to the provisions of this section shall be fined as provided in G.L. 1956, § 4-13-1 and 4-13-39. 
(b)  Proof of liability insurance for a 12-month period in the amount of $100,000.00 for the third offenders or subsequent offenders of the animal control ordinance, which policy shall cover damages or injury which may be caused by the dog. The policy shall contain a provision requiring the town be named as additional insured for the sole purpose of the town clerk being notified of any cancellation of policy. 
(Ord. of 11-2-92, § 11; Ord. of 12-14-98(2)) 
Cross reference- Penalty for violation of chapter, § 10-2. 
State Law reference- Penalties for violations, G.L. 1956, §§ 4-13-1, 4-13-15, 4-13-39. 
Secs. 10-75-10-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Dog licenses required, G.L. 1956, § 4-13-4. 

Sec. 10-96. - Required; fee; period of validity. 
    All dogs must be registered upon six months of age in accordance with state law. Every owner or keeper of a dog shall annually, in the month of April, cause such dogs to be licensed from the first day of the ensuing May, in the office of the town clerk. Such owner or keeper shall pay the town clerk for the license. All licenses shall be valid in the town during the then current year; provided, however, that any person who shall cause the dog to be licensed shall do so within 30 days after he becomes an owner or keeper. 
(Ord. of 11-2-92, § 11(d)) 
Secs. 10-97-10-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RABIES CONTROL[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Rabies control, G.L. 1956, §§ 4-13-26-4-13-32, Rules and Regulation Governing Rabies Control Within The State of Rhode Island, Rabies Control Board, March 1993. 

Sec. 10-131. - Report of persons bitten; quarantine of animal. 
    Every dog, cat, ferret and other animal susceptible to rabies that bites a person shall be promptly reported to the animal control officer, and shall thereupon be securely quarantined at the direction of the animal control officer for a period of 14 days and shall not be released from such quarantine except by written permission of the animal control officer. At the discretion of the animal control officer, such quarantine may be on the premises of the owner, at the shelter designated as the animal pound or, at the owner's option and expense, in a veterinary hospital of his choice. In the case of stray animals, or in case of animals whose ownership is not known, such quarantine shall be at the shelter designated by the animal control officer. 
(Ord. of 11-2-92, § 7(a)) 
Sec. 10-132. - Surrender of animal by owner; expense of quarantine; reclaiming animal. 
    The owner, upon demand by the animal control officer, shall forthwith surrender any animal which has bitten a human, or which is suspected as having been exposed to rabies, for supervised quarantine, the expense of which shall be borne by the owner. Such animal may be reclaimed by the owner if it is adjudged free of rabies, upon payment of fees set forth in section 10-173. 
(Ord. of 11-2-92, § 7(b)) 
Sec. 10-133. - Medical practitioner reports of bite cases. 
    It shall be the duty of every physician or other medical practitioner to report to the animal control officer or the town clerk the names and addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted by animals, together with such other information as will be helpful in rabies control. 
(Ord. of 11-2-92, § 8) 
Sec. 10-134. - Responsibilities of veterinarians. 
    It shall be the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report to the animal control officer any animal considered by him to be a rabies suspect. 
(Ord. of 11-2-92, § 9) 
Sec. 10-135. - Death of animal; examination of head; report. 
    When rabies has been diagnosed in any animal under quarantine or rabies is suspected by a licensed veterinarian, and the animal dies while under such observation, the animal control officer shall immediately send the head of such animal to the state health department for the pathological examination; and shall notify the proper public health office of reports of human contacts and the diagnosis. 
(Ord. of 11-2-92, § 7(c)) 
Sec. 10-136. - Areawide quarantine; requirements. 
(a)  When one or both reports indicated a positive diagnosis of rabies, the animal control officer shall recommend an areawide quarantine for a period of 90 days, and upon invoking of such emergency quarantine, no animal shall be taken into the streets, or permitted to be in the streets, during such period of quarantine. During such quarantine, no animal may be taken or shipped from the town without the written permission of the animal control officer. 
(b)  If there are additional positive cases of rabies occurring during the period of quarantine, such period of quarantine may be extended for an additional six months. 
(c)  During this quarantine period and as long afterwards as is necessary to prevent the spread of rabies, the health officer shall require all dogs, three months of age and older to be vaccinated against rabies with a canine rabies vaccine approved by the biologics control section of the U.S. Department of Agriculture. The types of approved canine anti-rabies vaccine to be used and the recognized duration of immunity for each shall be restricted (leashing or confinement of enclosed premises) for 30 days after vaccination. During the quarantine period, the health officer shall be empowered to provide for a program of mass immunization by the establishment of temporary emergency canine rabies vaccination clinics strategically located throughout the town. 
(Ord. of 11-2-92, § 7(d), (f)) 
Sec. 10-137. - Claiming of impounded strays during quarantine. 
    No dog which has been impounded by reason of its being a stray, unclaimed by its owner, is allowed to be claimed during the period of the rabies emergency quarantine, except by special authorization of the health officer and the animal control officer. 
(Ord. of 11-2-92, § 7(d)) 
Sec. 10-138. - Destruction or isolation of bitten animals. 
    Animals bitten by a known rabid animal shall be immediately destroyed or if the owner is unwilling to destroy the exposed animal, strict isolation of the animal in a kennel for six months shall be enforced. If the animal has been previously vaccinated against rabies, within time limits established by the health officer, based on the kind of vaccine used, revaccination and restraint, including leashing and confinement, for 30 days shall be carried out. 
(Ord. of 11-2-92, § 7(e)) 
Sec. 10-139. - Killing of animals; permit required. 
    No person shall kill, or cause to be killed, any rabid animal, any animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies, or any animal biting a human, except as provided in this article, nor remove any such animal from the town limits without written permission from the animal control officer. 
(Ord. of 11-2-92, § 7(g)) 
Sec. 10-140. - Disposition of carcasses; surrender of animals upon demand. 
(a)  The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall, upon demand, be surrendered to the animal control officer. 
(b)  The animal control officer shall direct the disposition of any animal found to be infected with rabies. 
(c)  No person shall fail or refuse to surrender any animal for quarantine or destruction as required in this article when demand is made therefor by the animal control officer. 
(Ord. of 11-2-92, § 7(h)-(j)) 
Sec. 10-141. - Vaccination deadline. 
    All dogs in the town shall be vaccinated against rabies by the age of three months. 
(Ord. of 11-2-92, § 7(k)) 
Secs. 10-142-10-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - IMPOUNDMENT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Redemption or adoption of animals, G.L. 1956, § 4-19-17. 

Sec. 10-171. - Authorized actions. 
(a)  Taking up; disposal. Any animal described in section 10-71 and section 10-174 shall be taken up by the animal control officer in the shelter designated as the animal pound. Animals not claimed by their owners before the expiration of five days, may be disposed of at the discretion of the animal control officer, except as provided in this chapter in the cases of certain animals. 
(b)  Transfer of title to SPCA or Animal Rescue League. The animal control officer may transfer title of any animal held at the animal pound to the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (SPCA) and/or the Animal Rescue League after the legal detention period has expired and such animal has not been claimed by its owner. 
(c)  Notification of owners. Immediately upon impounding dogs, the animal control officer shall make every possible reasonable effort to notify the owners of such dogs, so impounded, and inform such owners of the conditions whereby they may regain custody of such dogs. 
(d)  Protection of town residents by impounding or disposition. Any dog found running at large within the town limits may be impounded or disposed of according to law when such action is required either to protect the dog or to protect the residents of the town. 
(Ord. of 11-2-92, § 3) 
Sec. 10-172. - Redemption of impounded dogs. 
(a)  The owner shall be entitled to regain possession of any impounded dog, except as provided in the cases of certain dogs, upon the payment of impoundment fees set forth in this article. Proof of ownership includes a license receipt, affidavits of neighbors, a photograph, etc. 
(b)  Any dog impounded under the provisions of this chapter and not reclaimed by its owner within five days may be humanely destroyed by the animal control officer, have its title transferred to the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals and/or the Animal Rescue League as provided for in section 10-171(b), or placed in the custody of some person deemed to be a responsible and suitable owner, who will agree to comply with the provisions of this chapter and such other regulations as shall be fixed by the town; provided, however, that if the animal is one as to which the respective rights of the owner and the person in possession or custody are determined by the state law, such law shall be complied with. Under no circumstances shall the ownership of any dog be transferred to a vivisection association. 
(Ord. of 11-2-92, § 4) 
Sec. 10-173. - Fees. 
(a)  Any animal impounded under this chapter's provisions may be reclaimed as provided in this section upon payment by the owner to the animal control officer of the sum of $15.00 and the additional sum of one dollar for each day such animal is kept after the expiration of the legal detention period. Impoundment fees set forth in this section, and such additional sums as provided in this section for keeping the animals, shall be collected by the town clerk for the use of the animal control officer. 
(b)  Exeter animal shelter schedule of fees. The following is a schedule of minimum fees to be charged: 
Boarding fees (cats and dogs): 
In-town animals, per day ..... 15.00 
West Greenwich and out-of-town animals, per day ..... 20.00 
Turn-in Fees (Exeter Cats and Dogs Only): 
Cats and Dogs sterilized ..... 25.00 
Cats not sterilized ..... 75.00 
Dogs not sterilized ..... 175.00 
License fee (dogs only): ..... 5.00 
Spay/neuter surcharge (dogs only): ..... 1.00 
Late license fee (dogs only) ..... 25.00* 
Adoption fee (cats and dogs): ..... 75.00 
Deposit for sterilization (cats and dogs) (deposit required for sterilization-refundable upon proof of sterilization) ..... 25.00 
*Total license fee for late registration is $31.00 (includes license fee, spay/neuter surcharge and late license fee). 
(Ord. of 11-2-92, § 5; Ord. of 12-14-98(3); Ord. of 2-7-00(1); Amd. of 10-6-03(1); Amd. of 4-4-05; Ord. of 9-5-06; Ord. of 10-2-06; Ord. of 12-1-14) 
Sec. 10-174. - Confinement of certain dogs and other animals. 
(a)  The owner shall confine within a building or secure enclosure, every fierce, dangerous or vicious animal, and not take such animal out of such building or secure enclosure unless such animal is securely muzzled. 
(b)  Every female dog in heat shall be kept confined in a building or secure enclosure, or in a veterinary hospital or boarding kennel, in such a manner that such female dog or other animal cannot come in contact with another dog or animal, except for intentional breeding purposes. 
(c)  Any dog described in subsection (b) of this section, found at large, shall be impounded by the animal control officer and may not be reclaimed by owners, unless such reclamation be authorized by any court having jurisdiction. 
(d)  Any animal may, the first time it is impounded for being a public nuisance, be reclaimed as provided in section 10-172(a), but may not be reclaimed when so impounded on second or subsequent occasion unless such reclamation is authorized by a court having jurisdiction in the matter. 
(Ord. of 11-2-92, § 6) 
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 22; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 26; natural resources, ch. 30; solid waste, ch. 34; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 38; nonissuance and nonrenewal of licenses or permits to applicants or licensees in arrears in taxes, liens and assessments, § 42-1; waterways, ch. 50; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference- State building code, G.L. 1956, § 23-27.3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Storage of building materials, machinery or construction vehicles within public right-of-way. 
    No person shall store building materials, machinery or construction vehicles within a public right-of-way without the prior written approval of the building inspector and the public works director. Where staging or other apparatus or material is to be stored or erected within a public right-of-way, suitable barriers and lighting shall be provided, together with an alternative pedestrian walkway. All rubbish and other discarded material shall be removed from the premises by the builder or his agent. 
(Ord. of 4-22-68, § 6(b), (c)) 
Secs. 14-2-14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDINGS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- State Building Code, G.L. 1956, § 23-27.3-1 et seq.; inspection of buildings where combustible materials accumulate, G.L. 1956, § 23-28.5-1 et seq.; notice to vacate unfit dwellings, G.L. 1956, § 23-19.2-8; housing maintenance and occupancy code, G.L. 1956, § 45-21.3-1 et seq.; minimum housing standards, G.L. 1956, § 45-24.2-1 et seq.; plumbers, G.L. 1956, § 5-20-1 et seq.; electricians, G.L. 1956, § 5-6-1 et seq.; electrical code, G.L. 1956, § 23-27.3-5; plumbing code, G.L. 1956, § 23-27.3-3. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-31. - Numbering of buildings and lots. 
(a)  Preamble. Acting under the authority granted under Section 45-6-1 of the G.L. 1956 as amended, the town council hereby ordains this section establishing a uniform system for the numbering of residential, commercial, and industrial buildings and lots in the town. All buildings in the town shall display street numbers in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Purpose. The standards set forth in this section are made for the purpose of promoting the public health and safety by providing a means of locating residential and other structures by police, fire, and other emergency services and for such other purposes requiring the location of residential and other structures as may be required. 
(c)  Administration. This building and lot numbering system shall be administered by the town council, through the 911 coordinator, who shall assign building numbers to all residential, commercial, and industrial structures and lots in conformity with the plan developed pursuant to this section. The town council shall be responsible for the enforcement of this section. The town council, through the 911 coordinator, shall also be responsible for maintaining the following official records of this numbering system: 
(1)  A town map for official use showing said numbering system. 
(2)  A town-wide alphabetical list of property owners by last name, showing the assigned numbers. 
(3)  A town-wide alphabetical list of streets with property owners listed in order of their assigned numbers. 
(d)  Numbering system. The following criteria shall govern the development of the numbering system and the assignment of numbers: 
(1)  Number interval. Each 50 feet of every street shall be assigned one odd number and one even number on each side of the street. 
(2)  Odd and even numbers. Odd numbers shall be on the right-hand side of all streets facing from the point of number origin to the point of number destination of each street. 
(3)  Number origins. On through streets which terminate at another street at both ends, numbers shall start at the northerly end of streets which run in a generally north-south direction and shall start at the easterly end of the streets which run in a generally east-west direction. Streets running in other directions shall start numbers at whichever end is most northerly or easterly. 
On dead-end streets or cul-de-sacs, numbers will start at the intersection of origin of the street and run toward the dead-end or turnaround, and the right hand rule shall apply. 
Exceptions to either of the above shall be decided on a case-by-case basis. 
(4)  Common access. Where several residences or other structures are served by a common driveway or a private right-of-way which is not on a street recognized by the town, the number at the entrance shall apply to all residences and structures served by the drive or way and each separate residence or structure shall be identified by a suffix letter (for example, 110A) in clockwise rotation starting with the structure on the immediate right of the drive or access way. Where possible, letters shall be assigned using the same interval in feet as used on recognized streets. 
(5)  Number assignment. The number assigned to each residence or other structure shall be the number which falls closest to the main entry or driveway providing access to the property as shown on the official map of street numbers. 
(e)  Street names. Names shall be chosen that relate to the location and historical significance of an area. 
(1)  Unacceptable street names. Numerical (1st, 2nd, 3rd, etc.), alphabetical letter (A, B, C, etc.), frivolous, complicated, undesirable, unconventional. 
(2)  Affixes. Unnecessary affixes are to be avoided. Terms that may be utilized are as follows: "East," "West," "North," "South," indicating direction; "Old," "New,", to indicate changes in differing or separate roads. 
(3)  Name duplication. Similar sounding names are considered to be duplication regardless of spelling. No duplication of names is to be permitted within the services of a Unites States Post Office or local public agencies such as a police or fire department. 
(4)  Continuity. A continuous street, or one proposed as continuous, should bear the same name throughout, even if it changes direction. 
(f)  Compliance. All owners, residents and other occupants are required to display assigned numbers in the following manner: 
(1)  Number on the structure or residence. Where the residence or structure is within 50 feet of the edge of a street right-of-way, the unobstructed assigned number shall be displayed on the front of the residence or structure in the vicinity of the front door or entry way, and said number shall be viewable from the street. 
(2)  Number at the street line. Where the residence or structure is over 50 feet from the edge of the street right-of-way, the unobstructed assigned number shall be displayed on a mailbox, post, fence, wall, or at the property line adjacent to the walk or access drive to the residence or structure. 
(3)  Size and color of number. Numbers shall be displayed as follows: The number is to consist of numerals of at least three inches in size and be of a color that contrasts with the background on which it is placed and shall be so located as to be easily visible from the street The use of reflective numbering is strongly recommended to increase night visibility. No owner, occupant, leasee, tenant, or subtenant of any building shall display any street number other than the assigned proper street number designated by the town council, through the 911 coordinator. 
(4)  Placing of numbers. Within 30 days of receipt of a verification of address or a notification of change, the owner of the building shall place the designated number or numbers on the respective building. 
(5)  Interior location. All residents and other occupants are requested to post the assigned number and street name adjacent to their telephone for emergency reference. 
(6)  Violations. Any person violating this section shall be punished by a fine of up to $50.00 for first violation and up to $100.00 for each succeeding violation, plus any and all associated legal fees involved in the collection thereof. 
(g)  New construction. Whenever any residence or other structure is constructed or developed, it shall be the duty of the new owner to procure and post an assigned number or numbers from the town building inspector, as approved by the 911 coordinator. This shall be done at the time of the issuance of the building permit. No certificate of occupancy will be given until assigned building number is displayed as outlined in subsection (f). 
(h)  New subdivisions. Any prospective subdivider shall provide a proposed lot numbering system (i.e., a grid of the maps) on the preapplication submission to the town planning board. After approval of a tentative tract map, the subdivider shall submit a street naming and numbering proposal to the planning board. The proposal shall consist of: 
(1)  A map of the overall tract illustrating the streets layout, the name proposed for each street and proposed number for each lot; and 
(2)  An alphabetical list of the proposed street names, together with an alternate name for each street name proposed. The planning board shall review the proposed street naming and numbering program for duplication of names, appropriateness of names, and for overall compliance with the street naming and numbering policy (see subsections (d) and (e)). The planning board may modify or amend the proposed list as it deems necessary in order to bring it into compliance with the street naming and numbering policy. The approved street names and numbering shall be included in the final map which is submitted for approval and for recordation. As a condition precedent to final approval, the 911 coordinator shall confirm in writing the assignment of numbers to the lots in the subdivision. 
(Ord. of 8-3-92, §§ 1-8) 
Editor's note- Ord. of Aug. 3, 1992, §§ 1-8, did not specifically amend the Code. Hence, its inclusion herein as section 14-31 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 14-32-14-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT FEES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Permit required, G.L. 1956, § 23-27.3-113.1; authority to prescribe building permit fees, G.L. 1956, § 23-27.3-118.0. 

Sec. 14-51. - Schedule of fees. 
    The following fees shall be remitted to the town prior to the issuance of the specified permit: 
(1)  Computation formula for new construction. The fees for new construction shall be computed based on the following formula: 
Gross area multiplied by gross area modifier, multiplied by type of construction factor, multiplied by permit fee multiplier. 
For this purpose, the following definitions shall apply: 
Gross area means the square footage per floor, basement, garage, etc., of the new construction. 
Gross area modifier (GAM) means the latest number established by the Building Officials Code Administrators International Association (BOCA) that reflects the ratio of the cost differences between construction types. Currently, the figure is 62. The figure shall be altered at the same time and in the same manner as it is altered by BOCA. 
Permit fee multipler (PFM) means the building department budget divided by the annual construction value within the town for the past calendar year. The PFM shall be adjusted annually by the building inspector, this figure is currently .0068. 
Type of construction factor (TCF) means the ratio between type and use costs (from the BOCA Factor Table). This figure is currently .66. 
These fees have increased 25 percent for all permits applied for after September 1, 2002. 
(2)  Alterations, additions and repairs. Alterations, additions and repairs shall include the construction of fireplaces and chimneys, factory built or masonry. The fees shall be based on the following schedule keyed to the cost of construction: 
Building permit fee schedule for alterations, additions, repairs, fireplaces and chimneys factory built or masonry. 
$0.00 $499.00 $25.00 $500.00 $999.00 $50.00 $1,000.00 $1,999.00 $75.00 $2,000.00 $4,999.00 $100.00 $5,000.00 $9,999.00 $125.00 $10,000.00 $14,999.00 $187.00 $15,000.00 $19,999.00 $250.00 $20,000.00 $24,999.00 $325.00 $25,000.00 $25,999.00 $338.00 $26,000.00 $26,999.00 $350.00 $27,000.00 $27,999.00 $363.00 $28,000.00 $28,999.00 $375.00 $29,000.00 $29,999.00 $388.00 $30,000.00 $30,999.00 $400.00 $31,000.00 $31,999.00 $413.00 $32,000.00 $32,999.00 $425.00 $33,000.00 $33,999.00 $438.00 $34,000.00 $34,999.00 $450.00 $35,000.00 $35,999.00 $463.00 $36,000.00 $36,999.00 $475.00 $37,000.00 $37,999.00 $488.00 $38,000.00 $38,999.00 $500.00 $39,000.00 $39,999.00 $513.00 $40,000.00 $40,999.00 $525.00 $41,000.00 $41,999.00 $538.00 $42,000.00 $42,999.00 $550.00 $43,000.00 $43,999.00 $563.00 $44,000.00 $44,999.00 $575.00 $45,000.00 $45,999.00 $588.00 $46,000.00 $46,999.00 $600.00 $47,000.00 $47,999.00 $613.00 $48,000.00 $48,999.00 $625.00 $49,000.00 $49,999.00 $638.00 $50,000.00 $50,999.00 $650.00 $51,000.00 $51,999.00 $663.00 $52,000.00 $52,999.00 $675.00 $53,000.00 $53,999.00 $688.00 $54,000.00 $54,999.00 $700.00 $55,000.00 $55,999.00 $713.00 $56,000.00 $56,999.00 $725.00 $57,000.00 $57,999.00 $738.00 $58,000.00 $58,999.00 $750.00 $59,000.00 $59,999.00 $763.00  
$60,000.00 to no limit $763.00 + $5.00 per thousand or portion thereof in excess of $60,000.00. 
(3)  Plumbing, mechanical, electrical, wood stoves, moving, demolition and sign. The fees for plumbing mechanical, electrical, wood stoves, moving, demolition and signs shall be $50.00 plus ten dollars for each $1,000.00 (or portion thereof) of project cost in excess of $1,000.00. 
(4)  Additional fees for all applicants. In the event of no shows, lock-outs or failed inspections, an additional fee of $25.00 shall be assessed. Such fee must be paid to the town clerk before the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. There shall be a $50.00 fee for issuance of certificate of occupancy. The permit must be sought before construction is commenced. If the permit application follows construction start, the fee shall total 150 percent of such calculated fee. At the discretion of the building official, industrial and commercial construction plans may be submitted for state building commissioner review. Fees assessed by the state for this review are the responsibility of the applicant and must be paid in addition to and simultaneous with payment of the town assessed permit fee. Town fees for town official plan review shall also be assessed. Plan review is required for all construction except residential alterations. The plan review fee is $200.00. 
(Ord. of 4-3-95(1), §§ 1-4; Ord. of 9-9-02(1)) 
Secs. 14-52-14-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MOVING BUILDINGS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 38. 

Sec. 14-71. - Building permit required. 
    Any person wishing to move a building or structure to a new location must obtain a building permit. No electric wire, telephone wire, sign, tree or shrub shall be removed in connection with such moving without the written permission of the building inspector. All such buildings or structures shall conform to the applicable provisions of the state building code. 
(Ord. of 4-22-68, § 6) 
Sec. 14-72. - Bond or other surety required; indemnification of town. 
    Any person moving a structure or building must file with the permit application a bond or other surety satisfactory to the town solicitor, and conditioned to comply with all legal requirements and restrictions relative to the moving of buildings; to pay damages suffered by any persons by reason of any negligence of the licensee, his servants or agents in or about the moving of buildings in the town; and to indemnify and save the town harmless from all loss and damage by reason of any such negligence in moving buildings through, over, or on any public street or highway in the town; and any liability of the town therefor relative to maintaining its public highways in condition safe and convenient for pedestrian and vehicular travel of any description. Such permit may be revoked at any time by the building inspector for any violation of this division or any of the conditions of such bond. 
(Ord. of 4-22-68, § 6) 
Secs. 14-73-14-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GROWTH MANAGEMENT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Nov. 5, 2012, deleted the former Art. III, §§ 14-201-14-213, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted Nov. 5, 2001, §§ 1-13. 

Sec. 14-201. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of growth management is to equitably allocate a limited number of new residential building permits over time, so as to minimize the burden on existing facilities and resources, whose adequacy is essential to the public health, safety and welfare, and in a manner which is consistent with the town comprehensive plan. It is the intent of this article to allow controlled growth in relation to the existing and future capacity of town facilities and the Exeter-West Greenwich School District (hereafter the "school district"). 
(Ord. of 11-5-12) 
Sec. 14-202. - Findings. 
    The town council, planning board, town staff and consultants have conducted a study to develop a growth management program as called for in the comprehensive plan. The study is entitled "Town of Exeter, Rhode Island, Growth Management Program," and was adopted by the town council on November 5, 2001. The town council finds that this study, together with the footnotes and sources, establishes the basis for the town's growth management program, and are all incorporated herein by reference. In addition, in 2012 the Exeter Town Council commissioned a second study entitled "Growth Management Follow-Up Report" and is adopted by reference herein. 
(Ord. of 11-5-12) 
Sec. 14-203. - Issuance of residential building permits. 
    Issuance of building permits authorizing creation of one or more dwelling units, as defined by the town zoning ordinance, through new construction or change of use shall be allowed only under the procedures and requirements set forth herein. 
    A permit is equivalent to a dwelling unit. Applicants for such residential building permits shall be authorized to proceed in the manner specified herein, and in accordance with the priority assigned to them. The total number of dwelling units authorized to begin construction in any quarter shall not exceed the calculated quota as established in this article. 
(Ord. of 11-5-12) 
Sec. 14-204. - Calculated quota. 
    There shall be a finite number of residential building permits for each quarter of each year. A quarter is defined as a three-month period that begins on the first day of January, April, July and October. The number of residential permits to be issued shall be limited in accordance with the following formula: 
Total permits per quarter equals the currently available seats within the school district plus any increase of seats that the school district may provide for through new construction of school facilities over the next ten years, commencing with January 1, 2013, divided by 0.6 divided by 40 quarters, and multiplied by the percentage of Exeter's current enrollment in the EWG system. 
(Ord. of 11-5-12) 
Sec. 14-205. - Quota established. 
    It has been determined by the town council, based upon studies conducted pursuant to the comprehensive plan and studies cited in section 14-202, along with data supplied by the school district, the town's present capacity for additional dwelling units is based on the following: 
2010/2011 total capacity 2,310 Plus recaptured seats-interim plan 180 Total 2,490 2010/2011 enrollment 1,835 Existing excess capacity 655 Divided by (pupil per dwelling unit ratio here) .6 (Equals number of system-wide permits in ten-year period 1091 Multiplied by the Exeter's percentage of enrollment 44.93% Equals number of Exeter permits in ten-year period 490 Number of permits per year 49 Number of permits per quarter 12, 12, 13, 12  
(Ord. of 11-5-12) 
Sec. 14-206. - Subsequent quotas. 
    Following the method established in section 14-205, the calculation of the formula for all subsequent quarters shall be performed by the building official and shall be submitted to the town council, the planning board and posted in the office of the town clerk not less than 30 days prior to the commencement of the quarter for which the quota is to be applied. To assist the building official in his/her calculation, the building official shall request, in writing, that the superintendent of schools supply him/her with the number of available seats in the school district based on the current capacity less the actual enrollment as of October 1 of the current school calendar year, and the increase in seat capacity, projected from January 1, 2002, to December 31, 2012, based upon any adopted plan of the school district. The building official shall monitor the school district's overall capacity by checking with the superintendent of schools every first day of October of every year to determine the system capacity and enrollment. 
(Ord. of 11-5-12) 
Sec. 14-207. - Effective date. 
    For the purposes of this article, the effective date shall be January 1, 2013. Any application for a building permit creating one or more additional dwelling units submitted after the effective date of this article shall be subject to the review procedures set forth herein. Permit applications submitted before the effective date of this article shall not be subject to any of the quota limitations of this article. This article shall supercede any and all ordinances inconsistent herewith. 
(Ord. of 11-5-12) 
Sec. 14-208. - Exemptions from the quota. 
    The following types of dwellings shall not be subject to the provisions of this article with regard to the calculated quota. These dwellings have been determined to have no or minimal impact upon the town's capacity or provide positive benefits to the town which are consistent with the comprehensive community plan. The building official shall accept applications for construction of the dwellings listed below and shall act upon them without regard to the quotas, priority determination and procedures as set forth in this article. All such permits issued shall be considered to be issued in addition to the calculated quota provisions of this article. Complete applications for construction of dwelling units so authorized shall be granted permits within the time limits prescribed in the state building code, regardless of the availability of permits within the quota. 
(1)  Affordable housing. Any housing units required to be constructed under article IX of the Exeter Zoning Ordinance. 
(2)  Vested rights. An application to construct a dwelling is not subject to this section if allowed pursuant to vested rights provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
(3)  Elderly housing. Dwellings which would contribute to meeting the year-round housing needs of elderly and disabled citizens through enforceable restrictions limiting occupancy to households whose members are 62 years of age or older. 
(4)  Retired adult communities. Planned developments for retired citizens, with amenities, established through publicly enforceable restrictions limiting occupancy to residents whose members are 55 years of age or older. 
(5)  Community residence. Any community residence as defined by R.I.G.L. § 45-24-31. 
(Ord. of 11-5-12) 
Sec. 14-209. - Priority issuance. 
    Building permits shall be issued by the building official up to the maximum number permitted by the applicable calculated quota, in the order of priority assigned below. In the event of a tie, priority shall go to the application with the earlier date and time of the submission of a complete application. 
(1)  The first priority shall be given to applications for construction of low and moderate income housing. "Low and moderate income housing" is that housing developed, approved and built in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 54 of Title 45 of the R.I. General laws and the Exeter Code of Ordinances, Section 9.0 [Appendix A, Article IX]. 
(2)  The second priority shall be given to applications for construction of a new single family detached dwelling provided that: 
a.  The applicant owned the lot to be built before the effective date of this article; or 
b.  The lot to be built upon was subdivided from a larger parcel before the effective date of this article. 
This priority level shall not apply: 
a.  If the applicant has previously received a permit for a new single family detached dwelling in the town; or 
b.  The lot to be built upon was under common ownership with a lot or parcel that has previously received a building permit for a new single family detached dwelling in the town within two years prior to the date of application. 
(3)  The third priority shall be given to applicants whose application for construction of a dwelling has been denied for four consecutive quarters because of the provisions of this article. 
(4)  The remainder of the quota shall be issued to any other applications in the order of complete applications received. 
(Ord. of 11-5-12) 
Sec. 14-210. - Procedure for issuance of building permits. 
(a)  Applications for building permits for construction of one or more dwelling units shall be submitted to the building official, who shall adhere to the following procedure in reviewing and issuing permits: 
(1)  Completeness. The building official shall, upon receipt of an application submitted, examine the application, plans and all materials for completeness, which shall include all plans and materials required for a building permit under the applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance and the state building code. If said application, plans and materials are complete, the building official shall stamp it indicating the date and time of official receipt by the town. 
(2)  Incomplete applications. If the application is incomplete and does not contain all plans and materials as required by the zoning ordinance and the state building code, the application, plans and materials shall be returned to the applicant, within 15 days, who will be informed by the building official what is missing from the submission in order to qualify as a complete application. 
(b)  The building official shall not issue permits for any dwelling units in excess of the quota unless such units are exempt, as provided in section 14-208. The building official shall keep track of all permits issued plus complete applications submitted during the most recent quarter, beginning with the effective date of this article. If, within any quarter, the number exceeds the quota, additional building permits shall no longer be issued. Applications for additional permits shall be accumulated for action at the beginning of the next quarter, and shall be prioritized and issued under the ensuing quarter. 
(c)  At the beginning of the next quarter, the building official shall add the total number of complete applications on file to the total number of permits issued during the previous three quarters. In the event that the resulting sum (current quarter applications plus the previous three quarters' accumulation) is fewer than the annual quota as defined herein, accumulated permits shall be issued up to the quarterly quota limit and new applications may be processed to such limit. In the event that the resulting sum exceeds the annual quota, the accumulated permits shall not be issued and no further permits shall be issued for that quarter. 
(d)  The accumulation of applications may continue from one quarter to the next and permits issued within the limitations described in subsection (c) above. Under no circumstances shall the number of building permits, other than those exempt dwellings, exceed the annual quota. 
(e)  In the event that the number of building permits issued in any one year does not reach the annual quota, there shall be no carryover of permits to the following year. 
(Ord. of 11-5-12) 
Sec. 14-211. - Limitation on permits issued. 
    In order to assure that permits for residential building construction are equitably distributed among all qualified applicants, no more than five building permits for dwelling units shall be granted to either any single applicant (including any related entity as defined below), or to any owner (including any related entity) of any single subdivision or land development project, within any quarter if doing so would result in denial of a permit for any other applicant. 
    Related entity means, with respect to a specific person, group of people, or corporation ("party"): 
(1)  Such party's spouse or parents, children, grandparents, grandchildren or siblings (blood or adopted); 
(2)  A trustee of a trust for the benefit of such party, or for the benefit of any person identified in subsection (1) above; 
(3)  A corporation, partnership, firm, business or legal entity of which 15 percent or more of the voting interest is owned by such party, or any person identified in either subsections (1) or (2) above; or 
(4)  A person who is an officer, director, trustee, employee or partner of any legal entity referred to in subsections (2) or (3) above. 
(Ord. of 11-5-12) 
Sec. 14-212. - Appeals. 
    Any decision by the building official to carry out the purposes of this article may be taken by an aggrieved party to the zoning board of review. The appeal shall be taken within 20 days following an action by the building official to enforce the provisions of this article and shall specify the grounds for such appeal. The building official shall forthwith transmit to the zoning board of review all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. Notice of the appeal shall also be transmitted to the planning board. The procedure for any appeal including a public hearing shall be in accordance with section 1.7 of the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. of 11-5-12) 
Sec. 14-213. - Expiration date. 
    This article shall expire on December 31, 2022, and shall be reviewed for applicability by the planning board no later than December 31, 2017. 
(Ord. of 11-5-12) 
Secs. 14-214-14-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - IMPACT FEES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of Sept. 9, 2002(2), §§ 1-12, did not specifically amend the Code. Hence, its inclusion herein as article IV, sections 14-231-14-242, was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 14-231. - Authorized. 
    This article authorizes the establishment of an impact fee on land development in the town for providing new public facilities, upgrades, and/or improvements to existing public facilities as that term is defined in R.I. General Laws 45-22.4-3, as amended, including but not limited to schools (and their related facilities) within the town and/or within the regional school district which are proportionately necessitated by such new development. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02(2), § 1; Amend. of 8-7-17(1)) 
Sec. 14-232. - Findings. 
(a)  In accordance with RIGL Title 45, Chapter 45-22.4, the Town Council of the Town of Exeter finds that an equitable program is needed for the planning and financing of public facilities to provide for the service demands of new development in the town in order to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of this town. 
(b)  It is therefore the public policy of the town and in the public interest to assess, impose, levy and collect fees defined herein as impact fees for certain new development within the town's jurisdictional limits. 
(c)  It is the intent of the town council, by enactment of this amendment, to: 
(1)  Ensure that adequate public facilities are available to serve new growth and development; 
(2)  Ensure that new growth and development does not place an undue financial burden upon existing taxpayers; 
(3)  Promote orderly growth and development by establishing uniform standards to require that those who benefit from new growth and development pay a proportionate fair share of the cost of new and/or upgraded public facilities needed to serve that new growth and development. 
(d)  The town is required by state statute to provide public educational opportunities for all town school-age pupils and school site planning for new, upgraded, or expanded schools within the town or any regional school district in order to ensure that plans for the construction and opening of public educational facilities are coordinated in time and place with plans for residential development and other necessary services. 
(e)  The town must expand, upgrade, and improve its educational facilities in order to maintain current levels of service if new development is to be accommodated without decreasing current levels of service. This must be done in order to promote and protect the public health, safety, and welfare of current and future citizens. 
(f)  The state, through the enactment of the Rhode Island Comprehensive Planning Act of 1988 and the Zoning Enabling Act of 1991 (RIGL Sec. 45-24-30), has sought to encourage the Town to enact innovative development regulations and techniques. RIGL Title 45 Chapter 45-22.4 specifically enables the town council to adopt impact fee ordinances. 
(g)  The imposition of impact fees is one of the preferred methods of ensuring that development bears a proportionate share of the cost of capital facilities necessary to accommodate such development. This must be done in order to promote and protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(h)  Development of single and multi-family units will place students in the public schools of the regional school district necessitating the acquisition of school sites, the expansion, improvement, or upgrading of existing municipal and educational public facilities, and the construction of new municipal and educational public facilities. 
(i)  The fees established by this article are derived from, based upon, and do not exceed the costs of providing a proportionate share of the cost of public facilities capital improvements and for such municipal and/or educational facilities upgrades and improvements necessitated by new land developments for which the fees are levied. Such costs are established by the latest available costs of capital improvements for the Town of Exeter and/or the Exeter-West Greenwich regional school district. 
(j)  The report entitled "Town of Exeter, Rhode Island Phase II Growth Management-Needs Assessment for Impact Fee Schedule and Ordinance," dated September 9, 2002, sets forth a reasonable base methodology and analysis for the determination of the impact of new development on the need for and costs of additional school sites, improvements, updates, and educational facilities in the town or the school district. Said report shall be deemed amended annually as necessary to reflect current calculations and formulas as may be set forth in any new and/or revised regulations, standards and/or specifications, and/or by the latest enrollment percentages, budgetary information, capital cost allocations, and construction projects identified by the school district and/or the Town of Exeter on an annual basis. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02(2), § 2; Ord. of 6-2-08; Amend. of 8-7-17(1)) 
Sec. 14-233. - Intent. 
(a)  The fees established by this article are consistent with and are intended to assist in the implementation of the town comprehensive plan. 
(b)  The purpose of this article is to regulate the use and development of land so as to assure that new development bears a proportionate share of the cost of capital expenditures and improvements necessary to provide public educational, and other public sites and facilities, as mandated by the state. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02(2), § 3; Amend. of 8-7-17(1)) 
Sec. 14-234. - Definitions. 
    As used in this section, the following words have the meanings stated in this section: 
    Capital improvement means improvements with a useful life of ten years or more, which increases or improves the service capacity of a public facility; 
    Capital improvement program means that component of the town's budget or the regional school district's master plan that sets out the need for public facility capital improvements, including those for educational facilities, the costs of the improvements, and proposed funding sources. A capital improvement program must cover at least a five-year period and should be reviewed at least every five years; 
    Developer means a person or legal entity undertaking development, including any one person commencing a subdivision or land development project which may reasonably be expected to place students in the public schools, place commensurate burdens on the town's educational facilities and which requires the issuance of a building permit for one or more residential buildings; 
    Impact fee means the charge imposed upon new development by the town to fund all or a portion of the public facility's capital improvements affected by the new development from which it is collected; 
    Proportionate share means that portion of the cost of system improvements which reasonably relates to the service demands and needs of the project; and 
    Public facilities means: 
(1)  Roads, streets, and bridges, including rights-of-way, traffic signals, landscaping, and local components of state and federal highways; 
(2)  Stormwater collection, retention, detention, treatment, and disposal facilities, flood control facilities, bank and shore projections, and enhancement improvements; 
(3)  Parks, open space areas, and recreation facilities; 
(4)  Police, emergency medical, rescue, and fire protection facilities; 
(5)  Public schools, including those capital projects undertaken by the town or regional school district to accommodate existing and future town school-age pupils. Such facilities may be located within the town or within any regional school district area; and 
(6)  Other public facilities consistent with a community's capital improvement program. 
    Capital costs of educational facilities means expenditures for the acquisition of fixed assets, improvements, upgrades, or additions to fixed assets and expenditures for site acquisition, construction, improvement, upgrading, design, site development, necessary off-site improvements, and capital equipment pertaining to such facilities; 
    Subdivision or land development projects which may reasonably be expected to place students in the public schools means any construction or installation of new residential buildings, improvements, or structures that may reasonably be expected to result in the enrollment of new or added students in the public schools; 
    Independent fee calculation study means the demographic and/or educational impact documentation prepared by a fee payer to allow the determination of the impact fee other than by the method established by this article; 
    Construction, construct, and constructing include any valuable additional upgrade to property, and any amelioration in its condition amounting to more than a temporary repair or maintenance which is intended to enhance its utility or to adapt it for new or expanded purposes. The term also includes the erection or upgrading of buildings, structures or appurtenances such as sidewalks, sewers, utilities, etc. "Construction" includes not only the erecting of new facilities but also upgrades intended to extend the useful life of an existing asset or to improve its capacity, usefulness, performance or safety beyond that of the existing asset. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02(2), § 4; Amend. of 8-7-17(1)) 
Sec. 14-235. - Imposition of capital facilities impact fee. 
(a)  Any person applying after the effective date of this article, for a residential building permit which includes a new dwelling unit is hereby required to pay a public facilities impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this article. 
(b)  The requirement of funds for provision of school or municipal facilities shall be based upon needs as established by the capital improvement program or regional master plan for municipal or educational facilities as deemed amended by annual reports and public data and shall be consistent with the policies stated therein. The building official is charged with the administration of this section. The fee amount shall be based upon the following: 
(1)  A fee schedule for municipal and/or educational facilities, per residential dwelling unit, shall be determined and posted by the town council annually for the fiscal year. The established fee schedule for school public facilities and/or municipal public facilities shall be based on information provided by the regional school district in regards to the current school district capital improvement program and other related standards and practices necessary for updating the calculation formulas found in the town's Phase II Growth Management-Needs Assessment for impact fee schedule and ordinance, as amended, and/or any municipal capital improvements plan or budget that may be adopted by the town. 
(2)  The fee payer is required to pay the fee as established annually by the town council. If a fee payer disputes the impact fee determined as described herein, then the fee payer may appeal the decision of the building official to the zoning board of review in accordance with section 24 of the zoning ordinance and may submit an independent fee calculation study for the land development activity for which a building permit is sought. As to education capital improvements, the student generation and/or educational impact documentation submitted shall show the basis upon which the independent fee calculation was made. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02(2), § 5; Ord. of 6-2-08; Amend. of 8-7-17(1)) 
Sec. 14-236. - Calculation of the impact fee. 
    The calculation of funds required for provision of public facilities shall be based upon needs as may be established by the annual budget and capital improvement projects identified by the Town of Exeter and/or the Exeter-West Greenwich Regional School District and shall be consistent with the policies stated therein. The fees shall be based upon the following: 
(1)  The capital facilities impact fee for all educational public facilities shall be based on the square foot allocation per student based on Rhode Island construction standards (131), multiplied by construction cost estimates to establish a total cost per student. The state reimbursement percentage shall be deducted, yielding a local cost per student. The per student cost is multiplied by the students per dwelling factor, yielding the final fee, the school construction cost per dwelling unit. The impact fee shall be deemed to be recalculated on May 1 of each year, based on updated figures, costs and percentages provided by the school district annually or, as otherwise available and shall take effect on July 1 of each year. 
(2)  The impact fee for all municipal facility capital improvements may be applied by the town council annually as part of the town's adopted municipal capital improvements program and the capital improvement projects and costs identified in the annual town budget. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02(2), § 6; Amend. of 8-7-17(1)) 
Sec. 14-237. - Payment of fee. 
    The fee payer shall be assessed the capital facilities impact fee required by this article upon application for a building permit, to the building official and shall be collected in full prior to the issuance of building permit. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02(2), § 7; Amend. of 8-7-17(1)) 
Sec. 14-238. - Capital facilities impact fee trust fund established. 
(a)  There is hereby established a separate capital facilities impact fee trust fund to be administered by the town treasurer. All funds collected shall be properly identified and promptly deposited in a special proprietary fund, which shall be invested in government insured or government backed instruments only with all interest accruing to the trust fund and used solely for the purposes specified in this article. 
(b)  Within eight years of the date of collection, impact fees shall be expended or encumbered for the construction of public facilities capital improvements of reasonable benefit to the development paying the fees and that are consistent with the capital improvement program. The improvement, construction, upgrading, expansion, or renovation of new school or other municipal public facilities anywhere in the town or in any regional school district shall be deemed to be such reasonable benefit. 
(c)  Where the expenditure or encumbrance of fees is not feasible within eight years, the town may retain impact fees for a longer period of time if there are compelling reasons for the longer period. In no case shall impact fees be retained longer than 12 years. 
(d)  Funds withdrawn from this account must be used in accordance with the provisions of section 14-239 of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02(2), § 8; Amend. of 8-7-17(1)) 
Sec. 14-239. - Use of funds. 
(a)  Funds collected from capital facilities impact fees and deposited in the capital facilities impact fee trust fund by the town treasurer are for the purpose of improving and/or upgrading and constructing educational facilities for the town or for any other qualified municipal public facilities. Such funds shall be spent solely to acquire, construct, upgrade, expand, and equip the educational or municipal sites and educational or municipal capital facilities necessitated proportionally by new development. 
(b)  Whenever the funds retained in the capital improvement trust fund are used for public facilities, improvements, or upgrades in the Exeter-West Greenwich Regional School District, the Town of Exeter will specify in writing to the school district the intended dedication of the funds to specific capital improvements pursuant to the terms of this article. 
(c)  Funds may be used to make refunds required by section 14-241 of this article. 
(d)  Any and all expenditures from the capital improvement trust fund shall be allocated by the town council and approved by the voters at the corresponding financial town meeting. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02(2), § 9; Ord. of 6-2-08; Amend. of 8-7-17(1)) 
Sec. 14-240. - Vested rights. 
    In accordance with the zoning ordinance, any application for a building permit that has been submitted and has been deemed complete prior to September 9, 2002, shall have vested rights to proceed with the application and receive a building permit or CO without requiring the payment of an impact fee. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02(2), § 10; Ord. of 6-2-08) 
Sec. 14-241. - Refund of fees paid. 
(a)  Any funds not expended or encumbered by the end of the calendar quarter immediately following eight years, or 12 years if section 14-238(c) of this article applies, from the date the capital facilities impact fee was paid, shall be refunded to the current owner of record for the assessor's plat and lot for which the fee was paid upon the current owner's written request if in accordance with the terms of this article. The refund shall include interest on the original fee amount, equal only to the actual interest that the town treasurer may have accrued through an investment account or similar interest bearing account. 
(b)  The town shall notify the current owner of record by certified letter, return receipt requested, that a refund of impact fees are due for the reasons provided in section 14-241(a). The current owner of record may respond and submit an application for a refund to the building official within one year from the date of receipt of the town's notice. Failure to respond within the specified time period shall be deemed a waiver of such refund and any funds so unclaimed may be transferred unencumbered to the general fund and used for any public programs. 
(c)  If the town council were to act to terminate any or all impact fee requirements, all unexpended or unencumbered funds shall be refunded as provided above. Upon the finding that any or all fee requirements are to be terminated, the town shall place a notice of termination and availability of refunds in a newspaper of general circulation within the town at least two times. All funds available for refund shall be retained for a period of one year. At the end of one year, any remaining funds may be transferred to the general fund and used for any public purpose. The town is released from this notice requirement if there are no unexpended or unencumbered balances within a fund or funds being terminated. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02(2), § 11; Ord. of 6-2-08; Amend. of 8-7-17(1)) 
Sec. 14-242. - Exemptions. 
    The following shall be exempted from payment of the impact fee. Any claim of exemption must be made no later than the time of application for a building permit. Any claim not so made shall be deemed waived. 
(1)  Impact fees shall not be imposed against any developer or landowner for remodeling, rehabilitation, or other improvements to an existing structure where the use and number of residential units are not intensified or changed. 
(2)  Impact fees shall not be imposed for the construction of accessory buildings or structures which will not add a dwelling unit. 
(3)  Impact fees shall not be imposed for rebuilding a damaged structure, including the replacement of a destroyed or partially destroyed building or structure with a new building or structure of the same size, number of residential units and use. 
(4)  Impact fees shall not be imposed on nonresidential buildings and structures. 
(5)  Any developments that are exempt pursuant to section 14-208 of this Code are also exempt from impact fees. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02(2), § 12; Ord. of 6-2-08; Amend. of 8-7-17(1)) 
Sec. 14-243. - Effective date. 
    This article shall take effect upon passage and all prior ordinances inconsistent herewith shall be deemed repealed. 
(Ord. of 6-2-08; Amend. of 8-7-17(1)) 
Chapter 18 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Amusements and entertainment, ch. 6; private haulers license for solid waste, § 34-101 et seq.; collectors and haulers of recycling, § 34-261 et seq.; taxation, ch. 42; nonissuance and nonrenewal of licenses or permits to applicants or licensees in arrears in taxes, liens and assessments, § 42-1; commercial vehicles, § 46-186 et seq.; home occupations, app. A, § 4.2; signs in business and industrial district, app. A, § 6.6; signs in shopping centers, app. A, § 6.8. 
State Law reference- Businesses and professions, G.L. 1956, Title 5. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1-18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SECONDHAND GOODS DEALERS, JUNKYARDS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Secondhand goods dealers, G.L. 1956, §§ 5-21-1-5-21-8; junkyards, G.L. 1956, §§ 24-14-1-24-14-12; automobile salvage yards, G.L. 1956, §§ 42-14.2-1-42-14.2-21. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Automobile junkyard means a place where one or more unserviceable, discarded, wornout or junked automobiles, or bodies, engines, tires, parts or accessories thereof are gathered together. 
(Ord. of 11-4-68, § 2) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 18-32-18-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 18-51. - Required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of purchasing, selling, bartering or dealing in junk, old metals or any secondhand articles, whether as the keeper of a shop or storehouse for the reception of such articles, or as the holder of such articles on any premises, as a gatherer of such articles in any bag, wagon, cart, motor vehicle or as foundryman or other person receiving such articles for the purpose of melting such articles into casting, unless such person shall be licensed by the town council. 
(Ord. of 4-2-62, § 1) 
Sec. 18-52. - Application; contents. 
    Every applicant shall set forth in the application the name and address of the applicant and the address at which he proposes to conduct the business, as well as the assessor's plat, block and lot number, telephone number, type of license and other information relative to such business. 
(Ord. of 4-2-62, § 2) 
Sec. 18-53. - Public hearing; notice. 
    The town council shall issue such license only after a public hearing. Notice of such hearing shall be posted at least seven days, but not more than 14 days prior to the hearing in not less than two public places in the town and by publication in a newspaper of general circulation of the town at least five days before such hearing. 
(Ord. of 4-2-62, §§ 3, 5) 
Sec. 18-54. - Filing of objections to granting. 
    No license shall be granted under this article when the owners or occupants of the greater part of the land within 200 feet of such building or place shall file with the town council on or before the date of such hearing their objection to the granting of such license. 
(Ord. of 4-2-62, § 5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 5-21-2(b). 
Sec. 18-55. - Conditions for granting. 
    The town council may require as a condition of the issuance or continuation of any license that the applicant or holder of a license comply with rules and specifications as to the manner of conducting such business as determined by the town council in accordance with G.L. 1956, § 5-21-4 for the welfare of the town. 
(Ord. of 4-2-62, § 4) 
Sec. 18-56. - Fees. 
    The annual fee for such license shall be $100.00 for the keeper of a shop or storehouse for any junk, old metals or secondhand articles including an automobile junkyard. All licenses shall expire on December 1 next succeeding the date of such license. 
(Ord. of 4-2-62, § 6) 
Sec. 18-57. - Display; hours of operation; number to be granted. 
(a)  All licenses granted shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within such shop or storehouse, and no keeper of such shop or storehouse shall do any business therein except during the hours provided for in his license. 
(b)  The number of automobile junkyard licenses to be granted by the town shall be limited to five licenses. 
(Ord. of 4-2-62, § 7; Ord. of 11-4-68, §§ 1, 2) 
Secs. 18-58-18-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - KENNELS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 10. 
State Law reference- Animal care, G.L. 1956, § 4-19-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 18-91-18-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- State license, G.L. 1956, § 19-1-6. 

Sec. 18-111. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- An amendment of April 6, 2009, repealed the former section 18-111 in its entirety, which pertained to qualifications of prospective licenses, and derived from an ordinance of August 3, 1970, § 1. 
Sec. 18-112. - Application for kennel license. 
    Every owner or keeper of four or more dogs shall file, with the town clerk, an application for the issuance of a kennel license. Such application shall be filed at least two weeks prior to the date of a regularly scheduled town council meeting. 
(Ord. of 8-3-70, § 2; Amd. of 4-6-09) 
Editor's note- An amendment of April 6, 2009, changed the title of section 18-112 from "Application for initial license" to "Application for kennel license." The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
Sec. 18-113. - Classes. 
(a)  Class 1 license. The issuance of a class 1 license will permit the licensee to own, keep train and/or board over ten dogs in a fully enclosed/indoor structure. 
(b)  Class 2 license. The issuance of a class 2 license will permit the licensees to own, keep, train and/or board four to ten dogs, but not more than ten dogs. 
(Ord. of 8-3-70, § 3; Amd. of 4-6-09) 
Sec. 18-114. - Fees. 
    The applicant for the initial or renewal issuance of a kennel license shall pay to the town clerk, upon filing his application, a license fee of $100.00 for a class 1 license and a license fee of $25.00 for a class 2 license. Each applicant upon filing for the initial or renewal issuance of a kennel license shall also pay the fee in this section to defray the costs of collection by the town clerk. All such fees shall be paid over to the town treasurer. If after the public hearing or inspection, the application for the initial issuance of a kennel license shall be denied, the license fees specified in this section shall be refunded to the applicant. 
    Every applicant shall register all dogs housed at the kennel with the town clerk, who will issue dog licenses for each dog registered. The town clerk shall also collect a $1.00 surcharge on each dog license issued at each kennel. The revenue generated by this surcharge shall be deposited in a spay-neuter account established by the town clerk and town treasurer to fund low-cost spay/neuter programs. Any remaining revenue collected pursuant to town ordinance and state law unused during any calendar year shall remain in said spay/neuter account for use during the following year. The $1.00 surcharge shall apply to adult dogs housed at each kennel, and does not apply to puppies. 
(Ord. of 8-3-70, § 3; Ord. of 10-2-06; Amd. of 4-6-09) 
Sec. 18-115. - Application; contents. 
    Application for a kennel license shall indicate the names of the owners or keepers, the proposed location of such kennel, and the name and address of the owner of the land where the kennel is to be located, including plat, block and lot. The applicant shall indicate which class of license is being applied for and shall furnish the names and addresses of all persons owning real property within 300 feet of the lot or parcel of land where the kennel is to be located. 
(Ord. of 8-3-70, § 4) 
Sec. 18-116. - Notice of hearing. 
(a)  Upon receipt of application for a kennel license, the town clerk shall cause notice of such application to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the town at least once during the week prior to the week in which the hearing will be held. Such notice shall state the name and address of the applicant and the class of license requested. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and that all persons are entitled to be heard before the granting of such license. 
(b)  In addition, notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail to all persons owning real property within 300 feet of the lot or parcel of land for a class 2 and 1,000 feet for a class 1 which is the subject of the license application. 
(Ord. of 8-3-70, § 5; Amd. of 4-6-09) 
Sec. 18-117. - Hearing. 
    Hearings on applications for the initial issuance of kennel licenses shall be held at regularly scheduled town council meetings, unless otherwise ordered by the town council. At such hearing, all persons for or against the granting of such license shall be heard. All hearings shall be opened to the public. The town council shall render a decision and grant or deny such license within ten days after the date of the hearing. 
(Ord. of 8-3-70, § 6) 
Sec. 18-118. - Inspection of kennel site. 
    The town council or its designee reserves the right to inspect the site. 
(Ord. of 8-3-70, § 7; Amd. of 4-6-09) 
Sec. 18-119. - Expiration. 
    A kennel license shall be valid for a period not exceeding one year, and all kennel licenses shall expire on April 1. 
(Ord. of 8-3-70, § 9) 
Sec. 18-120. - Revocation. 
    A kennel license may be revoked by the town council after a public hearing. Notice of such hearing shall be given by mailing the notice by certified or registered mail to the licensee at the address shown upon the license. Such notice shall be mailed at least ten days before the date set for the hearing. Causes for revocation shall be unhealthy operation of the kennel, creation of a nuisance to the neighborhood, mistreatment of dogs or other improper operation. 
(Ord. of 8-3-70, § 10A) 
Sec. 18-121. - Renewal. 
    Licenses shall be automatically renewed annually, provided that: 
(1)  The annual license fee has been paid on or before March 31; and 
(2)  The town animal control officer has certified that the kennel has been properly operated during the preceding year. If the fee has not been so paid or no such certification has been made, then the license shall not be renewed, and any application made shall be treated as a new application. 
(Ord. of 8-3-70, § 11) 
Secs. 18-122-18-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TAVERNS, COOKSHOPS, VICTUALING HOUSES[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Taverns, cookshops, etc., G.L. 1956, § 5-24-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-141. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Every person who shall open or keep open any tavern, victualing house or cookshop, without a license first had and obtained from the town council, or in any place other than that specified in such license, shall be fined as provided in section 1-15. 
(Ord. No. 1971-1, § 5, 9-1-71) 
Secs. 18-142-18-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 18-161. - Required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of operating a tavern, victualing house or cookshop within the town unless a license therefor shall be granted by the town council. 
(Ord. No. 1971-1, § 1, 9-1-71) 
Sec. 18-162. - Application; contents. 
    Applications for such licenses shall be made to the town council, shall specify the name and address of the applicant, specify the type of business to be conducted by the applicant, describe the location of the business premises within the town and be accompanied by a statement from the state department of public health that the applicant and the business premises comply with all state health department regulations and requirements for such business. 
(Ord. No. 1971-1, § 2, 9-1-71) 
Sec. 18-163. - Fees. 
    The fee for such license, payable to the town in advance of the issuance of such license, shall be $25.00. 
(Ord. No. 1971-1, § 3, 9-1-71) 
Sec. 18-164. - Contents; duration. 
    Each license shall specify the person licensed, the business licensed and the premises where the business shall be pursued, and shall continue in force until December 1 subsequent to its issuance, unless sooner revoked for cause by the town council. 
(Ord. No. 1971-1, § 4, 9-1-71) 
Secs. 18-165-18-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FIREARMS DEALERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 18-181-18-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 18-201. - Authority. 
    This division is enacted pursuant to the provisions of G.L. 1956, § 11-47-39 which provides for firearms dealers' licenses to be issued by cities and towns of this state. 
(Ord. of 3-2-98(2)) 
Sec. 18-202. - Required. 
    No person who is not licensed under the provisions of this division shall engage in the business of buying or selling firearms within the town. The term "persons" as used in this section shall mean any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, business or other entity. 
(Ord. of 3-2-98(2)) 
Sec. 18-203. - Application. 
    Any person applying for a license under this division shall file a written application for the same with the town council. Such applications shall be in a form prescribed by the town clerk and shall include the name of the person applying, a statement as to whether the person applying has ever been arrested or convicted at any time, including misdemeanor and felony arrests and convictions. Any such arrest and conviction shall be listed giving full details of the same. Such application shall include the age of the applicant, the applicant's residence addresses for the previous five years, the applicant's social security number, and in case of a corporation, the application shall include the name of all shareholders of the corporation, all directors and all officers. The application shall be subscribed and sworn to under oath. Cost for advertising shall be born by the applicant and paid in advance to the town clerk. 
(Ord. of 3-2-98(2)) 
Sec. 18-204. - Action upon application. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application under this division, the town clerk shall refer the same to the town sergeant who shall make a full investigation of the applicant and shall file a report with the town council with the recommendation of the town sergeant as to whether the application should be granted or denied. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the application with the report of the town sergeant, the town council shall cause the same to be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation in the town once a week for three successive weeks prior to the hearing on the license. 
(c)  The town council shall hold a public hearing on the issuance of the license at a time and place to be designated by the council, at which hearing all persons wishing to be heard for or against the issuance of such license shall be given opportunity to by heard. 
(Ord. of 3-2-98(2)) 
Sec. 18-205. - Fees. 
    The application for a license under this division shall be accompanied by an application fee of $75.00, and estimated cost for advertising as may be determined by the town clerk. The renewal license fee, as prescribed by G. L. 1956, § 11-47-39, shall be $5.00. 
(Ord. of 3-2-98(2)) 
Sec. 18-206. - Federal and state licenses required. 
    No license shall be issued under this division to any person who does not have requisite federal and state license for dealers in firearms. 
(Ord. of 3-2-98(2)) 
Sec. 18-207. - Applicability of state and federal law. 
    Any license issued under this division shall be subject to all applicable provisions of federal and state law. 
(Ord. of 3-2-98(2)) 
Sec. 18-208. - Conditions. 
    Any license issued under this division shall, in addition to other applicable provisions of law, be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The business shall be carried on only in the building designated in the license. 
(2)  The license or copy thereof, certified by the issuing authority, shall be displayed on the premises where it can easily be read. 
(3)  No pistol or revolver shall be sold in violation of any provisions of G.L. 1956, ch. 11-47, nor shall a pistol or revolver be sold under any circumstances unless the purchaser is personally known to the seller or the purchaser presents clear evidence of his identity. 
(Ord. of 3-2-98(2)) 
Sec. 18-209. - Expiration. 
    Any license issued under this division shall expire on December 31 of each year. 
(Ord. of 3-2-98(2)) 
Sec. 18-210. - Renewal. 
    Any license issued under this division shall be annually renewable upon payment of an annual renewal fee of $5.00 and certification of compliance by the licenseholder with all the terms and conditions of the license. In addition, such annual renewal of such license shall be subject to nonissuance and nonrenewal of licenses or permits to applicants or licensees in arrears in taxes, liens and assessments and the terms outlined in section 42-1. 
(Ord. of 3-2-98(2)) 
Sec. 18-211. - Existing licenses. 
    All licenses previously issued by the town pursuant to the provisions of G.L. 1956, ch. 11-47 shall continue in effect subject to terms of this division and shall be renewed annually by the holder pursuant to the terms of this division. 
(Ord. of 3-2-98(2)) 
Sec. 18-212. - Suspension; revocation. 
    Any license issued under this division may be suspended or revoked by the town council at any time, for reasonable cause shown after giving the licenseholder an opportunity to be heard at a public hearing to be scheduled by the town council. 
(Ord. of 3-2-98(2)) 
Secs. 18-213-18-257. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - HAWKERS, PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance amendment adopted Feb. 6, 2012, supplied provisions to be added to this Code as §§ 18-58-18-74. In order to maintain the established numbering system of this Code, at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have redesignated as §§ 18-258-18-274, to read as set out herein. 
Cross reference- Fees, ch. 93, art. I. 
State Law reference- Hawkers and peddlers, G.L. § 5-11-1.1 et seq.; door-to-door sales , G.L. § 6-28-1 et seq.; solicitations by charitable organizations, G.L. § 5-53.1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 18-258. - Definitions and covered entities 
    Charitable includes the words "patriotic," "philanthropic," "social service," "welfare," "benevolent," "educational," "civic" or "fraternal," either actual or purported. 
    Hawker means any person selling or offering for sale any goods, wares, or merchandise, including any food or beverage, on any public street, highway, or public right-of-way in the state from a stationary location; lunch carts, mobile canteens and other similar vehicles. 
    Peddler means any person selling or offering for sale any goods, wares, or merchandise, including any food or beverage, from a vehicle, cart, or any other conveyance which is not stationary, including but not limited to lunch carts, mobile canteens and other similar vehicles. 
    Solicit and solicitation mean a request, either directly or indirectly, "door to door" or by other methods for money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value, any plea or representation that such money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value will be used for charitable or religious or commercial purposes. Such words shall also mean and include the following methods of securing money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value: 
(1)  Any oral or written request; 
(2)  The sale of, or offer, or attempt to sell any advertising space, book, card, chance, coupon device, magazine, membership, merchandise, subscription, ticket or other thing in connection with which any appeal is made for any charitable or religious purpose, or where the names of any charitable or religious person is used or referred to in such appeal as an inducement or reason for the making of any such sale, or when or where in connection with any such sale any statement is made that the whole or any part of the proceeds of such sale will go or be donated to any charitable or religious purpose. A solicitation shall be deemed completed when made, whether or not the person making the same receives any contribution or makes any sale. 
    Solicitor means any person or persons who intend to solicit or conduct solicitations. 
    Transient merchant means any person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, agent, assignee, or employee, whether a resident of the town or not, and whether located in one place or traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck or any type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house, from street to street, who is taking or attempting to take orders for, or offering for sale, goods, wares, merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries, or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale, or whether or not collecting advance payment on such sales. The definition shall include solicitor. 
(Amend. of 2-6-12, § 18-58) 
Sec. 18-259. - License required. 
(a)  No person shall sell or offer for sale any goods, wares, merchandise, ice cream, fruits, hotdogs, hamburgers, vegetables or other articles or substances on any street in the town from vehicles, carts or baskets or as a hawker and peddler without first having obtained a license from the town council. 
(b)  No "hawker" or "peddler" shall sell or offer for sale any single good, ware or item having a retail value of more than $300.00. However, this dollar limitation shall not apply to any non-profit corporation duly authorized to do business in Rhode Island. A non-profit corporation means a non-profit corporation which has applied under 42 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3) for approval as a § 501(c)(3) corporation with the Internal Revenue Service, or has been so approved. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any "solicitor" or "transient merchant" to engage in such business or related activity within the town without first having obtained a license from the town council. 
(Amend. of 2-6-12, § 18-59) 
Sec. 18-260. - License fees generally. 
(a)  For licenses issued under this article the person receiving the same shall pay to the town council fees which shall be set from time to time and are on file in the town clerk's office: 
(1)  For selling or offering for sale as a hawker, peddler and/or solicitor, watches, jewelry, gold or silverware or patented medicines; 
(2)  For selling or offering for sale as a hawker, peddler and/or solicitor, ice cream, vegetables, foodstuffs, goods, wares, merchandise, articles or substances other than those set forth in subsection (1) of this section, from vehicles, carts, wagons, handcarts or pushcarts, lunch carts, mobile canteens and other similar vehicles. 
(b)  Charitable solicitation permit required: Exemptions. No person shall solicit contributions for any charitable or religious purpose within the town without having received a hawker's, peddler's and/or solicitor's license pursuant to the terms of this article; provided, however, that the provisions of this article shall not apply to any person organized and operated exclusively for religious or charitable purposes and not operated for the pecuniary profit of any such person, if the solicitations by such established person are conducted among the members thereof by other members or officers thereof voluntarily and without remuneration for making such solicitations, or if the solicitations are in form of collections or contributions at the regular assembly or services of any such person; provided further, however, that no person shall be deemed to be a member if such person is a member solely by reason of having made a contribution thereto. 
(Amend. of 2-6-12, § 18-60) 
Sec. 18-261. - Exemptions from payments of license fees. 
    No fee shall be charged when the licensee has been licensed under sections 5-11-1 to 5-11-3 of the General Laws nor for any license issued to any person selling religious books and publications in behalf of Bible, tract or other religious or moral societies for the purpose of promoting religious or moral improvement, and which are sold for that purpose and not for pecuniary profit; nor to any butcher retailing meats, or to fishermen selling fish or shellfish from vehicles, carts, or otherwise; or to any person selling or peddling any tow cloth, knit stockings, gloves, mitts or other articles of household manufacture, or articles manufactured with his own hands; nor to any milkman, or to any farmer selling the produce of his farm, or selling both the produce of his farm and the produce of other farms. 
(Amend. of 2-6-12, § 18-61) 
Sec. 18-262. - Term and revocation of license. 
(a)  Each license under this article shall remain in force for a period of one year starting April 1 and ending March 31 the following year. Any license granted under this article may be revoked by the town council after notice and hearing, for violating the following: 
(1)  Any fraud or misrepresentation contained in the license application; 
(2)  Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in connection with the business being conducted under the license; 
(3)  Any violation of this article; 
(4)  Conviction of the licensee of any felony, or conviction of licensee of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; 
(5)  Conducting the business licensed in an unlawful manner, or in such a way as to constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the public. 
(6)  No "hawker" or "peddler" shall sell or offer for sale any single good, ware or item having a retail value of more than $300.00). However, this dollar limitation shall not apply to any non-profit corporation duly authorized to do business in Rhode Island. A non-profit corporation means a non-profit corporation which has applied under 42 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3) for approval as a § 501(c)(3) corporation with the Internal Revenue Service, or has been so approved. 
(b)  Notice of hearing for revocation shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the licensee at his or her last known address at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(Amend. of 2-6-12, § 18-62) 
Sec. 18-263. - License to be nontransferable; license to be carried and displayed by licensee. 
(a)  No license under this article shall be transferable, nor shall it authorize a person other than the one to whom it was issued and named therein to act thereunder, provided that a licensee may employ a driver and such driver may operate on the license as long as he or she is registered with the town clerk as a driver for the licensee. Every licensee shall carry with him or her such license while engaged in peddling and produce the same when required by a state police officer, code enforcement officer, town clerk, town sergeant, town constable or member of the town council and failure on his or her part to produce the same forthwith shall be cause for the revocation of such license. A license shall be required for each vehicle, cart or wagon. 
(b)  All persons to whom solicitor's licenses have been issued under this article shall furnish proper credentials to their agents and solicitors. Such credentials shall include the name of the license holder, the date of issuance, a statement describing the holder's charitable or business activity, the signature of the license holder's chief executive officer, the name of the solicitor or agent as to whom such credentials are issued, and the specific period of time during which the solicitor or agent is authorized to solicit or offer to sell on behalf of the license holder. A copy of such credentials shall be filed with the town clerk prior to the conducting of any solicitation within the town. No person shall solicit or sell under any license granted under this article without the credentials required by this section, and a facsimile copy of the permit in his or her possession. 
(Amend. of 2-6-12, § 18-63) 
Sec. 18-264. - Effect of failure to show license. 
    Any person who, after demand by any state police officer, code enforcement officer, town clerk, town sergeant, town constable or member of the town council, shall neglect or refuse to exhibit to him or her his or her license shall be deemed for the purposes of this article to be unlicensed. 
(Amend. of 2-6-12, § 18-64) 
Sec. 18-265. - Penalty for noncompliance. 
    All persons found to be in violation of any section of this article shall be subject to a penalty not exceeding, for any one offense, a fine of $50.00 or imprisonment not exceeding ten days. 
(Amend. of 2-6-12, § 18-65) 
Sec. 18-266. - Revocation or suspension of license. 
    Failure of any licensee, its agents or employees to comply with any provision of this article or to comply with any lawful directive or order of any town officer or person identified in sections 18-263 and 18-264, in addition to the penalty set forth in section 18-265, shall be grounds for the revocation or suspension of the license by the town council after official notification by the council and public hearing thereon, the licensee to be given written notice of the hearing prior thereto. 
(Amend. of 2-6-12, § 18-66) 
Sec. 18-267. - Application procedure. 
(a)  All applicants for licenses required by this article shall file a written, sworn application with the town clerk. Such application shall be signed by the applicant if an individual, or by all partners if a partnership, or by the president if a corporation. Applications should be made, if possible, on forms available in the office of the town clerk. The application shall state: 
(1)  The name, address and date of birth of the applicant; 
(2)  The name and date of birth of the individual having management authority or supervision of the applicant's business during the time that it is proposed to be carried on in the town; the local address of such individual; the permanent address of such individual; the capacity in which such individual will act; 
(3)  The name and address and date of birth of the person, if any, for whose purpose the business will be carried on, and, if a corporation, the state of incorporation; 
(4)  The time period or periods during which it is proposed to carry on applicant's business; 
(5)  The nature, character, and quality of the goods or services to be offered for sale or delivered; if goods, their invoice value and whether they are to be sold by sample as well as from stock; if goods, where and by whom such goods are manufactured or grown, and where such goods are at the time of application; 
(6)  The nature of the advertising proposed to be done for the business; 
(7)  Whether or not the applicant, or any individual identified in this application has been convicted of any crime or misdemeanor; if so, the nature of each offense and the penalty assessed for each offense. 
(b)  All applications for hawker, peddler and/or solicitor licenses shall include, in addition: 
(1)  One current 2" × 2" photograph of the applicant and all those conducting business under the license; 
(2)  A description of any vehicle proposed to be used in the business, including the year, make, model, color and registration number. 
(c)  All applicants for licenses required by this article shall attach to their application the following: 
(1)  Credentials from the person, if any, for which the applicant proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as such representative. 
(2)  Applicants who propose to handle foodstuffs a current certificate from the State of Rhode Island, Department of Health. 
(3)  A copy of a current state sales tax certificate for applicants whose activities require such under Rhode Island General Law Title 44 or provided to the town clerk as may be subject to the town council's approval of such license and prior to conducting of any business within town for which the application is being made. 
(4)  Applicants who intend to conduct business in one location in the town, a letter approving the use of the designated location from the property owner, either public or private, on which the applicant will be conducting business from. 
(d)  In the case of a charitable solicitation applicant: 
(1)  The name, address or headquarters of the person applying for the license. 
(2)  If the applicant is not an individual, the names and addresses of the applicant's principal officers and managers. 
(3)  The purpose for which such solicitation is to be made, and the use or disposition to be made of any receipts therefrom. 
(4)  The names and addresses of the person or persons in charge of conducting the solicitation, and the names and addresses of any persons who will conduct such solicitation, together with a statement as to whether or not any such person has been convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude, and if so, nature of the offense, the date of such conviction and the sentence imposed, if any. 
(5)  The dates upon which the license is requested for use indicating, if applicable, the special event for which application is sought. 
(6)  The length of time for which the right to do business is desired. 
(7)  The place and/or preferred designated area where the goods or property are proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof is manufactured or produced, where such goods or products located at the time the application is filed, and the proposed method of delivery. 
(8)  An outline as to the method to be used in conducting the solicitation. 
(9)  The times when it is anticipated such solicitation will be made, giving the dates for the beginning and ending of such solicitation requested. 
(10)  The most recent copy of the annual report and/or registration form filed with the director of the department of business regulations pursuant to the provisions of G.L. 1956, § 5-53.1-1 et seq. 
(11)  If any representation is to be made in any solicitation that contributions are deductible pursuant to the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as the code has been, or may hereafter be, amended, a copy of the determination letter received by the organization from the Internal Revenue Service indicating that contributions made will be deductible as charitable contributions pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code of 1954. 
(12)  Copy of charter received from state of incorporation, if any, and tax-exempt number. 
(13)  A description of any cart, vehicle or other apparatus proposed for use in conjunction with the sale of goods or service. 
(e)  Upon receipt of an application, the town clerk shall make an investigation of the applicant's business reputation and moral character. 
(f)  The town clerk shall recommend approval of the application unless such investigation discloses tangible evidence that the conduct of the applicant's business would pose a substantial threat to the public health, safety, morals or general welfare. 
(Amend. of 2-6-12, § 18-67) 
Sec. 18-268. - Standards of issuance of license. 
    The following will constitute valid reasons for disapproval of an application by the town council: 
(1)  Applicant has: 
a.  Been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude; 
b.  Made willful misstatements in the application; 
c.  Committed prior violations of ordinances pertaining to itinerant merchants, hawkers, peddlers, solicitors, and/or the like; 
d.  Committed prior fraudulent acts; 
e.  A record of continual breaches of solicited contracts; 
f.  An unsatisfactory moral character. 
g.  Failure to furnish information or approvals required by this article. 
(Amend. of 2-6-12, § 18-68) 
Sec. 18-269. - Operations of hawkers, peddlers and/or solicitors. 
    There shall be no solicitation of motor vehicles while stopped in traffic and at traffic lights by hawkers, peddlers and/or solicitors, and hawkers, peddlers and/or solicitors shall not remain in a fixed location to attract business but shall cause the continual movement of themselves and, if applicable, their vending vehicles in a direction which would cause them to relocate to various locations within the town, except when such vending vehicle or pushcart is stopped to service customers or when located at the authorized location which the applicant will be conducting business from. Stopping to service customers shall be in a manner so as not to impede the normal and reasonable flow of traffic on any highway, walkway, or passageway within the town. Furthermore, no licensee hereunder shall use any device intended to signal or attract customers without first having the same approved by the town council. 
(Amend. of 2-6-12, § 18-69) 
Sec. 18-270. - Prohibited hours of business. 
(a)  Duly licensed hawkers and peddlers shall not pursue their business of hawking and/or peddling except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., local time, in the town. 
(b)  No person shall engage in door-to-door solicitations before the hour of 9:00 a.m. nor after the hour of 7:00 p.m., local time, in the town. 
(Amend. of 2-6-12, § 18-70) 
Sec. 18-271. - Soliciting at residences where "No Solicitation" sign displayed. 
    Any person residing in the town may prominently affix to the entrance of his or her residence a sign containing the legend "No Solicitation." Any person required to be licensed under the provisions of this chapter who shall make or attempt to make any solicitation or sale at a residence so marked shall be deemed to have violated the provisions hereof. 
(Amend. of 2-6-12, § 18-71) 
Sec. 18-272. - Solicitation in shopping centers. 
    There shall be no solicitation by hawkers, peddlers and/or solicitors in parking lots in shopping centers unless they have the written permission of the owners of the shopping centers. 
(Amend. of 2-6-12, § 18-72) 
Sec. 18-273. - Obstruction of traffic prohibited. 
    Hawkers, peddlers and/or solicitors shall not create a traffic hazard or block traffic while providing services on the side of the road. 
(Amend. of 2-6-12, § 18-73) 
Cross reference- Ch. 46, Art. III, Parking, Stopping and Standing. 
Sec. 18-274. - Sanitary disposal units. 
    Hawkers and/or peddlers shall provide their own sanitary disposal units. 
(Amend. of 2-6-12, § 18-74) 
Chapter 22 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 26; natural resources, ch. 30; solid waste, ch. 34; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 38; waterways, ch. 50; zoning, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1-22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NOISE 

Sec. 22-31. - Declaration of town policy. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the town to prohibit unnecessary and excessive noise from all sources subject to its police power. At certain levels, noises are detrimental to the health and the welfare of the citizenry; therefore, in the public interest, such noises shall be systematically proscribed. 
(Ord. of 11-3-93, § 1) 
Sec. 22-32. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ambient noise means the all-encompassing noise associated with a given environment, being a composite of sounds from many sources, near and far. For the purposes of this article, the term "ambient noise level" is the average over 15 minutes, excluding random or intermittent noises and the alleged offensive noise at the location and time of day at which a comparison with an alleged offensive noise is to be made. Averaging may be done by instrumental analysis in accordance with American National Standard S.13-1971, or may be done manually as follows: 
(1)  Observe a sound level meter for five seconds and record the best estimate of central tendency of the indicator needle, and the highest and lowest indications. 
(2)  Repeat the observations as many times as necessary to provide that observations be made at the beginning and at the end of the 15-minute averaging period and that there shall be at least as many additional observations as there are decibels between the lowest low indication and the highest high indication. 
(3)  Calculate the arithmetical average of the observed central tendency indications. 
    Commercial purposes means the use, operation or maintenance of any sound amplifying equipment for the purpose of advertising any business or any goods, or any services, or for the purpose of attracting the attention of the public to, or advertising for, or soliciting patronage or customers to or for any performance, show, entertainment, exhibition or event, or for the purpose of demonstrating such sound equipment. 
    Decibel (dBA) means a unit of measure of sound (noise) level relative to a standard reference sound on a logarithmic scale. The decibel level of a given sound is determined as 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure in micronewtons per square meter of the sound being measured to the standard reference sound pressure of 20 micronewtons per square meter (0.0002 microbar). 
    Emergency work means work necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity or work required to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger or work by private or public utilities when restoring utility service. 
    Motor vehicles means, but is not limited to, automobiles, trucks, buses, motorcycles, minibikes and go-carts. 
    Noncommercial purpose means the use, operation or maintenance of any sound equipment for other than a commercial purpose. The term "noncommercial purpose" shall mean, but shall not be limited to, philanthropic, political, patriotic and charitable purposes. 
    Sound amplifying equipment means any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music, or any other sound. The term "sound amplifying equipment" shall not include standard automobile radios when used and heard only by the occupants of the vehicle in which the automobile radio is installed. Sound amplifying equipment shall not include warning devices on any vehicle used only for traffic safety purposes. 
    Sound level (noise level) in decibels means the level measured on the A-weighted scale as defined in the American National Standard S-1.4-1071. 
    Sound truck means any motor vehicle or any other vehicle, regardless of motive power, whether in motion or stationary, having mounted thereon or attached thereto any sound amplifying equipment. 
    Unnecessary, excessive or offensive noise means any sound or noise conflicting with the criteria, standards or levels set forth in this article for permissible noises. In the absence of specific maximum noise levels, a noise level which exceeds the ambient noise level by ten dBA or more, when measured at the nearest property line or, in the case of multiple-family residential buildings, when measured anywhere in one dwelling unit with respect to a noise emanating from another dwelling unit or from common space in the same building, shall be deemed a prima facie violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-3-93, § 2) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-33. - Radios, television sets and similar devices. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within any residential zone of the town to use or operate any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, television set or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of neighborhood residents or of any reasonable person of normal sensitivity residing in the area. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device so as to exceed 50 dBA between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or so as to exceed 55 dBA between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., measured at the property line of the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(Ord. of 11-3-93, § 3) 
Sec. 22-34. - Hawkers and peddlers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the town to sell anything by outcry within any area of the town zoned for residential uses. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the selling by outcry of merchandise, food, beverages at licensed sporting events, parades, fairs, circuses or other similar licensed public entertainment events. 
(Ord. of 11-3-93, § 4) 
Sec. 22-35. - Drums. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use any drum, or other instrument or device of any kind, for the purpose of attracting attention by the creation of noise within the town. This section shall not apply to any person who is a participant in a school band or duly licensed to parade, or who has been otherwise duly authorized to engage in such conduct. 
(Ord. of 11-3-93, § 5) 
Sec. 22-36. - Schools, hospitals and churches. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to create any unnecessary, excessive or offensive noise on any street, sidewalk or public place adjacent to any school, institution of learning, hospital or church while the same is in use, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed in such street, sidewalk or public places indicating the presence of a school, hospital or church. 
(Ord. of 11-3-93, § 6) 
Sec. 22-37. - Machinery, equipment, fans and air conditioning. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any machinery, equipment, pump, fan and air conditioning apparatus, or similar mechanical device, in any residential area so as to exceed 50 dBA between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or so as to exceed 55 dBA between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
(Ord. of 11-3-93, § 7) 
Sec. 22-38. - Construction of buildings and projects. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate equipment or perform any outside construction or repair work on buildings, structures or projects or to operate any piledriver, power shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, power hoist or any other device used in removal of gravel or blasting of rock or ledge construction type device between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. so as to create that unnecessary, excessive or offensive noise. Emergency work shall be exempted from the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. of 11-3-93, § 8) 
Sec. 22-39. - Vehicle repairs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within any residential area of the town to test any motor vehicle between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time of the day on a Sunday or legal holiday so as to create unnecessary, excessive or offensive noise. 
(Ord. of 11-3-93, § 9) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 46. 
Sec. 22-40. - Public nuisance declared; injunctions. 
    The operation or maintenance of any device, instrument, vehicle or machinery in violation of any provision of this article, which operation or maintenance causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitivity or endangers the comfort, repose, health or peace of residents in the area, shall be deemed, and is declared to be, a public nuisance and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 11-3-93, § 11) 
Sec. 22-41. - General noise regulations. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, and in addition thereto, it shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make or continue, or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary, excessive or offensive noise. 
(Ord. of 11-3-93, § 12) 
Sec. 22-42. - Complaints. 
    Any person may be a complainant for the purpose of instituting action for any violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-3-93, § 13) 
ARTICLE III. - OUTDOOR HYDRONIC HEATERS 

Sec. 22-43. - Purpose. 
    The town council recognizes and finds that although outdoor hydronic heaters or outdoor wood boilers (hereafter collectively referred to as "OHHs") may represent an economical alternative to conventional heating systems, such systems should not be located or used in such a manner as to compromise the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the town resulting from harmful emissions, offensive odors, smoke, soot, fumes, ash or other conditions that may otherwise constitute a nuisance from the use and operation of outdoor furnaces. 
    This article seeks to regulate the location, use, construction and operation of outdoor furnaces for these purposes. 
(Ord. of 3-2-09) 
Sec. 22-44. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply to this article: 
    Allowable fuels mean: 
1.  Clean wood; 
2.  Wood pellets made from clean wood; 
3.  Manufacturer approved fuels, provided that no fuel shall be in conflict with prohibited fuels as defined herein; 
4.  Home heating oil in compliance with the applicable sulfur content limit or natural gas may be used as starter fuels for dual-fired outdoor hydronic heaters. 
    Clean wood means wood that has no paint, stains, or other types of coatings, and wood that has not been treated with, including but not limited to, copper chromium arsenate, creosote, or pentachlorophenol. 
    Existing unit or existing OHH means an outdoor hydronic heater that is sold, installed and/or operated at the intended location of use prior to the effective date of this article. A new unit or new OHH is an OHH that is not an existing OHH. 
    Outdoor hydronic heater or outdoor wood boiler (OHH) means a fuel burning device designed to (1) burn wood or other approved fuels; (2) that the manufacturer specifies for outdoor installation or installation in structures not normally occupied by humans (e.g., garages); and (3) heats building space and/or water via the distribution, typically through pipes, of a fluid heated in the device, typically water or a water/antifreeze mixture. This includes without limitation any structure, equipment, device, or apparatus, or any part thereof, which is installed, affixed, constructed or located outdoors for the primary purpose of combustion of solid fuel, including but not limited to wood, to produce heat or energy used as a component of a heating system. 
    Prohibited fuels mean: 
1.  Any wood that does not meet the definition of clean wood; 
2.  Garbage; 
3.  Tires; 
4.  Lawn clippings, leaves, brush trimmings, or general yard waste; 
5.  Materials containing plastic; 
6.  Materials containing rubber; 
7.  Waste petroleum products; 
8.  Paints and paint thinners; 
9.  Chemicals; 
10.  Coal; 
11.  Glossy or colored papers; 
12.  Construction and demolition debris; 
13.  Plywood; 
14.  Particleboard; 
15.  Salt water driftwood; 
16.  Manure; 
17.  Animal carcasses; 
18.  Asphalt products; 
19.  Any material prohibited for combustion by state or federal law or regulation; and 
20.  Lighter fluids, gasoline or chemicals to start the flames are prohibited. 
    Untreated lumber means dry wood that has been milled and dried but that has not been treated or combined with any petroleum product, chemical, preservative, glue, adhesive, stain, paint or other substance. 
(Ord. of 3-2-09) 
Sec. 22-45. - Requirement of permit-Initial permit. 
(a)  No person shall construct, install, use, operate, or permit to be operated on their property an OHH without first having obtained a permit from the zoning inspector. Installation of all new units requires an initial application for permit following the effective date of this article. Said application shall include a map showing the site of the unit on the property. All units, new or used shall carry a tag that identifies that the OHH complies with the EPA Phase II Emission Standard, or higher as defined by the EPA and here, and as here incorporated by reference. 
(b)  An application fee shall apply, based on the percentage of cost of the OHH, for the initial application for new units, which shall include inspection for compliance with this article and shall include an inspection for compliance with all applicable plumbing, electrical, fire and other laws as deemed necessary by the zoning inspector. 
(Ord. of 3-2-09) 
Sec. 22-46. - Restrictions on location, operation and use. 
(a)  Location. 
(1)  OHHs which conform in all respects to the requirements of this article may be permitted in all zones, however a special use permit may also be required for location of an OHH on a lot of less than two acres only upon passage of consistent zoning amendments imposing such a requirement. 
(2)  Setbacks. OHHs shall be no closer than: 
a.  One hundred feet from any lot line. 
b.  Thirty feet from any dwelling unit, including but not limited to the structure that it services, or such number as shall be advised by the manufacturer. 
(3)  The OHH must be located in the back yard (as defined by the town zoning ordinance), behind the structure to be serviced, or as close thereto as possible, in the event of unusual configuration, in the discretion of the zoning inspector, and in no event in the front yard. 
(b)  Use and operation. 
(1)  Fuels. No person that operates an OHH shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the use of a fuel other than allowable fuels as here defined. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the burning of any prohibited fuel as here defined. 
(2)  Manufacturers standards. OHHs shall, as a minimum standard, be operated in compliance with the operating manual and standards of the manufacturer of the unit, including, but not limited to, the manufacturer recommended loading times and amounts. 
(3)  Stack height. The stack or chimney extending from an OHH shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications. 
(c)  Particulate emission standards for new units. 
(1)  All new units, as defined in this article, shall comply, as of the effective date of this article, with the EPA Phase II Emission standard, as defined by the EPA and here, and as here incorporated by reference. 
(2)  Emission standard. No person shall purchase, operate, install or allow for installation an OHH for use in the town unless it has been certified to meet a particulate matter emission limit of 0.32 lb/MMBtu heat output and satisfies the 2010 USEPA standard for same (the commonly-called Phase II Emission standard). 
(Ord. of 3-2-09) 
Sec. 22-47. - Existing units. 
(a)  Existing OHH. All provisions of this article shall immediately become effective as to existing units in use and operation before March 3, 2009 upon passage of the ordinance from which this article derives with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Setbacks under subsection 22-46(a). 
(2)  Particulate emission standards under subsection 22-46(c). 
(b)  Replacement of an existing OHH. Any existing unit as defined herein that is to be replaced shall meet all provision set forth in this article except as specified herein. 
(c)  Nuisance. Compliance with this article shall not exonerate or insulate the owner of an OHH from the provisions of subsection 22-48(b). 
(Ord. of 3-2-09) 
Sec. 22-48. - Applicability of other regulations and laws. 
(a)  Compliance with law. Outdoor furnaces shall be manufactured, constructed, installed, operated and located in conformance with any other applicable state or federal law or regulation, including but not limited to those of the US EPA and RI DEM. In the event of any conflict among state, federal and local ordinance, the more restrictive law or regulation shall apply. All other provisions of the building, electrical or other applicable laws codes shall also apply, as well as applicable subdivision and zoning regulations. 
(b)  Nuisance or other condition. It is prohibited to use, maintain or operate an OHH, or use its ash or residue that creates a nuisance or an interference with the health, safety and welfare of the town or of any person. Compliance with this article shall not otherwise exonerate or insulate the owner of a furnace for the creation of nuisance or other interference with the public health, safety and welfare, and it is intended that the town and its citizens shall have preserved any public or private right of action in nuisance or otherwise resulting from the operation of such furnace, either under this article, or under any state or federal law or regulation, or the common law. 
(Ord. of 3-2-09) 
Sec. 22-49. - Penalties. 
(a)  Failure to comply with any provision of this article shall be a violation, and a first offense shall be punishable by a warning. Each day of each offense shall be construed to be a separate violation. Each second offense shall be punishable by a fine of $100.00, and each offense thereafter shall be $300.00 per offense. The owners of the property shall be jointly and severably liable with any other violator for any violation of this article. Any fine imposed under this article shall constitute a lien on the real property on which the OHH is located. 
(b)  The zoning officer, or his designee shall be responsible for the enforcement of this article. He shall have the discretion to forego a warning for a first violation if, in his sole discretion, he is of the belief that the violation is without intent and can be brought into compliance in a reasonable time, and such compliance deadline is provided to the landowner for compliance, not to exceed ten days. Compliance within the time established shall not constitute a first offense. 
(c)  Any person or entity in violation of the terms of this article shall, in addition to the above sanctions, be liable to the town for the costs of any remediation actions reasonably necessitated by the actions of the violator(s), and for the costs (including reasonable attorney fees) of any action brought for equitable or legal action against the violator, which costs and fees shall constitute a lien against the property on which the furnace is located. 
(Ord. of 3-2-09) 
Sec. 22-50. - Suspension of operation. 
(a)  Any OHH may be suspended immediately from operation, within the discretion of the zoning inspector or his designee, should that official or his designee determine that a nuisance is or has been caused by the use and operation of the furnace, as a result of any condition, including, without limitation, malodorous air contaminants detectable on land other than that of the owner; emissions that interfere with the reasonable enjoyment of the life or property of that other than the owner; the emissions cause damage to the environment, vegetation or property of another, or for any other violation of the terms of this article. 
(b)  An OHH may be reinstated by the zoning inspector, or his designee, once he has determined that compliance has been established and the offending condition has been remedied. 
(Ord. of 3-2-09) 
ARTICLE IV. - SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS 

Sec. 22-51. - Statement of purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to ensure public safety; minimize hazards to persons and property from flooding, to protect watercourses from encroachment, and to maintain the capability of floodplains to retain and carry off floodwaters. The Town of Exeter elects to comply with the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended). 
(Ord. of 10-4-10) 
Sec. 22-52. - Applicability. 
(a)  Special flood hazard areas. The special flood hazard areas are herein established as a floodplain overlay district. The district includes all special flood hazard areas within the Town of Exeter designated as Zone A, AE, AH, AO, A99, V, or VE on the Washington County Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and Digital FIRM issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for the administration of the National Flood Insurance Program. The exact boundaries of the district may be defined by the 100-year base flood elevations shown on the FIRM and further defined by the Washington County Flood Insurance Study (FIS) report dated October 19, 2010. The FIRM and FIS report and any revisions thereto are incorporated herein by reference and are on file with the town planner. 
(b)  Administrative provisions. 
    Use permit. All proposed construction or other development within a special flood hazard area shall require a permit. 
    If the construction or other development within a special flood hazard area is not covered by a building or other approved permit application, a flood hazard development permit shall be required. The application for a flood hazard development permit shall be submitted to the Exeter Building Inspector and shall include: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  An address or a map indicating the location of the construction site; 
(3)  A site plan showing location of existing and proposed structures, sewage disposal facilities, water supply facilities, areas to be cut and filled, and the dimensions of the lot; 
(4)  A statement of the intended use of the structure; 
(5)  A statement as to the type of sewage system proposed; 
(6)  Specification of dimensions of the proposed structures; 
(7)  The specific datum used for all elevations; 
(8)  The elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor, including basement, and if the lowest floor is below grade on one or more sides, the elevation of the floor immediately above; 
(9)  Base flood elevation data for all new, relocated or substantially improved structures; 
(10)  The elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure will be flood proofed; 
(11)  The description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development. 
    Prior to the issuance of a building or development permit, the applicant shall submit evidence that all necessary permits and approvals have been received from all government agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law. 
    A permit fee (based on the cost of the construction) may be required to be paid to the Town of Exeter and a copy of a receipt for the same shall accompany the application. An additional fee may be charged if the code enforcement officer and/or board of appeals needs the assistance of a professional engineer. 
    Disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by the article is considered reasonable but does not imply total flood protection. 
    Severability. If any section, provision, or portion of this article is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court, the remainder of the article shall not be affected. 
    Abrogation and greater restriction. This article shall not in any way impair/remove the necessity of compliance with any other applicable laws, ordinances, regulations, etc. Where this article imposes a greater restriction, the provisions of this article shall control. 
(Ord. of 10-4-10) 
Sec. 22-53. - Notification of watercourse alteration. 
    In a riverine situation, the town planner shall notify the following of any alteration or relocation of a watercourse: 
 Adjacent communities 
 Bordering states (optional) 
  NFIP state coordinator 
 Rhode Island Emergency Management Agency 
 645 New London Avenue 
 Cranston, RI 02920 
  NFIP program specialist 
Federal Emergency Management Agency, Region I 
99 High Street, 6th Floor 
Boston, MA 02110 
    The carrying capacity of the altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained. 
(Ord. of 10-4-10) 
Sec. 22-54. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Reference to existing regulations. The special flood hazard areas are established as a floodplain overlay district. All development in the district, including structural and non-structural activities, whether permitted by right or by special permit must be in compliance with the following: 
-  Rhode Island State Building Code (As established under Rhode Island General Law § 23-27.3); 
-  Coastal Resources Management Program, Coastal Resource Management Council (G.L. § 46-23) 
-  Freshwater Wetlands Act, Department of Environmental Management (G.L. § 46-23-6) 
-  Minimum Standards Related to Individual Sewage Disposal Systems, Department of Environmental Management (G.L. § 46-12) 
    Any variances from the provisions and requirements of the above referenced state regulations may only be granted in accordance with the required variance procedures of these state regulations. 
(b)  Other use regulations. 
(1)  Within zones AH and AO on the FIRM, adequate drainage paths must be provided around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(2)  Within zones AO on the FIRM, new and substantially improved residential structures shall have their lowest floor at least as high as the FIRM's depth number above the highest adjacent grade and non-residential structures shall be elevated or flood-proofed above the highest adjacent grade to at least as high as the depth number on the FIRM. On FIRMs without a depth number for the AO zone, structures shall be elevated or floodproofed to at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade. 
(3)  In zones A1-30 and AE, along watercourses that have a regulatory floodway designated on the Washington County FIRM or Flood Boundary and Floodway Map 0062H, 0091H, and 0094H. Encroachments are prohibited in the regulatory floodway which would result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(4)  All subdivision proposals must be designed to assure that: 
a.  Such proposals minimize flood damage; 
b.  All public utilities and facilities are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
c.  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(5)  Detached accessory structures in zones A, AE, A1-30, AO, and AH (i.e., garages, sheds) do not have to meet the elevation or dry floodproofing requirement if the following standards are met: 
a.  The structure is no more than 100 square feet in size and has a value less than $1,000.00. 
b.  The structure has unfinished interiors and must not be used for human habitation. An apartment, office or other finished space over a detached garage is considered human habitation and would require the structure to be elevated. 
c.  The structure is used solely for parking of vehicles and/or limited storage. 
d.  The accessory must be wet floodproofed and designed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of flood water. 
e.  The accessory structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
f.  Service facilities such as electrical, mechanical and heating equipment must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the base flood elevation. 
g.  The structure must not increase the flood levels in the floodway. 
(6)  Existing contour intervals of site and elevations of existing structures must be included on plan proposal. 
(c)  Base flood elevation and floodway data. 
(1)  Floodway data. In zones A, A1-30, and AE, along watercourses that have not had a regulatory floodway designated, the best available federal, state, local, or other floodway data shall be used to prohibit encroachments in floodways which would result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  Base flood elevation data. Base flood elevation data is required for subdivision proposals or other developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, within unnumbered A zones. 
(3)  Base flood elevations in A zones. In the absence of FEMA BFE data and floodway data, the best available federal, state, local, or other BFE or floodway data shall be used as the basis for elevating residential and non-residential structures to or above the base flood level and for floodproofing non-residential structures to or above the base flood level. 
(Ord. of 10-4-10) 
Sec. 22-55. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this article pertain to floodplain management, have the same meaning as they have in common usage and to give this article it's most reasonable application. 
    Accessory structure. A structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
    Area of shallow flooding. A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of special flood hazard. See definition for "Special flood hazard area". 
    Base flood. The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also referred to as the 100-year flood, as published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) as part of a flood insurance study (FIS) and depicted on a flood insurance rate map (FIRM). 
    Base flood elevation (BFE). The elevation of the crest of the base flood or 100-year flood. The height, as established in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum where specified), in relation to mean sea level expected to be reached by the waters of the base flood at pertinent points in the floodplains of coastal and riverine areas. 
    Basement. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Building. See definition for "Structure." 
    Cost. As related to substantial improvements, the cost of any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, alteration, repair or other improvement of a structure shall be established by a detailed written contractor's estimate. The estimate shall include, but not be limited to: the cost of materials (interior finishing elements, structural elements, utility and service equipment); sales tax on materials, building equipment and fixtures, including heating and air conditioning and utility meters; labor; built-in appliances; demolition and site preparation; repairs made to damaged parts of the building worked on at the same time; contractor's overhead; contractor's profit; and grand total. Items to be excluded include: cost of plans and specifications, survey costs, permit fees, costs to correct code violations subsequent to a violation notice, outside improvements such as septic systems, water supply wells, landscaping, sidewalks, fences, yard lights, irrigation systems, and detached structures such as garages, sheds, and gazebos. 
    Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to the construction of buildings or structures; the construction of additions, alterations or substantial improvements to buildings or structures; the placement of buildings or structures; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment; the storage, deposition, or extraction of materials; and the installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities. 
    Existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision. A manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured home are to be affixed (including, as a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or existing manufactured home subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufacturing homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) 
    Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from either the overflow of inland or tidal waters, or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated both the special flood hazard areas (100-year floodplain) and the insurance risk premium zones applicable to a community. FIRM published after January 1990 may also show the limits of the regulatory floodway. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS). The official study of a community in which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has conducted a technical engineering evaluation and determination of local flood hazards, flood profiles and water surface elevations. The flood insurance rate maps (FIRM), which accompany the FIS, provide both flood insurance rate zones and base flood elevations, and may provide the regulatory floodway limits. 
    Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. For the purposes of these regulations, the term "Regulatory floodway" is synonymous in meaning with the term "Floodway". 
    Functionally dependent use or facility. A use or facility that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities. The term does not include seafood processing facilities, long-term storage, manufacturing, sales or service facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade (HAG). The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure. Any structure that is: (a) listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (b) certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historic significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; (c) individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (d) individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: (1) by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or (2) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). 
    Manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational vehicles and other similar vehicles or transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
    Manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision. A parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Market value. Market value is the price of a structure that a willing buyer and seller agree upon. This can be determined by an independent appraisal by a professional appraiser; the property's tax assessment, minus land value; the replacement cost minus depreciation of the structure; the structure's actual cash value. 
    New construction. Structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, new construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. (required) 
    New manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision. A manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain regulations adopted by the community. 
    Recreational vehicle. A vehicle which is: (a) built on a single chassis; (b) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; (c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Regulatory floodway. See definition for "Floodway." 
    Sheet flow area. See definition for "Area of shallow flooding." 
    Special flood hazard area (SFHA). The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. SFHAs are determined utilizing the base flood elevations (BFE) provided on the flood profiles in the flood insurance study (FIS) for a community. BFEs provided on flood insurance rate map (FIRM) are only approximate (rounded up or down) and should be verified with the BFEs published in the FIS for a specific location. SFHAs include, but are not necessarily limited to, the land shown as zones A, A1-30, AE, AO, AH, and the coastal high hazard areas shown as zones V, V1-30, and VE on a FIRM. The SFHA is also called the area of special flood hazard. 
    Start of construction. For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, substantial improvement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does in include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erections of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure. A walled and roofed building which is principally above ground, including a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank, or other man-made facilities or infrastructures. 
    Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure, where the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement. Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, rehabilitation, alterations, additions or other improvements to a structure, taking place within any 12-month period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure ([G.L.] § 23-27.3-106.1). This term includes structures that have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. For purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either: (1) any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
    Variance. A grant of relief by a community from the terms of the floodplain management ordinance that allows construction in a manner otherwise prohibited and where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. 
    Violation. Failure of a structure or other development to be fully complaint with the community's floodplain management ordinance. A structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, floodproofing certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is resumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. of 10-4-10) 
Sec. 22-56. - Effective date. 
    This article shall take effect upon passage. 
(Ord. of 10-4-10) 
Chapter 23 - EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 23-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
    Applicant means any person proposing a development which would involve disturbance to the natural terrain. 
    Cut means an excavation, the difference between a point on the original ground and a designated point of lower elevation on the final grade. Also, the material removed in excavation. 
    Development project means any construction, reconstruction, demolition, or removal of structures, roadways, parking, or other paved areas; utilities, or other similar facilities, including any action requiring permit by the town. 
    Erosion means the removal of mineral and/or organic matter by the action of wind, water, and/or gravity. 
    Excavate means any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other similar material is dug into, cut, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated, or bulldozed, and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom. 
    Fill means any act by which earth, sand, or other material is placed or moved to a new location aboveground. The fill is also the difference in elevation between a point or existing undisturbed ground and a designated point of higher elevation of the final grade. 
    Land disturbing activity means any physical land development activity which included such actions as clearance of vegetation; moving or filling of land; removal or excavation of soil or mineral resources; or similar activities. 
    Runoff means the surface water discharge or rate of discharge of a given watershed after a fall of rain or snow and including seepage flows that do not enter the soil but run off the surface of the land. Also, that portion of water that is not absorbed by the soil, but runs off the land surface. 
    Sediment means solid material, both mineral and/or organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water and/or gravity as a product of erosion. 
    Soil erosion and sediment control plans means the approved document required before any person may cause a disturbance to the natural terrain within the town as herein regulated. Also, herein referred to as erosion and sediment control plan, approved plan. 
(Ord. of 12-6-10) 
Sec. 23-2. - Purpose. 
(a)  The town council hereby finds that excessive quantities of soil are eroding from certain areas that are undergoing development for nonagricultural uses such as housing developments, industrial areas, recreational facilities and roads. This erosion makes necessary costly repairs to gullies, washed out fills, roads, and embankments. The resulting sediment clogs the storm sewers, road ditches and muddies streams, leaves deposits of silt in ponds and reservoirs and is considered a major water pollutant. 
(b)  The purpose of this chapter is to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation from occurring as a result of nonagricultural development within the town by requiring an approved soil erosion and sedimentation permit that will assure proper provisions for water disposal, and the protection of soil surfaces during and after construction, in order to promote the safety, public health and general welfare of the town. 
(Ord. of 12-6-10) 
Sec. 23-3. - Application. 
    This chapter shall be applicable in any situation involving any disturbance to the natural terrain, topsoil or vegetative ground cover upon any property within the town except as so specified in section 23-32, including but not limited to the following specific situations: 
(1)  For any development project subject to the obtaining of a building permit pursuant to the building code. 
(2)  For any development project subject to the approval of a subdivision plan pursuant to the subdivision regulations; however, the preliminary and final plats approved by the town planning board shall constitute the plan. 
(3)  All plans for projects undertaken by the town through private contractors shall include in the specifications and in the contract documents the requirements of this chapter. 
(4)  All projects undertaken directly by the department of public works and by its several divisions shall be undertaken in accordance with the performance principles provided for in section 23-59 and such standards and definitions as may be adopted to implement such performance principles. 
(Ord. of 12-6-10) 
Sec. 23-4. - Penalty for violation. 
    In addition to any other provision of this chapter, whenever there is a failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter, the town shall have the right to notify the applicant/owner that it has five days from the receipt of notice to temporarily correct the violations and 30 days from receipt of notice to permanently correct the violations. Should the applicant/owner fail to take the temporary corrective measures within the five-day period and the permanent corrective measures within the 30-day period, the town shall then have the right to take whatever actions it deems necessary to correct the violations and to assert a lien on the subject property in an amount equal to the costs of remedial actions. The imposition of any penalty shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the provisions of this chapter, including revocation of the performance bond or assessment of a lien on the property by the town. 
(Ord. of 12-6-10) 
Sec. 23-5. - Liability. 
    Neither approval of an erosion and sediment control plan nor compliance with any condition of this chapter shall relieve the owner/applicant from any responsibility for damage to persons or property, nor impose any liability upon the town for damages to persons or property. 
(Ord. of 12-6-10) 
Sec. 23-6. - Approval; expiration, renewal. 
(a)  Every approval granted pursuant to this chapter shall expire at the end of the time period set forth in the conditions. The developer shall fully perform and complete all of the work required within the specified time period. 
(b)  If the developer is unable to complete the work within the designated time period, he shall, at least 30 days prior to the expiration date, submit a written request for an extension of time to the building inspector or his designee, setting forth the reasons underlying the requested time extension. If the extension is warranted, the building inspector or his designee may grant an extension of time up to a maximum of one year from the date of the original deadline. Subsequent extensions under the same conditions may be granted at the discretion of the building inspector or his designee. 
(Ord. of 12-6-10) 
Sec. 23-7. - Maintenance of measures. 
    Maintenance of all erosion-sediment control devices under this chapter shall be the responsibility of the owner. Such erosion-sediment control devices shall be maintained in good condition and working order on a continuing basis. Watercourses originating and located completely on private property shall be the responsibility of the owner to their point of open discharge at the property line or at a communal watercourse within the property. 
(Ord. of 12-6-10) 
Sec. 23-8. - Periodic inspections. 
    The provisions of this section shall be administered and enforced by the building inspector or his designee or his designated representative. All work shall be subject to periodic inspections by the building inspector or his designee. All work shall be performed in accordance with an inspection and construction control schedule approved by the building inspector or his designee, who shall maintain a permanent file on all of its inspections. Upon completion of the work, the developer or owner shall notify the building inspector or his designee that all grading, drainage, erosion and sediment control measures and devices, and vegetation and ground cover planting has been completed in conformance with the approval, all attached plans, specifications, conditions, and other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-6-10) 
Sec. 23-9. - Final inspections. 
(a)  Upon notification of the completion of work under this chapter by the owner, the building inspector or his designee shall make a final inspection of the site in question and shall prepare a final summary inspection report of his findings which shall be retained in the building inspector's office. 
(b)  After the final site inspection has been completed and approved, the applicant/owner may request a release of his performance bond by the building inspector or his designee. In the instance where the performance bond has been posted with the recording of a final subdivision, the bond shall be released after the building inspector or his designee has been notified by the planning board of successful completion of all plat improvements by the applicant/owner. 
(Ord. of 12-6-10) 
Sec. 23-10. - Noncompliance. 
    If, at any stage, the work-in-progress and/or completed under the terms of an approved erosion and sediment control plan does not conform to such plan, a written notice from the building inspector or his designee to comply shall be transmitted to the owner. Such notice shall set forth the nature of corrections required and the time limit within which corrections shall be completed. Failure to comply with the required corrections within the specified time limit shall be considered in violation of this chapter, in which case the performance bond or cash or negotiable securities deposit shall be subject to notice of default, in accordance with section 23-61. 
(Ord. of 12-6-10) 
Sec. 23-11. - Revocation or suspension of approval. 
    The approval of an erosion and sediment control plan under this chapter may be revoked or suspended and work initiated under the plan halted for an indefinite time period by the building inspector or his designee after written notification is transmitted to the applicant for one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  Violation of any condition of the approved plan, conditions or specifications pertaining thereto; 
(2)  Violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation related to the work or site of work; and 
(3)  The existence of any condition or the performance of any act constituting or creating a nuisance, hazard, or endangerment to human life or the property of others, or contrary to the spirit or intent of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-6-10) 
Secs. 23-12-23-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT 

Sec. 23-31. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any existing land, trees, vegetation, grades, and contours of land within 40 feet of a property line without first applying for and receiving a permit from the building inspector or his designee. 
(Ord. of 12-6-10) 
Sec. 23-32. - Exceptions. 
    No permit shall be required under this article for the following: 
(1)  The construction, alteration or use of a single-family residential structure or appurtenance or a two-family residential structure or structures accessory thereto, which is or are to be constructed, altered or used individually and not as part of a development, provided such construction, including land disturbance activities, does not occur within 100 feet of any watercourse and has no slopes greater than ten feet horizontal or ten percent; 
(2)  Development projects where less than one-half-acre is to be disturbed during one planting season, and which disturbance of soil is not within 100 feet of any watercourse, has no slope greater than ten percent; and 
(3)  Accepted agricultural management practices such as seasonal tilling and harvest activities associated with property utilized for private or commercial agricultural or silvicultural purposes consistent with right to farming; 
(4)  An excavation which exhibits all of the following characteristics: 
a.  Does not result in a total displacement of more than 100 cubic yards of material on any lot, land, parcel or subdivision. 
b.  Has no slopes steeper than ten feet vertical in 100 feet horizontal or approximately ten percent. 
c.  Has all disturbed surface areas promptly and effectively protected to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation from occurring including seeding or sodding, and provided that all disturbed surface areas which will be exposed for a period of time in excess of 30 days shall be covered with a suitable temporary protective ground cover until permanent ground cover is in place. 
d.  Disturbance of soil is not within 100 feet of any watercourse. 
(5)  Grading, as a maintenance measure, or for landscaping purposes on existing developed land parcels or lots, provided that all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The aggregate of areas affected or stripped at any one time does not exceed 10,000 square feet. 
b.  The change of elevation does not exceed two feet at any point. 
c.  All bare surface area is promptly seeded, sodded, or otherwise effectively protected from erosive actions. 
d.  The grading, filling, removal, or excavation does not involve a quantity of material in excess of 250 cubic yards. 
e.  Disturbance of soil is not within 100 feet of any water course. 
(6)  None of the above exceptions apply if the soil disturbance is within 40 feet of the lot line. 
(7)  Grading, filling, removal or excavation activities and operations undertaken by the town under the direction and supervision of the director of public works for work on streets, roads or rights-of-ways dedicated to public use; provided, however, that adequate and acceptable erosion and sediment controls are incorporated in engineering plans and specifications and employed. Appropriate controls shall apply during construction as well as after the completion of such activities. 
(Ord. of 12-6-10) 
Sec. 23-33. - Submission of plan-Generally. 
    To obtain approval for a permit under the provisions of this article, an applicant shall first file an erosion and sediment control plan signed by the owner of the property, or authorized agent, on which the work subject to approval is to be performed. The plan or drawings, as described in section 23-56, shall include proposed erosion and sediment control measures to be employed by the applicant or his agent. A soil erosion permit application fee of $200.00 is required and a project review fee will be determined by the building inspector or his designee based upon the scope and complexity of the application. 
(Ord. of 12-6-10) 
Sec. 23-34. - Freshwater wetlands permit. 
    R.I. Freshwater Wetlands Permit: Where any portion of a proposed development requires approval under any provision of the general laws approved by the general assembly or where the approval contains provisions for soil erosion and sediment controls, that approved plan shall be a component of the overall soil erosion and sediment control plan required under this chapter for the development. 
(Ord. of 12-6-10) 
Sec. 23-35. - Building permit fees. 
    Where a building permit is required under the building code, the site plans shall include all the requirements of this chapter and the building permit fee shall be based on the entire cost of the building plus improvements required by this chapter. Application of such fees shall apply to all land-disturbing activities; for example, subdivisions, except as provided for under section 23-32. 
(Ord. of 12-6-10) 
Sec. 23-36. - Plan review. 
(a)  Within five working days of the receipt of a completed plan, the building inspector or his designee shall send a copy of the plan to the public works department and the town planner for the purpose of review and comment. The building inspector or his designee may also within the above time frame submit copies of the plan to other local departments or agencies, in order to better achieve the purposes of this chapter. 
(b)  The time allowed for plan review and fee shall be commensurate with the proposed development project, and shall be done simultaneously with other reviews. 
(Ord. of 12-6-10) 
Sec. 23-37. - Plan approval. 
(a)  The building inspector or his designee shall take action in writing either approving or disapproving the plan with reasons stated within ten days after he has received the written opinion of the public works director and the town planner. Failure of the public works director or the town planner to respond within 21 days of the receipt of the plan shall be deemed as no objection to the plan as submitted. 
(b)  In approving a plan, the building inspector or his designee may attach such conditions deemed reasonably necessary by the director of public works and the planning board to further the purposes of this chapter. Such conditions pertaining to erosion and sediment control measures and/or devices, may include, but are not limited to, the erection of walls, drains, dams and structures, planning vegetation, trees, shrubs, furnishings, necessary easements and specifying a method of performing various kinds of work, and the sequence or timing thereof. The applicant/owner shall notify the building inspector in advance of this intent to begin clearing and construction work described in the erosion and sediment control plan. 
(c)  The applicant shall have the approved erosion and sediment control plan on the site during grading and construction. The applicant shall post a 12-inch by 12-inch sign visible from the street, stating "Town of Exeter Approved E&S Site". 
(Ord. of 12-6-10) 
Sec. 23-38. - Appeals. 
(a)  If the ruling made by the building inspector or his designee is unsatisfactory to the applicant/owner, the applicant/owner may file a written appeal within 20 days. The appeal of the soil and erosion plan shall be to the planning board. 
(b)  Appeal procedures shall follow current requirements for appeal board above. 
(c)  During the period in which the request for appeal is filed, and until such time as a final decision is rendered on the appeal, the decision of the building inspector or his designee shall remain in effect. 
(Ord. of 12-6-10) 
Sec. 23-39. - Expert opinion. 
    The building inspector or the planning board may seek technical assistance on any soil erosion and sediment control plan. Such expert opinion must be made available in the office of the building inspector as a public record prior to the appeals hearing. 
(Ord. of 12-6-10) 
Secs. 23-40-23-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN 

Sec. 23-56. - Preparation. 
(a)  The erosion and sediment control plan shall be prepared by a registered engineer or land surveyor on standard eight and one-half-inch by 11-inch, 11-inch by 17-inch or 24-inch by 36-inch sheets at a suggested scale of one inch equals 40 feet. A key sheet shall be included if a plan consists of more than two sheets. 
(b)  The erosion and sediment control plan shall include sufficient information about the proposed activities and land parcels to form a clear basis for discussion and review and to ensure compliance with all applicable requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-6-10) 
Sec. 23-57. - Number of copies. 
    A minimum of three copies of the erosion and sediment control plan, plus any additional copies that may be required by the building inspector, shall be submitted. 
(Ord. of 12-6-10) 
Sec. 23-58. - Contents. 
    The following information may be drafted on the erosion and sediment control plan or may be included as attachments and shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Locus plan. 
(2)  The name and address of the owner of the site, and, if different, the applicant, the designer, and the developer. 
(3)  The location, extent, and type of all proposed work to be performed, including all existing and proposed buildings, structures, utilities, sewers, water mains, and storm drains on the site. 
(4)  Topographic mapping with elevations keyed to the municipal base showing existing contours at intervals of not more than two feet and contours at two-foot intervals of the finished grade of all disturbed land areas at the conclusion of the construction and/or land disturbance activities. 
(5)  A description of the general topographic and soil conditions at the project site, including all significant limitations such as rock, outcrops, existing alterations to natural drainage, and any other site characteristics pertinent to the work to be performed. 
(6)  The location and size of all parking and loading areas and driveways, both public and private. 
(7)  The location of all existing and proposed buildings or structures, utilities including drainage facilities, and all significant natural features within 100 feet of the proposed work to be performed. 
(8)  The name, location, right-of-way width, and pavement width of all streets, roads and highways within 100 feet of the site. 
(9)  The location and names, if applicable, of any streams, wetlands, water bodies, drainage swales, watercourses, and areas subject to periodic flooding, both on and within 100 feet of the site on which the work is to be performed. Included shall be a delineation of any areas designated as flood hazards by the federal emergency management agency or other state or federal agency. 
(10)  The names and addresses of all owners of abutting parcels and the location of all adjoining lot boundaries according to the latest assessor's records. 
(11)  The approximate total quantity of earthwork involved in the proposed work, with appropriate breakdown as to cut and fill. 
(12)  The location and extent of the removal of existing topsoil, trees, and other vegetation; quantities and location of any material to be removed from the site. 
(13)  The estimated time of exposure for all disturbed land areas on the site prior to the completion of effective temporary and/or permanent erosion and sediment control measures and facilities. This shall include planting and seeding dates and application rates, and the phasing plan indicating the anticipated starting and completion dates of all phases of proposed site work. 
(14)  Details of all proposed drainage provisions to be employed on the site including the location and type of all proposed erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater runoff controls of both a permanent and temporary nature and specifications for the maintenance of each. 
(15)  The type, location, and extent of all proposed temporary and permanent vegetation and mulching that will be used to protect exposed areas of the project site. 
(16)  Provide a detailed inspection and construction control schedule. 
(17)  Prompt submittal of such other information or construction plans and details as deemed necessary by the building inspector or his designee for a thorough review of the plan prior to action being taken as prescribed in this chapter. Withholding or delay of such information may be reason for the building inspector or his designee to judge the application as incomplete and grounds for disapproval. 
(Ord. of 12-6-10) 
Sec. 23-59. - Performance principles. 
(a)  The contents of the erosion and sediment control plan shall clearly demonstrate how the principles, outlined below, have been met in the design and are to be accomplished by the proposed development project. 
(1)  The site selected shall show due regard for natural drainage characteristics and topography. 
(2)  Areas with slopes exceeding ten percent shall be avoided. 
(3)  The grade of slopes created shall be minimized. 
(4)  When downstream capacities prove to be inadequate, any increase in storm runoff shall be controlled on-site to minimize downstream impact. This increased storm runoff shall be retained and recharged as close as feasible to its place of origin by means of detention ponds or basins, seepage areas, subsurface drains, porous paying, or similar technique. 
(5)  Original boundaries, alignment and slope of watercourses within the project locus shall be preserved to the greatest extent feasible. 
(6)  In general, drainage shall be directed away from structures intended for human occupancy, municipal or utility use, or similar structures. 
(7)  All drainage provisions shall be of such a design and capacity so as to adequately handle stormwater runoff, including runoff from tributary upstream areas which may be outside the locus of the project. 
(8)  Drainage facilities shall be installed as early as feasible during construction, prior to site clearance, if possible. 
(9)  Fill located adjacent to watercourses shall be suitably protected from erosion by means of rip-rap, gabions, retaining walls, vegetative stabilization, or similar measures. 
(10)  Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect bare areas and stockpiles from erosion during construction; the smallest areas feasible shall be exposed at any one time; disturbed areas shall be protected during the nongrowing months, November through March. 
(11)  Permanent vegetation shall be placed immediately following fine grading. 
(12)  Trees and other existing vegetation shall be retained whenever feasible; the area beyond the drip line shall be fenced or roped off to protect trees from construction equipment. 
(13)  Areas damaged during construction shall be resodded, reseeded, or otherwise restored. Monitoring and maintenance schedules, where required, shall be predetermined. 
(b)  In order to comply with the principles set forth above, the building inspector or his designee shall use as a reference in determining the suitability and adequacy of erosion-sediment plans the publication entitled, "Rhode Island Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook," U.S. Department of Agriculture. Soil Conservation Service and Rhode Island State Conservation Committee, 1980, or its most recent addition. 
(Ord. of 12-6-10) 
Sec. 23-60. - Performance bond-Required. 
(a)  Before approving an erosion sediment control plan, the building inspector or his designee may require the applicant/owner to file a surety company performance bond or deposit of money or negotiable securities. When any land disturbing activity is to take place within 100 feet of any watercourse or within an identified flood hazard district, or on slopes in excess of ten percent, the filing of a performance bond shall be required. The amount of such bond, as determined by the public works department, shall be sufficient to cover the cost of implementing all erosion and sediment control measures as shown on the plan. 
(b)  The bond filed by the applicant shall be in the form of a certified check payable to the town and to be deposited in an interest bearing account. All accrued interest will be returned to the applicant. 
(c)  A performance bond for an erosion sediment control plan for a subdivision may be included in the performance bond of the subdivision. The posting of such bond as part of the subdivision performance bond does not, however, relieve the owner of any requirement of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-6-10) 
Sec. 23-61. - Same-Notice of default. 
(a)  Performance secured by bond. Whenever the building inspector or his designee shall find that a default has occurred in the performance of any term or condition of the bond or in the implementation of measures secured by the bond, written notice thereof shall be made to the applicant. Such notice shall state the nature of default, work to be done, the estimated cost thereof, and the period of time deemed by the building inspector or his designee to be reasonably necessary for the completion of such work. 
(b)  Failure to comply. Failure of the applicant to acknowledge and comply with the provisions and deadlines outlined in such notice of default shall mean the institution, by the town solicitor, without further notice of proceedings whatsoever, of appropriate measures to utilize the performance bond to cause the required work to be completed by the town, by contract or by other appropriate means as determined by the town solicitor. 
(c)  Performance secured by cash deposit (as per section 4.2.D of the Subdivision Exeter Land Use and Regulations). If a cash deposit has been posted by the applicant, notice and procedure shall be the same as provided for in the preceding (a) and (b) above. 
(Ord. of 12-6-10) 
Sec. 23-62. - Same-Release. 
    The performance bonding requirement shall remain in full force and effect until satisfactory completion of the work. 
(Ord. of 12-6-10) 
Sec. 23-63. - Effective date. 
    This article shall take effect upon passage. 
(Ord. of 12-6-10) 
Chapter 26 - MANUFACTURED HOMES AND TRAILERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 22; solid waste, ch. 34; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 38; traffic and vehicles, ch. 46; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference- Mobile homes and trailers, G.L. 1956, § 31-44-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1-26-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRAILERS AND TRAILER PARKS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Nonissuance and nonrenewal of licenses or permits to applicants or licensees in arrears in taxes, liens and assessments, § 42-1. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Trailer means any portable structure, mobile home or other similar vehicle designed to be drawn by vehicles, or self-propelled and designed to be occupied as a dwelling or to be used for sleeping purposes, and includes such portable structures, mobile homes and vehicles when attached to the real estate. 
    Trailer park means any privately owned parcel of land upon which two or more trailers are located and used for dwellings or sleeping purposes. 
    Trailer space means the area within a trailer park occupied or designed to be occupied by a single trailer. 
(Ord. of 7-7-86, § 1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-32. - Camping trailers. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to camping trailers stored in the town. 
(Ord. of 7-7-86, § 12) 
Sec. 26-33. - Installation permit and certificate of occupancy required; fees. 
(a)  For each trailer brought into a duly licensed trailer park intended for human habitation, or relocation of existing trailers within such park, the owner of such trailer park must first apply for an installation permit from the building inspector of the town. Thereafter, and prior to the occupancy of any such trailer, the building inspector, the zoning inspector, the ordinance inspector and the electrical inspector shall verify that all state and town regulations concerning such mobile home have been complied with. Upon written approval of all such inspectors, the building inspector shall issue a certificate of occupancy for such trailer. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this article for any trailer under this section to be occupied without the required certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  The fee for the installation permit shall be $35.00 and shall be nonrefundable. 
(Ord. of 7-7-86, § 15) 
Sec. 26-34. - Application of article provisions to existing trailer parks. 
    This article shall apply to all trailer parks existing on July 7, 1986, in the town; provided, however, that the dimensional requirements for trailer spaces in use prior to July 7, 1986, and the construction requirements for roads in use prior to July 7, 1986, and water supply for fire protection per section 26-35(15) may have been waived if application to the town council was made within two months of July 7, 1986. 
(Ord. of 7-7-86, § 11) 
Sec. 26-35. - Standards governing operation of trailer parks. 
    Trailer parks shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)  The site shall be graded to ensure proper drainage of surface and subsurface waters and freedom from stagnant pools. 
(2)  Each trailer space shall contain at least 20,000 square feet and shall have a width of at least 25 feet. 
(3)  Each trailer shall be located at least 40 feet from the roadway in the trailer park and at least 20 feet from the side lines of the trailer space. 
(4)  Roads within the trailer park shall be at least 30 feet in width where off-road parking is provided and at least 40 feet in width where no off-road parking is provided. 
(5)  Roads within the trailer park shall be well-defined and well-drained and shall be constructed of not less than six inches of compacted gravel or better and shall be maintained in good condition. 
(6)  No trailer within the trailer park shall be located closer than 50 feet to adjoining property or closer than 100 feet to any public highway. 
(7)  Each trailer space shall be provided with an electrical connection approved by the town building inspector. 
(8)  All roads and walkways within the trailer park shall be provided with lighting or a minimum of 100 watt bulbs suspended at least 14 feet above the ground at a minimum interval of 100 feet, unless the equivalent or better lighting system is approved by the town building inspector. 
(9)  Each trailer space shall be provided with an adequate and potable water supply, with a minimum pressure of 25 pounds per square inch at all times, capable of a minimum 300 gallons per day. 
(10)  Each trailer space shall be provided with a sewer connection approved by the state department of health. 
(11)  The sewage disposal systems of the trailer park shall be approved by the state department of health and shall be designed and located so as not to create a nuisance or health hazard to occupants of the trailer park or adjoining property owners. 
(12)  Each trailer space shall be furnished with at least one refuse can with a tightfitting lid. Refuse shall be collected and removed regularly so as not to create a nuisance or health hazard. 
(13)  Fire extinguishers of a design and type approved by the town council shall be placed throughout the trailer park so that no trailer is more than 125 feet from a fire extinguisher. 
(14)  No open fires shall be permitted within the trailer park unless attended at all times and located so as not to endanger persons or property. 
(15)  A water supply of at least 3,000 gallons, suitable for fire department pumper drafting, shall be located so that no trailer is more than 1,000 feet from such water supply. 
(16)  No animals except dogs and cats shall be kept within the trailer park. Dogs and cats shall not be permitted to run at large or commit any nuisance within the trailer park. 
(Ord. of 7-7-86, § 6) 
Sec. 26-36. - Expansion of trailer parks. 
    Expansion of trailer parks beyond the area licensed for such use shall be permitted only upon application to the town council. Applications for expansion of trailer parks shall be governed by the provisions of this article in the same manner as applications for initial trailer park licenses. 
(Ord. of 7-7-86, § 10) 
Secs. 26-37-26-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 26-61. - Required. 
    No person shall locate or maintain a trailer park within the town without a license for such trailer park. 
(Ord. of 7-7-86, § 2) 
Sec. 26-62. - Application; contents. 
    Application for the initial issuance of a trailer park license shall be made in writing to the town council and shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  Plat of the proposed location of such trailer park prepared by a licensed surveyor showing the names and addresses of all adjoining property owners and all property owners within 200 feet of such location, and the location of the roads, trailer spaces, water, sewerage and sanitary facilities. 
(3)  Name and address of the owner of the proposed location. 
(4)  Written opinion of the planning board of the town, concerning the effect of the proposed trailer park on the orderly development of the town and making its recommendations. 
(5)  Written opinion of the state department of health that the proposed location and proposed water, sanitary and sewerage facilities meet with its approval. 
(6)  Application fee of $100.00 to defray the expense of recording the application, inspecting the proposed location, giving notice of the application and inspecting the installations of the trailer park. 
(Ord. of 7-7-86, § 3) 
Sec. 26-63. - Notice of hearing. 
    Upon receipt of a proper application, the town council shall schedule a public hearing on the application and shall cause notice of such hearing to be advertised in a newspaper published or of general circulation in the county once a week for three successive weeks, and shall cause notices to be sent by regular mail to each of the property owners shown on the survey required under section 26-62(2) at least two weeks prior to the date of such hearing. 
(Ord. of 7-7-86, § 4) 
Sec. 26-64. - Hearing on issuance; issuance or denial; bonds. 
    Hearings on the issuance of trailer park licenses shall be held at such time and place as the town council shall set. After hearing, the license shall be issued forthwith if the proposed location of the trailer park is found to be compatible with the character of the land and the land use of the surrounding neighborhood, and the town council is satisfied that the applicant will conform to the standards of operation set forth in section 26-35; otherwise, the application shall be denied. The town council may require that the applicant post bond, in an amount and with such surety or other security satisfactory to the town council to ensure that the permanent improvements to the real estate required under section 26-35 will be properly made, installed and maintained. 
(Ord. of 7-7-86, § 5) 
Sec. 26-65. - Registration of trailers within trailer parks. 
    The trailer park licensee shall keep a register in which the following information shall be recorded upon the letting of each trailer space: 
(1)  Name of trailer owner; 
(2)  Make, model, size, serial number and year of manufacture of trailer; and 
(3)  Registration of trailer. 
The information contained in such register shall be compiled and submitted between January 1 and January 31 of each year. One copy shall be kept by the town clerk, and one copy shall be kept with the board of assessors. 
(Ord. of 7-7-86, § 7) 
Sec. 26-66. - Expiration and renewal; annual fees. 
    Trailer park licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year. Such licenses shall be renewed by payment of an annual license fee of $100.00 to the town treasurer on or before December 31 of each year. 
(Ord. of 7-7-86, § 8) 
Sec. 26-67. - Revocation or suspension. 
    The town council may revoke or suspend any trailer park license for failure to comply with any of the provisions in this article. At least two weeks' written notice by registered or certified mail, or personal service, of the violation and the proposed revocation or suspension shall be given the licensee, and the licensee shall be afforded an opportunity for a public hearing if a written request is made therefor. 
(Ord. of 7-7-86, § 9) 
Chapter 30 - NATURAL RESOURCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Groundwater protection overlay district, app. A, art. VII; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 22; solid waste, ch. 34; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 38; waterways, ch. 50; zoning, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1-30-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EARTH REMOVAL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Nonissuance and nonrenewal of licenses or permits to applicants or licensees in arrears in taxes, liens and assessments, § 42-1. 
State Law reference- Soil erosion and sedimentation control, G.L. 1956, § 45-46-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-31. - Purpose of article. 
    The purpose of this article is to promote the health, safety and general welfare, and to effect uniform regulations within the town for earth removal, pursuant to Public Laws of 1973, ch. 190. 
(Ord. of 10-3-94, § 1) 
Sec. 30-32. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building inspector means the individual charged by the town with the issuance of building permits. 
    Earth removal means the extraction or removal (without the blasting of ledge) of any sand, gravel, loam, topsoil, small stones, clay or shale from any tract of land, excluding, however, earth removal necessary in the process of grading land for: 
(1)  The construction of a building for which a building permit has been issued; 
(2)  The construction of a roadway; or 
(3)  A subdivision in accordance with a plat plan or plans approved by the planning board of the town. 
The definition of the term "earth removal" does not encompass or include any activity requiring or entailing the blasting of ledge. 
    Gravel bank means a lot or parcel of land, or portion thereof, which is used for the purpose of extracting stone, sand, gravel, loam or other earth materials or the removal of 1,000 cubic yards or more of material. 
    Ledge means a layer or mass of metal bearing rock. 
    Residential use means any use for dwellings, including use as a multifamily dwelling. 
    Small stones means rock fragments less than three inches in diameter. 
    Town engineer means the individual or company contracted, employed or appointed by the town to provide engineering services to the municipality for purposes of this article. 
(Ord. of 10-3-94, § 2) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Definitions, Public Laws of 1973, ch. 190, § 2. 
Sec. 30-33. - Residential use area regulations. 
    Upon any land located within a residential use area, or within 150 feet of such a residential district: 
(1)  Hours and days for work. All work shall take place between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. No work shall take place on Sunday and legal holidays. The town council shall modify these hours depending upon their findings of conditions in each application case. 
(2)  Setbacks. No earth removal shall be conducted within 150 feet of the boundary of any property used for residential purposes. 
(3)  Fencing. The boundary of any tract of land upon which earth removal is being conducted adjacent to developed residential property shall be fenced if deemed necessary to protect public safety, as determined by the town council. Such fencing shall be six feet in height and of such construction as to effectively control access to the area in which such earth removal is being conducted. 
(4)  Dust control. Asphalt, stone or water shall be applied to all nonhard-surfaced roads used for vehicular ingress or egress to any tract of land upon which earth removal is conducted, and to the regularly traveled roads within any such tract of land. Such applications shall be made at intervals and in amounts sufficient to prevent observable dust from rising from the road surface, or upon the request of the town. 
(5)  Drainage. A plan for adequate drainage shall be presented to the town council, if requested, and prepared by a registered professional engineer. 
(Ord. of 10-3-94, § 6) 
Sec. 30-34. - Regulations for removal in areas other than residential. 
    Within any district or area other than residential use area: 
(1)  Dust control. Asphalt, stone or water shall be applied to all nonhard-surfaced roads used for vehicular ingress or egress to any tract of land upon which earth removal is conducted, and to the regularly traveled roads within any such tract of land. 
(2)  Drainage. A plan for adequate drainage shall be presented to the town council, if requested, and prepared by a registered professional engineer. 
(3)  Hours and days when removal is prohibited. Earth removal operations shall not be conducted during the period from 6:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. of any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday or Saturday, nor shall such operations be conducted on any Sunday or legal holiday. Earth removal operations during the times or days prohibited in this subsection may be authorized by the town council upon an application showing good cause. 
(Ord. of 10-3-94, § 7) 
Secs. 30-35-30-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 30-56. - Enforcement of article. 
    This article shall be enforced by the town council or its agent. 
(Ord. of 10-3-94, § 12) 
Sec. 30-57. - Fines. 
    In addition to any provisions for termination or forfeiture in this article, any person found guilty of violating this article shall be subject to a fine of $500.00 per acre, per day, for each day such person shall be in violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 10-3-94, § 13) 
Sec. 30-58. - Revision of earth removal plan. 
    A licensee under this article may apply for the revision of the plan contained in an approved application. Such application for revision shall be limited in scope to the area of land covered in the previously approved application, shall meet the requirements of an original plan as specified in this article, shall contain a statement indicating the applicant's reason for seeking a revision, and shall specify the time within which earth removal shall cease and the revised plan be complied with. Such time shall not exceed the then unexpired portion of the time specified therefor in the original, approved application. Such revised plan may be approved by the town council upon its finding that the same meets the requirements of sections 30-33 and 30-34 for the approval of an original application and that the revision is not sought to alleviate a hardship created by the licensee's failure to conduct earth removal operations in such a way as to reasonably anticipate the needs of, and provide for the implementation of, the plan contained in the original application. 
(Ord. of 10-3-94, § 15) 
Sec. 30-59. - Appeals from council decisions. 
    Appeals from the decisions of the town council shall be taken to the superior court having venue over the town. 
(Ord. of 10-3-94, § 18) 
Secs. 30-60-30-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LICENSE 

Sec. 30-81. - Application requirements. 
    A complete application for an earth removal license shall be made to the town council. A complete application will be forwarded to the planning board and the gravel bank commission for review and advisory opinion. Such application shall be accompanied by the following documentation: 
(1)  Copies of maps and plans. Four copies each of proposed preliminary maps and plans prepared by a professional engineer or registered land surveyor, drawn to a scale of one inch equals 100 feet and showing accurately the following: 
a.  The entire premises owned and the limits of the area for which a license is requested. 
b.  Existing and proposed land contours at a vertical contour level of not more than two feet within the license area, and of not more than ten feet within 200 feet in all directions therefrom. 
c.  Existing and proposed drainage, rivers, streams, ponds, watercourses and swamps on and within 200 feet of the premises owned. 
d.  Certification of maximum groundwater elevation during the wet season as defined by the state department of environmental management shall be provided and documented by test well results prepared by registered engineers. Such testing shall be performed throughout the license area. 
e.  Proposed ingress and egress to the license area, and all fences and gates. 
f.  A permanent point or benchmark in a location safe from disturbance for the duration of the license, with a designation of its elevation. 
g.  The storage area in which the applicant will initially stockpile sufficient topsoil, as calculated by a professional engineer, soil conservation commission or land surveyor, to cover the area to an average depth of no less than four inches. 
h.  The proposed time period of productivity for the gravel bank in its entirety as well as a map showing the proposed areas for phased operation. 
i.  If suitable fertile ground cover existed at the beginning of earth removal, then such plan shall show that enough of such ground cover is to be held in reserve and reapplied for a minimum thickness of four inches. 
j.  The type of ground cover to be planted or applied upon completion of earth removal operations to effectively control wind and water erosion. 
k.  The location of any proposed burial areas for stumps, boulders, etc. 
l.  Any other information as requested by the town council and/or planning board and/or gravel bank commission which may be pertinent to the existing or proposed gravel bank. 
(2)  Slopes; certified opinion. A written certified opinion by a registered engineer that upon completion of earth removal operations all slopes on such portion of the tract as set forth in the closure plan shall remain at the natural angle of repose. 
(3)  Completion of closure plan; renewals. The time for compliance is not to exceed two years within which earth removal shall cease, and such closure plan will be completed, unless an application for renewal of the license to perform earth removal activities for the same area is filed before the expiration of the initial two-year license period. Such renewal license shall be for a period of one year. 
(4)  Performance bond. 
a.  Before approving an earth removal plan or application, the planning board or its designee shall require the applicant/owner to file a surety company performance bond, deposit of money, negotiable securities or other method of surety, as specified by the planning board or its designee, when any land disturbing activity is to take place. A performance bond shall be required when any land disturbing activity is to take place within 100 feet of any watercourse or coastal feature or within an identified flood hazard district, or on slopes in excess of ten percent. The amount of the bond shall be set at $5,000.00 per acre and be sufficient to cover the cost of implementing all restoration measures as shown on the plan, including reclamation procedures in conjunction with a plan for closure. 
b.  The bond or negotiable security filed by the applicant shall be subject to approval of the form, content, amount and manner of execution by the planning board. Notice of default on performance secured by bond whenever the building official finds that default has occurred in the performance of any terms or conditions of the bond, or in the implementation measures secured by the bond, a written notice shall be made to the applicant and to the surety of the bond by the building official. The notice shall state the nature of the default, work to be done, the estimated cost and the period of time deemed by the building official to be reasonably necessary for the completion of the work. Failure of the applicant to acknowledge and comply with the provisions and deadlines outlined in such notice of default shall mean the institution, by the town solicitor, without further notice or proceedings whatsoever, of appropriate measures to utilize the performance bond to cause the required work to be completed by the town, by the contractor or by other appropriate means as determined by the planning board. 
c.  Notice of default on performance secured by cash or negotiable securities deposit. Once the cash or negotiable securities deposit has been posted by the applicant, the notice and procedure shall be the same as provided for in subsection (4)b of this section. 
d.  Release from performance bond conditions. The performance bonding requirement shall remain in full force and effect for 12 months following completion of the closure plan, or longer if deemed necessary by the building official or his designee. 
(5)  Equipment and machinery. The number and type of equipment and/or machinery to be used, in the operation of the gravel bank and its location if it is to be permanently situated within the gravel bank. Such equipment, if permitted, must be for use on that site only, and is only for the duration of the gravel bank operations. A list of such permanent equipment shall be submitted to the town tax assessors and updated on an annual basis. 
(6)  Permitting statement. A sworn statement indicating whether the applicant has made application for and/or secured all necessary permits required under any other federal or state law or town ordinance including a list of such permits applied for and/or secured. 
(7)  Applicable licensure for use or operation of earth removal equipment. A list of any and all applicable licenses and/or permits for the use or operation of earth removal equipment or machinery. 
(8)  Fee. A fee of $100.00 per application, plus costs and fees incurred by the town. 
The planning board and the gravel bank commission will have 45 days from the time the town council accepts the application as complete to conclude their review and forward their respective advisory opinions to the town council. The applicant will then prepare and submit a final plan for the license. 
(Ord. of 10-3-94, § 3; Ord. of 12-4-95) 
Sec. 30-82. - Issuance and fee. 
(a)  No person shall open or operate a gravel bank or engage in earth removal without first obtaining a license from the town council. Such earth removal license shall be a condition precedent to earth removal in the town. Prior to any license being issued, the town engineer shall inspect the site where the gravel bank is operating or where a gravel bank is proposed or where earth removal is proposed and shall report its findings to the planning board and the gravel bank commission. 
(b)  There shall be an initial license fee of $100.00 per acre for each acre to be disturbed during the initial two-year application period. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to proceed with earth removal without first obtaining a license from the town council. 
(Ord. of 10-3-94, § 4) 
Sec. 30-83. - Renewal and fees. 
(a)  The town council may grant a gravel bank license renewal for the sole purpose of extending the time within which the plan shall be completed. Any change to or expansion of a plan shall require a new application. 
(b)  A renewal fee equal to $25.00 per acre shall be paid for each license renewal granted by the town council. 
(Ord. of 10-3-94, § 5) 
Sec. 30-84. - Conditions on license. 
    In connection with the application for a license, the town council may grant or deny any application filed pursuant to this article, in whole or in part, and in so acting shall take into account public health, safety and welfare, including the possibility of dust, noise, unsightly waste, soil erosion, drainage problems and protection of property values, together with such other factors as it shall deem appropriate and may impose conditions which, in the discretion and judgment or in each particular case, are designed to prevent personal injury, to promote the health and welfare of the town's residents and to safeguard the surrounding area and the town against permanent and temporary injury to property values, either during operation of the gravel bank (including the handling and transportation of earth materials) or after operations are completed. However, all licenses shall require that: 
(1)  Buffer areas. The following buffer areas will be left in their natural state during the life of the license: 
a.  One hundred fifty feet from any street line; 
b.  One hundred fifty feet from any occupied dwelling. 
(2)  Ledges; burying of trees and stumps. In the licensed areas, ledge shall not be left exposed above the approved grade, and all cleared trees, stumps and brush shall be removed or completely buried. If buried, a plan showing the location of all such buried trees, stumps or other material subject to subsequent compacting by decay shall be filed with the building inspector. However, no trees, stumps or other material subject to decay shall be buried at an elevation below the maximum water table. 
(3)  Grading of final banks. All final banks shall be graded to a slope no steeper than one foot vertical to two feet horizontal. 
(4)  Topsoil; seeding. Following earth material removal, topsoil shall be spread to a minimum depth of six inches. Seeding of the area shall be done per the recommendations, if any, of the planning board. 
(5)  Standing water. No excavation shall produce standing water unless specifically approved. 
(6)  Removal of earth material. Earth material shall not be removed to an elevation less than four feet above the maximum water table elevation. 
(7)  Prevention of erosion or sedimentation. Adequate measures shall be taken to prevent erosion or depositing of sediment upon surrounding land and streets or into any water way, pond or swamp as required by federal law, state law, and the town conservation commission and the planning board. 
(8)  Hours and days when removal is prohibited. Earth removal operations shall not be conducted during the period from 6:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. of any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday or Saturday, nor shall such operations be conducted on any Sunday or legal holiday. Earth removal operations during the within prohibited times or days may be authorized by the town council upon application showing good cause. 
(9)  Screening. Screening, either in the form of vegetation or fencing, not less than six feet in height, shall be erected around the license area along the property boundary. 
(10)  Access roads. Access roads to the site and within the permitted area shall be treated with water only, to minimize dust conditions. 
(11)  Equipment or machinery for screening, washing, crushing or other like processes. No equipment or machinery for the screening, washing, crushing or other like processing of any material not extracted from the land shall be permitted on the property. 
(12)  Acreage limitations. Earth removal operations shall be limited to ten acres at any given time. Each additional ten acres, or a part thereof, shall be part of another approved application. 
(13)  Rehabilitation of excavated land; time limit for completion. All land excavated must be rehabilitated within one year of completion of the excavations of each licensed phase. Rehabilitation of the area shall be in conformance with the United States Department of Agriculture Guidelines for Developing and Restoring Gravel Pits. 
(14)  Access points. Access points to the property shall be kept free of loose gravel and debris. 
(Ord. of 10-3-94, § 8) 
Sec. 30-85. - Duration; renewal. 
    The town council shall issue such licenses for a period not to exceed two years. All licenses shall specify the commencement date and shall expire not longer than two years thereafter. Any license holder may apply to the town council to renew his license by filing a renewal application in compliance with section 30-31. Applications for renewal may incorporate by reference any documents filed with the original application. All operations up for renewal will be subject to site inspection and verification, prior to renewal, to confirm that all plans and license conditions are being followed by the operators. All reasonable costs shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant and shall be filed prior to December 1 of each year. 
(Ord. of 10-3-94, § 9) 
Sec. 30-86. - Restrictions. 
(a)  Any license granted under the provisions of this article shall not run with the land. Any conveyance of the premises conveying the gravel bank, or portion thereof, shall require an application to transfer by the succeeding owner, if gravel bank operations are to be continued upon those premises or a portion thereof. Sale for other uses must be preceded by satisfactory completion of site reclamation. 
(b)  Any license granted under the provisions of this article shall be limited to the boundaries of the original plan for which the license was granted. Expansion beyond the original plan requires a new application. 
(Ord. of 10-3-94, § 10) 
Sec. 30-87. - Revocation. 
    Any person who, after receiving a license in accordance with this article, violates any conditions set forth in such license shall be subject to having such license revoked and the bond forfeited. No revocation shall be made without first giving notification of the violation to the license holder and a public hearing. 
(Ord. of 10-3-94, § 11) 
Sec. 30-88. - Failure of licensee to complete plan; lien. 
    If a licensee shall fail to complete the plan contained in the approved application within the time specified therein, then, in addition to action against the licensee's bond and any other legal remedies, the town is authorized and empowered to undertake and complete such plan. In the event of such undertaking by the town, the owner of the land specified in such application shall reimburse the town for its necessary expenses in connection therewith and such expenses shall constitute a lien upon the entire tract of land of which any portion has been specified in an approved application. 
(Ord. of 10-3-94, § 16) 
Sec. 30-89. - Conditions for issuance. 
    No license shall be issued by the town council, as set forth in section 30-81 unless and until the applicant shall submit the documents required by section 30-33 and the application shall be approved by the town council. 
(Ord. of 10-3-94, § 17) 
Sec. 30-90. - Revocation hearing. 
    The town council, upon petition or on its own motion, may revoke any license issued under this article for violation of any of the provisions of this article. Prior to such action by the town council, it shall hold a hearing and give the licensee seven days' notice of such hearing. 
(Ord. of 10-3-94, § 19) 
Chapter 34 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 22; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 26; natural resources, ch. 30; nonissuance and nonrenewal of licenses or permits to applicants or licensees in arrears in taxes, liens and assessments, § 42-1. 
State Law reference- Recycling solid waste, G.L. 1956, § 23-18.8-1 et seq.; refuse disposal, G.L. 1956, § 23-18.9-1 et seq.; hazardous wastes, G.L. 1956, § 23-19.1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1-34-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Refuse disposal, G.L. 1956, § 23-18.9-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-31. - Purpose of article. 
    In order to comply with state and federal regulations, and to ensure that town citizens will continue to receive affordable and efficient waste disposal, it shall be the town council's intent to: 
(1)  Adopt rules and regulations for the operation of the transfer station; 
(2)  Establish fair and equitable fees to cover the costs of waste disposal; and 
(3)  Encourage the conservation of natural resources through recycling and public awareness programs. 
(Ord. of 6-1-92, § I) 
Sec. 34-32. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bulky waste means large items of solid waste such as major household appliances, furniture, auto parts, flotage, etc. 
    Construction debris means waste building material and refuse resulting from construction, remodeling and repair of houses, commercial/industrial buildings, barns, garages, outbuildings and other structures. 
    Demolition debris means solid waste generated from the razing of buildings and other manmade structures. 
    Disposal means the final disposition of waste. 
    Hard to dispose of items means those items, as determined by the state department of environmental management or its successor, or transfer station personnel. 
    Hazardous waste means any waste as defined in the Rhode Island Hazardous Waste Act G.L. 1956, § 23-19.1-1 et seq., or in regulations adopted pursuant thereto, as amended. 
    Nonhazardous liquid and semiliquid waste means any discarded material that is liquid or semiliquid and which is not hazardous waste as defined in the Rhode Island Hazardous Waste Act G.L. 1956, § 23-19.1-1 et seq., or in regulations adopted pursuant thereto, as amended. 
    Refuse. See Solid waste. 
    Solid waste means garbage, refuse and other discarded solid materials generated by residential, institutional, commercial, industrial and agricultural sources, but does not include solids or dissolved material in domestic sewage or sewage sludge, nor does it include hazardous waste as defined in the Rhode Island Hazardous Waste Act G.L. 1956, § 23-19.1-1 et seq., or in regulations adopted pursuant thereto, as amended. For purposes of this article, solid waste shall also include nonhazardous liquid, semiliquid and containerized gaseous wastes subject to any special conditions contained in this article. 
    Waste means discarded solid or semisolid or liquid material. 
(Ord. of 6-1-92, § IX) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-33. - General regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to dispose of solid waste on any property, public or private, within the town, except in a manner and location approved by the town council. Until further notice, the approved location for the disposal of solid waste shall be the town transfer station located on Ten Rod Road. The disposal of all other wastes shall be in a manner and location approved by the town council and the applicable state agency. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to transport solid waste on or over the state or town roads without having first obtained the appropriate permit and/or license. 
(c)  No person shall operate a vehicle in which solid waste is being transported, across a public roadway of this town, unless such waste is covered and/or properly secured. Failure to properly cover/secure the vehicle load can result in the assessment of fines and/or other penalties as allowed by law. 
(Ord. of 6-1-92, § II; Amd. of 8-4-14) 
Sec. 34-34. - Penalty for violation of article. 
(a)  Any person in violation of this article may be subject to the punishment in section 1-15. 
(b)  In addition to fines, any person violating any of the rules and regulations of this article may be excluded from use of the town's waste disposal facility. The duration of this penalty will be determined by the town council after a hearing thereon. 
(c)  Any permit issued pursuant to this article may be revoked by the town council upon failure of the permit holder to comply with all applicable ordinances of the town. 
(Ord. of 6-1-92, § VII; Amd. of 8-4-14) 
Sec. 34-35. - Appeals. 
(a)  All decisions by transfer station personnel are binding. Any person aggrieved by such decision may appeal to the town council for a hearing, and shall be placed on the first available agenda of the regularly scheduled town council meeting. 
(b)  Decisions of the town council may be appealed to superior court which shall hear the matter de novo. 
(Ord. of 6-1-92, § VIII) 
Secs. 34-36-34-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TRANSFER STATION 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 34-56. - Management and operation-Director of public works. 
    Pursuant to article VIII, section 801 of the Town Charter entitled "department of public works", the director of public works shall be responsible for the administration, operation, management and maintenance of the transfer station in accordance with all applicable ordinances, rules and regulations adopted by the town council. 
(Ord. of 12-1-03, § 1) 
Secs. 34-57-34-75. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Permits 

Sec. 34-76. - Enumeration of types. 
(a)  Annual permit. An annual permit is issued to an individual to allow access to the transfer station for the purpose of disposing of household refuse which was generated at the individual's town residence. This permit is available to anyone who currently resides in the Town of Exeter (permanently or seasonally) or who currently rents or leases residences in the Town of Exeter. Persons who own rental or leased residences in the Town of Exeter would not be entitled to a permit using that address as it is not their residence. Documentation as prima facie evidence of town residency and current motor vehicle registration is required. 
(b)  Annual permit for senior citizen. Annual permits for senior citizens are available to any individual who meets the criteria in subsection (a) of this section and who has reached 65 years of age. 
(c)  Single use permit. A single use permit may be issued to any individual who meets the criteria defined in subsection (a) of this section, or who is not a resident but who is performing contractual work at a resident's property. Such work generating waste must be that waste which can be disposed of at the transfer station. This permit limits the holder to a single entry to the transfer station, and is valid only for 30 days from the date of issuance. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Recycling permit. A recycling permit is available to any resident who otherwise would not utilize the transfer station, to gain entry for the sole purpose of disposing of recyclable materials. 
(f)  Special needs permit. A special needs permit may be issued to residents with disabilities, as defined by federal law, to allow nonresidents or other persons to bring the resident's waste to the transfer station. 
(Ord. of 6-1-92, § IV; Amd. of 8-4-14) 
Sec. 34-77. - Numbering, date of issuance and registration number. 
    Permits shall be numbered consecutively and shall indicate thereon the date of issue and registration number of the vehicle for which the permit has been issued. 
(Ord. of 6-1-92, § IV(5)) 
Sec. 34-78. - Miscellaneous requirements. 
(a)  All permits shall be issued annually on or before August 31 and shall expire on the following August 31. 
(b)  A permit is required for each vehicle utilizing transfer station privileges. 
(c)  There shall be a maximum of two permits issued per household. 
(d)  No vehicle shall be allowed to enter the transfer station without the appropriate permit properly affixed. 
(Ord. of 6-1-92, § IV; Amd. of 8-4-14) 
Secs. 34-79-34-100. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Reserved[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- An amendment adopted Aug. 4, 2014, deleted Subdiv. III, §§ 34-101-34-106, which pertained to private hauler's license and derived from an ordinance adopted June 1, 1992, § V. 

Secs. 34-101-34-125. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Use Regulations 

Sec. 34-126. - Hours of operation. 
    Hours of operation shall be on Wednesday, Saturday and Sunday from 7:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. 
(Ord. of 6-1-92, § III.A.; Amd. of 3-3-03, § 1) 
Sec. 34-127. - Prohibited items. 
    The following items shall not be accepted at the town transfer station: 
(1)  Refuse from outside of the town. 
(2)  Refuse brought to the transfer station in vehicles without the valid permit attached to the driver's side windshield, or a single use permit or other appropriate permit. 
(3)  Ash, cinder, burned materials or smoldering loads. 
(4)  Any hazardous solid, liquid, semiliquid or gaseous wastes. 
(5)  Stumps, brush, paving materials, stones, bricks, cinder blocks, dirt or other earthen materials. 
(6)  All building material: Wood, plaster board, paneling, etc., in excess of four feet in any one dimension. 
(7)  Radioactive, biological, chemical, medical, infectious, explosive or other hazardous wastes, as defined in the Rhode Island Hazardous Waste Act, G.L. 1956, § 23-19.1-1 et seq., or in regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
(8)  Residential, commercial and industrial recyclable material, uncontaminated, which in the opinion of the transfer station personnel must be recycled in accordance with prevailing laws, rules, and regulations promulgated by the state. 
(9)  Any single item in excess of four feet in any single direction, without the permission of the transfer station personnel. 
(10)  Any substance or item which, in the opinion of the transfer station personnel, may cause damage to, or adversely affect the operation of the transfer station. 
(11)  Household hazardous waste including, but not limited to, materials such as insecticides, pesticides, swimming pool chemicals and petroleum based materials such as oil-based paints, and any other materials defined as hazardous in the Rhode Island Hazardous Waste Act, G.L. 1956, § 23-19.1-1 et seq., or in regulations adopted pursuant thereto, as amended. Household hazardous materials should be properly disposed of during state or locally sponsored programs such as the state department of environmental management "Household Hazardous Material Disposal Days," or equivalent method. 
(12)  Refrigerators, air conditioners, and other appliances with Freon or other agents classified as refrigeration coolants. 
(Ord. of 6-1-92, § III.B.; Amd. of 8-4-14) 
Sec. 34-128. - Restricted items. 
    The following items shall be accepted at the town transfer station, with limitations, and may be subject to a disposal fee established by the town council: 
(1)  Tires. 
(2)  Bulky waste. 
(3)  A maximum of five gallons of waste crankcase oil, per permit, per week, will be accepted from residents only. All waste oil must be deposited in the designated storage area or container. Private businesses (garages, dealerships, etc.), shall make their own provisions for storage and removal of waste crankcase oil. 
(4)  Multicell batteries (automobile, marine, motorcycle, etc.) shall be accepted for deposit in an area designated by transfer station personnel. 
(5)  Other hard to dispose of items including, but not limited to, engines and transmissions, (automobile, motorcycle, tractor, etc.), and other machine parts or implements, etc., which in the opinion of the transfer station personnel would require an additional handling fee. 
(Ord. of 6-1-92, § III.C.) 
Sec. 34-129. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- An amendment adopted Aug. 4, 2014, deleted § 34-129, which pertained to special material processing and derived from an ordinance adopted June 1, 1992, § III.D. 
Sec. 34-130. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  The burden of proof necessary to show compliance with any of the terms or conditions contained within this article rests solely with the applicant/user. 
(b)  Nonresidents of the town shall at all times be prohibited from entering and utilizing the town waste disposal facility, except as provided for in sections 34-76(c)-(f) and 34-77. 
(c)  Pets are not allowed out of any vehicle while the vehicle is on the transfer station property. 
(d)  Children under the age of 16 must at all times be under complete supervision of an adult. 
(e)  Loitering, picking through rubbish, scrap metal, or any other containers, is prohibited. 
(f)  Household refuse must be transported in plastic or heavy paper bags, or in containers which would permit quick traffic flow through the station and minimize inconvenience to other residents, as well as prevent blowing paper. 
(g)  All materials must be deposited in the location designated and as directed by transfer station personnel. Depositing refuse or recyclable materials along the roadway or other locations not designated or directed will be considered littering. Offenders shall be subject to penalties as described by section 34-34. 
(h)  Abusive language or behavior while at the transfer station will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for permit revocation, and/or other penalties allowed by law. 
(Ord. of 6-1-92, § III.E.; Amd. of 8-4-14) 
Secs. 34-131-34-150. - Reserved. 
Subdivision V. - User Fees 

Sec. 34-151. - Imposition; disposition. 
(a)  All fees for use of the transfer station shall be set as deemed necessary by the town council. 
(b)  Revenues derived from the collection of the transfer station fees shall be used to operate, maintain and improve the transfer station facility. 
(Ord. of 6-1-92, § VI; Ord. of 10-28-92, § VI; Ord. of 4-3-95(2), § VI.A., B.) 
Sec. 34-152. - Payment. 
    All permit fees are to be paid at the town clerk's office during normal business hours prior to use of the transfer station. All other fees (including but not limited to, bulky waste, hard to dispose items, etc.), with the exception of tipping fees, are to be paid prior to the use of the transfer station and can be paid to transfer station personnel at the transfer station. 
(Ord. of 6-1-92, § VI; Ord. of 10-28-92, § VI; Ord. of 4-3-95(2), § VI.C.; Amd. of 8-4-14) 
Sec. 34-153. - Permits. 
    The fees for permits shall be as follows: 
(1)  Annual permit. The fee for annual permits shall be $150.00. A second permit (same household) shall be $70.00. 
(2)  Annual permit; senior citizens (age 65 or older). The fee for annual permits issued to senior citizens shall be $70.00. 
(3)  Single use permit: $50.00 
(4)  Recycling only permit: No fee. 
(5)  Special needs permit: $120.00 
(6)  New residents (one year or less occupancy) sliding scale: The fee for annual permits shall be pro-rated accordingly for new residents to the town. Proof of new residency must be provided at the time of permit purchase and must include the purchaser's name and Exeter address as identified by the following documents: 
  Recorded deed or signed lease agreement; 
  Vehicle registrations from previous address and new address; 
  Utility bills (telephone, electric, cable). 
    The pro-rated fee schedule for new residences shall be applied according to the start date of residency and not at the date of permit purchase as follows: 
a.  September 1-November 30 ..... $150.00 
b.  December 1-February 28 ..... 130.00 
c.  March 1-May 31 ..... 90.00 
d.  June 1-August 31 ..... 70.00 
(Ord. of 6-1-92, § VI; Ord. of 10-28-92, § VI; Ord. of 4-3-95(2), § VI.D.; Amd. of 5-5-03; Amd. of 4-4-05; Amd. of 8-15-05; Ord. of 8-7-06; Amd. of 9-4-07; Amd. of 8-4-14; Ord. of 7-5-16(1)) 
Sec. 34-154. - Bulky waste; restricted items; hard to dispose items. 
    The fees for bulky waste, restricted items, and hard to dispose of items shall be as follows: 
(1)  Major house appliances; sofas ..... $25.00 
(2)  Chairs ..... 15.00 
(3)  Televisions ..... 10.00 
(4)  Tires: 
Automobile ..... 5.00 
Truck ..... 10.00 
Size 800 and over ..... 15.00 
Tractor, cut in quarters and charged at a rate per quarter of ..... 5.00 
(5)  Multicell battery ..... 3.00 
(6)  Other hard to dispose of items ..... 20.00 
(7)  Computers ..... 10.00 
(8)  Microwave ovens ..... 10.00 
(9)  Toilets ..... 10.00 
(10)  Sinks ..... 10.00 
(11)  Bathroom fixtures ..... 10.00 
(12)  Yard waste, per bag ..... 1.00 
(15)  Propane gas tanks ..... 15.00 
(14)  Mattresses recoverable ..... 0.00 
(15)  Box springs recoverable ..... 0.00 
(16)  Mattresses not recoverable ..... 0.00 
(17)  Box springs not recoverable ..... 0.00 
(Ord. of 6-1-92, § VI; Ord. of 10-28-92, § VI; Ord. of 4-3-95(2), § VI.E.; Ord. of 2-7-00(2); Ord. of 10-2-00(1); Ord. of 6-4-01; Ord. of 11-5-01(2); Amd. of 10-6-03(2); Amd. of 4-4-05; Ord. of 8-7-06; Amd. of 8-4-14; Ord. of 7-5-16(1)) 
Sec. 34-155. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- An amendment adopted Aug. 4, 2014, deleted § 34-155 which pertained to tipping fees and derived from an ordinance adopted June 1, 1992, § VI; an ordinance adopted Oct. 28, 1992, § VI; and an ordinance adopted Apr. 3, 1995, § VI.F. 
Sec. 34-156. - Additional tipping fees. 
    Additional tipping fees shall be assessed for waste disposal, and of demolition debris, or construction debris disposal by all users at a rate as follows: 
(1)  Vehicles with a capacity of one-half to three-quarters of a ton: $50.00. 
(2)  Vehicles with a capacity greater than three-quarter ton, up to one ton: $70.00. 
(3)  Vehicles with a capacity greater than one ton: $80.00. 
(Ord. of 6-1-92, § VI; Ord. of 10-28-92, § VI; Ord. of 4-3-95(2), § VI; Amd. of 4-4-05; Ord. of 8-7-06; Amd. of 8-4-14) 
Sec. 34-157. - Basis of rates. 
    All rates are based on vehicle capacities as determined by transfer station personnel and are rounded up to the next whole ton. 
(Ord. of 6-1-92, § VI; Ord. of 10-28-92, § VI; Ord. of 4-3-95(2), § VI) 
Sec. 34-158. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcing officer. It shall be the duty of the sergeant of the town to enforce this article. 
(b)  Penalties for violations. Penalties for violations shall be issued as follows: 
(1)  Residents violating section 34 [this division]: 
a.  First offense: Written warning. 
b.  Second offense: $25.00 
c.  Subsequent offense: $50.00 
d.  Loss of Transfer Station Permit. 
(Amd. of 8-4-14) 
Secs. 34-159-34-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RECYCLING[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Recycling solid waste, G.L. 1956, § 23-18.8-1 et seq.; hazardous wastes, G.L. 1956, § 23-19.1-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-191. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcing officer. It shall be the duty of the sergeant of the town to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Penalties for violations. Penalties for violations shall be as follows: 
(1)  Residents violating section 34-213: 
a.  First offense: Written warning. 
b.  Second offense: $25.00. 
c.  Subsequent offense: $50.00. 
(2)  Haulers violating section 34-262: 
a.  First offense: Written warning. 
b.  Second offense: $200.00. 
c.  Subsequent offense: Loss of license. 
(Ord. of 6-7-93, § 7) 
Secs. 34-192-34-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROGRAM 

Sec. 34-211. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Mixed recyclables means those materials required to be removed from municipal solid waste at the source and delivered directly to the town recycling facility or placed in or on top of the setout container provided by the Solid Waste Management Corporation for collection by a privately contracted hauler. 
    Recyclable materials means those separated from municipal solid waste for processing for reuse as specified by the director of the state department of environmental management and listed in section 4 of the Municipal Recycling Regulations and within this article. The materials to be included may change from time to time depending upon new technologies, economic conditions, waste stream characteristics, environmental effects or mutual agreement between the state and municipalities. 
    Resident means anyone (including any business entity regardless of organizational form) residing in the town for any period of time who generates solid waste for which the town accepts disposal responsibility. 
    Solid waste means garbage, refuse and other discarded solid materials generated by residential, institutional, commercial, industrial and agricultural sources, but not including solids or dissolved material in domestic sewage or septage nor hazardous waste as defined in the state hazardous waste management act, G.L. 1956, § 23-19.1-1 et seq. 
    Source separation means the removal by the generator of recyclable materials, including mixed recyclables from all other solid waste generated by the household and conveyance of the recyclable materials to the town recycling facility or to the curbside for collection by a private hauler. 
(Ord. of 6-7-93, § 2) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-212. - Mandatory recycling. 
    A mandatory recycling program is hereby implemented in the town pursuant to G.L. 1956, §§ 23-18.8-1 et seq., 23-18.9-1 et seq. and the state department of environmental management Municipal Recycling Regulations, as amended. 
(Ord. of 6-7-93, § 1) 
Sec. 34-213. - Residential recycling. 
(a)  All residents are required to separate recyclable materials from residential solid waste and to deliver those materials directly to the town recycling facility or to have them delivered to a town or state recycling facility by a private hauler. This division does not, however, bar any residents from giving recyclable materials to a nonprofit organization. 
(b)  The following materials are required to be separated from residential solid waste and delivered to a town or state recycling facility: 
(1)  Newspapers; 
(2)  Aluminum; 
(3)  Steel/tin cans; 
(4)  Glass containers; 
(5)  PET plastic soda bottles; 
(6)  HDPE plastic dairy jugs; 
(7)  Other materials determined by the state department of environmental management to be recyclable in its Municipal Recycling Regulations, section 4-1. 
(c)  All separated materials are to be delivered to a town, state or state designated recycling facility in a processable condition, i.e., at a minimum, all glass, plastic, steel/tin and aluminum containers shall be empty and rinsed, aluminum foil shall be clean, webbing shall be removed from aluminum furniture, no noncontainer glass shall be mixed with the recyclables, newspapers shall be placed in a brown paper bag or tied in bundles with a string and any other requirements in the state department of environmental management's Municipal Recycling Regulations, which are on file in the town clerk's office. 
(Ord. of 6-7-93, § 3) 
Sec. 34-214. - Public events. 
    The separation of recyclables from solid waste shall be a condition of licensing or authorization of any public event the conduct of which generates solid waste for which the town accepts disposal responsibility. 
(Ord. of 6-7-93, § 5) 
Secs. 34-215-34-235. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PRIVATE LICENSING 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 34-236. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Groundwater means water collected and stored in the saturated zone beneath the ground surface. 
    Pollution means the alteration of the chemical, physical, biological and/or radiological integrity of groundwater, surface water and/or air quality. 
    Polluting means the causing of pollution. 
    Recycling means the re-use through any means of recovered resources in manufacturing, agriculture, power production or other processes and/or uses. 
    Recycling facility means the re-use through any means of recovered resources in manufacturing, agriculture, power production or other processes and/or uses. 
    Solid waste means garbage, refuse, sludge as defined by the state department of environmental management and other discarded solid materials including demolition materials generated by residential, institutional, commercial, industrial and agricultural services, but does not include hazardous waste as defined in the state hazardous waste management act, G.L. 1956, § 23-19.1-1 et seq. For purposes of this division, solid waste shall also include asphalt, concrete, Portland concrete cement and tree stumps. Stump dumps incidental to a residential, commercial or industrial development, approved by the planning board, shall be exempted from the licensing requirements of this division but shall comply with subdivision and development regulations pertaining to the same. 
    Surface water means a body of water whose top surface is exposed to the atmosphere. 
    Wellhead protection area means the critical portion of a three-dimensional zone surrounding a public well or wellfield through which water will move toward and reach such well or wellfield as designated by the town and/or the director of the state department of environmental management. 
(Ord. of 3-24-94, § I) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-237. - Enforcement of division. 
(a)  No person shall recycle solid waste in any manner on any property, public or private, within the town, except in a location designated and licensed for a recycling facility by the town council. 
(b)  Suit shall be brought in the superior court in the name of the town to restrain any violation of, or compel compliance with, the provisions of this division or any condition of approval, or the terms of any approved operations plan. 
(c)  The town will require strict compliance with the terms of this division and with any conditions of approval as set forth by the town council and with the terms of any approved operations plan. By application for license, the applicant consents to injunctive relief to the town's benefit until such time as the operator can certify and demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the town, the removal of violations and certify that future operations shall be conducted pursuant to the approved plan. 
(Ord. of 3-23-94, §§ II, IX) 
Secs. 34-238-34-260. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Collectors and Haulers[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18. 

Sec. 34-261. - Authorized recycling collectors. 
    No person shall solicit the commercial collection of any recyclable material within the town for personal gain except as specifically authorized by the town. The town may issue permits to charitable organizations to collect recyclable materials on the condition that a report is filed by such organization detailing the weights of each material collected in compliance with the state department of environmental management reporting requirements and provided that the town determines that such collection does not conflict with the town's recycling program. 
(Ord. of 6-7-93, § 6) 
Sec. 34-262. - Requirements for licensed haulers. 
(a)  All qualified persons engaged in the business of collecting and hauling refuse and operating transfer stations for reuse generated within the boundaries of the town shall be licensed by the town, pursuant to G.L. 1956, § 23-18.9-1(b)(1). 
(b)  Licensed haulers shall collect only that residential solid waste that is source separated by the resident into the recyclable and nonrecyclable components. 
(c)  Licensed haulers shall keep recyclable materials separate from nonrecyclable resident solid waste. 
(d)  Licensed haulers shall maintain any separated recyclable materials that are delivered to a state recycling facility in processable condition. 
(e)  Licensed haulers shall keep residential recyclable materials separate from recyclables collected from commercial accounts. 
(f)  Licensed haulers who deliver recyclables to a state recycling facility shall deliver to such facility only recyclables generated by the town. 
(g)  Licensed haulers shall deliver all recyclables designated to go to a state recycling facility to such facility. 
(Ord. of 6-7-93, § 4) 
Secs. 34-263-34-285. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Facilities 

Sec. 34-286. - Public hearing required; notice. 
    The town council shall issue licenses and regulate activities for recycling facilities. All licenses issued under this division shall be subject to the requirements set forth in this subdivision. No such license shall be issued until a public hearing has been held by the town council. Notice of the public hearing shall be advertised for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the town prior to the date of the hearing. The newspaper notice shall be published as a display advertisement and shall include the place, time and date of the hearing; the name of the applicant; a description of the license sought; the street address, plat, block and lot numbers of the property in question; and shall advise those interested where and when a copy of the license application may be examined or obtained. Notice of the hearing shall be sent to all property owners by certified mail, return receipt requested, within 1,000 feet of the boundary of the property upon which the recycling facility is proposed to be operated. Such notice to property owners must at a minimum contain all information required for the display advertisement and must be sent at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(Ord. of 3-24-94, § III) 
Sec. 34-287. - License renewals. 
    A license shall expire after one year. Licenses authorized by the town council may be renewed annually, if a renewal application is filed by the licensee. An application for license renewal shall be accompanied by the licensee's affidavit that the facility is operating according to plan and in accordance with any and all conditions of approval. In addition, any request for license renewal shall be accompanied by fees and license requirements including, but not limited to, new or revised performance guarantees as required by the town council. 
(Ord. of 3-24-94, § IV) 
Sec. 34-288. - License requirements. 
    All applicants for a recycling facility license shall demonstrate compliance with the following requirements. The following shall be deemed to be preconditions to license approval and/or renewal. No license shall be issued unless the town council has expressly made an affirmative finding of compliance with regard to each and every requirement set forth as follows: 
(1)  The proposed site is located in a zoning district which permits the proposed facility either as a permitted use or by special exception. 
(2)  If applicable, a license for the operation of a recycling facility has been issued by the director of the state department of environmental management. 
(3)  The recycling facility shall be operated in a manner so as to not cause or be likely to cause pollution of the groundwaters, the surface waters or the air of the town. 
(4)  The facility will be operated in a manner so as to be in compliance with any and all other municipal ordinances. 
(5)  The applicant has sufficient financial resources so as to be able to complete the requirements of any closure and/or other restoration required under this division. The town council shall require the applicant to post with the town adequate security to guarantee the applicant's obligations pursuant to the closure plan for the site and/or for any restoration required. Such performance guarantee shall also include, but not be limited to, the cost to repair roadway damage incurred through the transportation of solid waste to and from the facility, the removal of solid waste, protection from soil erosion and sedimentation and the restoration of surface conditions. A town-appointed engineer shall prepare an estimate of a required performance guarantee based on the closure plan or restoration plan submitted by the applicant. Such plan must provide sufficient detail as to site change proposed and quantities of material anticipated. A town-appointed engineer shall also prepare a report based on recommendations from other town departments of anticipated impacts from the licensing of a recycling facility; such report will provide the documentation for the performance guarantee in addition to any requirements of the closure or restoration plans. No license under this division shall be issued unless and until the performance guarantee approved by the town council has been received by the town clerk. 
(6)  The applicant has granted to the town a perpetual easement allowing the town the perpetual right to enter upon the land at reasonable times for the purposes of inspecting the solid waste management facility or for the purpose of conducting tests where the recycling facility is located. 
(7)  No solid waste shall be stored, disposed of, temporarily or permanently, at or near a recycling facility unless otherwise licensed as a solid waste disposal facility by the town and the state. The applicant shall have prepared by a registered engineer experienced in the field of environmental engineering and approved by the town council a plan for monitoring wells for the site proposed. Such monitoring wells shall be installed by the applicant to verify the groundwater elevations and be used to ensure the protection of the groundwater on the site and outside the site boundaries, or surface water bodies, if any. Monitoring well plans will be reviewed by the town for consistency with the objectives of this division and any other town ordinances. The town council shall receive from each applicant a report recommending a monitoring program for the site proposed. Such monitoring program will identify, at a minimum: The locations to be tested; the frequency of the test; the types of tests to be conducted; and the persons to conduct the testing. Such persons identified to conduct the testing shall be subject to town council approval. In addition to these minimums, the monitoring program shall include quarterly split sample testing. Such split sample testing shall be conducted at certified labs which have been approved by the town council. The town council shall review the report and use the report for establishing any necessary conditions to the license approval. The cost of such monitoring shall be borne by the applicant or license holder. 
(8)  All recycling facilities shall, in addition to all of the other requirements of this division, comply with all of the rules and regulations for solid waste management facilities, adopted and as amended by the state department of environmental management, division of air and hazardous materials. 
(9)  The granting of a license shall include the right of the town to conduct onsite inspections, as well as review manifests and records without notice during operating hours. 
(10)  The applicant certifies that no chemical processes intended to facilitate recycling activities will be used. 
(11)  All recycling facilities shall conduct all activities within structures approved for such use; no outside storage, temporary or permanent, shall be permitted. Any and all costs incurred by the town for necessary notice and advertising shall be reimbursed by the applicant prior to the public hearing. 
(Ord. of 3-23-94, § V) 
Sec. 34-289. - Special conditions. 
    The town council may establish special conditions for each license as part of licensing approval. 
(Ord. of 3-23-94, § VI) 
Sec. 34-290. - Submittal requirements for license. 
    All applicants for a license under this division shall, at the time of the filing of the application, submit the following information for review and approval by the town council: 
(1)  A site plan which shall include: 
a.  The entire premises owned and the limits of the areas for which a license is sought; 
b.  Existing contours of the tract of land at two-foot contours; 
c.  The limits of any proposed extraction activities; the maximum depth of excavation; 
d.  The final contours of the tract of land upon completion of proposed activities; 
e.  The location of all existing and proposed buildings and their intended use; 
f.  The surrounding land use, zoning, structures and circulation patterns within one-half mile of the entire parcel; 
g.  The location and direction of flow of all natural watercourses, brooks, streams, drainage swales, ponds, swamps, wetlands, flood hazard areas, groundwater recharge and wellhead districts; and groundwater reservoir districts; 
h.  The location of proposed monitoring wells; and 
i.  All other requirements for site plan review based on the type of use proposed and as described in town regulations and zoning ordinances. 
(2)  An operating plan which shall include, but not be limited to, the specifications of: 
a.  Hours of operations; 
b.  Site security; 
c.  Transportation routes; 
d.  Street sweeping and repair schedules; 
e.  Local and state manifest reporting program; and 
f.  Types of equipment that will be used on site, accompanied by a description of operation processes for equipment. 
(3)  Closure or restoration plan. 
(4)  Groundwater monitoring plan. 
(5)  Emergency or contingency plan for addressing potential fire hazards, hazardous waste or other unacceptable waste that may be delivered to the recycling facility. 
(6)  Traffic impact analysis including, but not limited to, a report that identifies the number of trips generated per day; the proposed routes for traffic accessing the site; and the location of the site relative to state and local roads. Additionally, the report should identify expected impacts and any measures proposed for mitigating identified impacts. 
(7)  Legal documents including easements, monitoring well program, insurance policies which ensure compliance with all license requirements and which indemnifies the town from any liability. Any general liability or environmental coverages shall include the town as a coinsured party. 
(8)  Documentation that the applicant has the financial resources to complete the closure plan or restoration plan. 
(9)  Fees for review of site plan and associated documents, review or traffic impact analysis, and preparation of impact analysis. 
(10)  Names and mailing addresses of all property owners within 1,000 feet of the subject property. 
(11)  Anticipated life of the facility and amount of material to be recycled on a daily basis. 
(12)  Upon receipt of all submittal requirements, the town clerk shall forward the application for such license to the town planning board and conservation commission with a request for their review and recommendation for approval or disapproval and/or for setting special conditions on any approval. 
(Ord. of 3-23-94, § VII) 
Sec. 34-291. - Revocation of license. 
    Sites shall be inspected on a regular basis by the town building inspector and town-appointed engineer. If operations are not proceeding in conformance with this division or with any condition of town council approval or with any approved operations plan, the town council may immediately suspend the license, and, after notice and hearing, shall revoke any license issued under the authority of this division for any violation of any of the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. of 3-23-94, § VIII) 
Chapter 38 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, alley or other public way in the town saved from repeal, § 1-11(4); any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades in town saved from repeal, § 1-11(5); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor saved from repeal, § 1-11(7); buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; moving buildings, § 14-71 et seq.; environment, ch. 22; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 26; natural resources, ch. 30; traffic and vehicles, ch. 46; waterways, ch. 50; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference- Streets, G.L. 1956, § 24-3-1 et seq.; sidewalks, G.L. 1956, § 24-7-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1-38-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREETS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Improvement and grading by towns, G.L. 1956, § 24-3-1 et seq.; federal aid to towns, G.L. 1956, § 24-4-1 et seq.; maintenance of town highways, G.L. 1956, § 24-5-1 et seq.; abandonment by towns, G.L. 1956, § 24-6-1 et seq.; mapped streets, G.L. 1956, § 45-23.1-1 et seq.; changing streets under redevelopment plan, G.L. 1956, § 45-32-15. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-31. - Encroachment of streets. 
    Permit required. No person shall erect encroach upon or over any street line without first obtaining permission from the highway supervisor. Such permission shall only be granted as follows: The town's highway supervisor may allot such portion of the street or highway adjoining the estate of any party obtaining permission for the purpose of erecting staging, or placement of removable containers for construction debris or other obstructions, as he may deem necessary, and impose such conditions and restrictions in relation to the portion thus allotted as he may deem proper, provided that safe suitable passways for pedestrians are preserved. 
(Ord. of 2-1-99, § 2) 
Sec. 38-32. - Littering and deposits of snow or ice generally. 
    No person shall throw or deposit, or cause to be thrown or deposited, in or upon any street, highway or public place, any deposits of snow or ice or any other material or substance whatever. 
(Ord. of 2-1-99, § 3) 
Sec. 38-33. - Dangerous spills of liquids. 
    In addition to any and all other fines, obligations or penalties imposed by state or federal law, whenever from accident or casualty, any oil or other liquid which may injure man or beast by contact therewith, shall be spilled, or any glass or other solid substance which may render travel unsafe to man or beast shall be thrown or deposited in any street, the person in whose charge or control such liquid or substance was at the time of such accident or casualty, shall, as soon as reasonably may be, by removal of the same or otherwise, restore the street to a condition safe and convenient for travel of persons or vehicles. 
(Ord. of 2-1-99, § 4) 
Sec. 38-34. - Utility and telephone poles. 
(a)  Any and all utility and telephone poles that are now set or maintained in any of the public streets or highways of this town by any person, shall be set and maintained only upon the following conditions: 
(1)  The town shall at all times have the first right to occupy and use such poles for supporting any and all wires used or that may be desired to be used, by the town and the departments of its government aforesaid, and in such manner as such departments may elect. 
(2)  The owner of, and all persons using or maintaining any or all of such poles shall be responsible for and shall pay all damages that have resulted, or may result, to the town or to any person in consequence of the careless and negligent setting, using or maintaining, by such owner or user, of any such poles. 
(3)  The setting, using an maintaining of any or all of such poles shall at all times be subject to the regulations and directions the town council, and the owner or user of any such poles shall change the location of, repair or remove such poles, upon the order of the council. 
(b)  Every person who shall remove, change the location, or in any manner interfere with any of the wires that are or may be used by this town, or by the several departments of its government, without the permission therefor of the town council, or the permission of the head of the department using the same, shall upon conviction, be punished in accordance with section 38-121(o). 
(c)  Every person who shall set, use or maintain, or shall cause to be set, used or maintained, and every person who shall do any work or be employed in setting, using or maintaining, any utility pole or line of poles, in any public street or highway of this town, without license therefor being first obtained from the town council, shall upon conviction, be punished in accordance with section 38-121(o). 
(Ord. of 2-1-99, § 5) 
Secs. 38-35-38-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EXCAVATIONS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 38-51. - Application of division. 
    The provisions of this division shall not apply to excavating or digging conducted by the town department of public works, in constructions, improvement or maintenance of state roads or to corporations operating railroads. 
(Ord. of 4-2-84, § 1) 
Secs. 38-52-38-70. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Permit 

Sec. 38-71. - Required. 
    Except as provided for emergencies in this division, no person shall excavate or dig into any portion of any of the public highways of the town without having first obtained a permit. 
(Ord. of 4-2-84, § 2) 
Sec. 38-72. - Application contents; bond requirements; contents of permit. 
    The town council may at any time issue a permit authorizing a person to excavate or dig into the public highways of the town. Before issuing such permit, they shall first receive from such person a written application setting forth the name and address of such applicant and a designation of the particular portion of the public highways which the applicant desires to excavate or dig into, and a designation of the purpose for which such excavation or digging is to be carried on. Before issuing such permit, the town council shall first receive a bond from such applicant running to the town, in such sum not less than $1,000.00 as the town council may fix, with such surety as is satisfactory to the director of public works. The bond shall contain a condition that the obligation of the bond shall be in full force and effect unless such applicant shall, upon final completion of the work, leave such public highways in as good condition as before the commencement of the work, and unless the town shall be held free and harmless from all loss or damage arising by reason of any fault or neglect on the part of such applicant in the performance of the work. Such special permit, if issued by the town council, shall designate the purpose of the excavating or digging permitted, and shall designate the particular portion of the public highways to be excavated or dug into, and also the time limit within which such excavation or digging shall be completed. The town clerk shall retain on record a duplicate of such permit. 
(Ord. of 4-2-84, § 3) 
Sec. 38-73. - Limitations. 
    No person who has received the permit provided for in section 38-72 shall be authorized to excavate or dig into the public highways of the town at any other time or place or for any other purpose than the time, place and purpose designated in such permit. 
(Ord. of 4-2-84, § 4) 
Sec. 38-74. - Permittee to act under authority of council. 
    No person who has received the permit provided for in section 38-72 shall do any work, excavating or digging thereunder, except in conformity with such orders, rules or regulations, general or special, established by the town council, as shall have been brought to the attention of such person by notice in writing from the town council. 
(Ord. of 4-2-84, § 5) 
Sec. 38-75. - Revocation. 
    The town council may at any time revoke any permit provided for in this article, and thereupon such person holding such permit shall cease to excavate or dig into the public highways of the town. 
(Ord. of 4-2-84, § 6) 
Sec. 38-76. - Notification of fire chief and director of public works upon issuance. 
    Upon the issuance of the permit provided for in this division, the town council shall forthwith notify the fire chief and the director of public works of the location, size and probable duration of the excavation or digging for which such special permit is granted, together with the name and address of the permittee, when deemed necessary. 
(Ord. of 4-2-84, § 7) 
Sec. 38-77. - Inspection fees. 
    Upon issuance of each permit as provided in this division, the town council shall estimate the number of manhours necessary for the town inspection service, and the permittee shall pay to the town an inspection fee, as established in the fee schedule of the town, calculated upon this estimate. Should the estimate of manhours turn out to be deficient or excessive by four hours, the permittee will be required to pay the difference or be refunded accordingly at a similar rate. 
(Ord. of 4-2-84, § 8) 
Sec. 38-78. - Emergency excavation. 
    If an emergency situation requires immediate excavation by any person, subject to this division, such emergency excavation may take place only to the extent necessary to meet such emergency and provided that the director of public works be notified immediately of the nature of the emergency and its location. Such person shall apply for the necessary permits under this division, as soon as possible but in no case more than 24 hours after such emergency excavation commences, excluding Saturday and Sunday. 
(Ord. of 4-2-84, § 9) 
Secs. 38-79-38-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OFFICIAL STREET MAP[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Street maps, G.L. 1956, § 45-23.1 et seq. 

Sec. 38-101. - Intent of division. 
    It is the intent of the town council to establish an official street map under the provisions of G.L. 1956, § 45-23.1-1 et seq., for the purpose of serving and promoting the public health, safety, morals, convenience, economy, orderliness and general welfare of the community; to further the orderly layout and use of land; to stabilize the location of real property boundary lines; to ensure proper legal descriptions; to facilitate adequate provision for transportation; and to facilitate the further subdivision of larger tracts into smaller parcels of land. 
(Ord. No. 96-01, § 1, 10-7-96) 
Sec. 38-102. - Contents generally. 
    The official map shall show the location of the streets of the town theretofore existing and established by law as public streets. The location of the streets are hereby established as shown on a map entitled "Exeter Official Street Map for the Town of Exeter," filed at the office of the town clerk. Such official map shall also show the location of the lines of streets on plats of subdivisions which shall have been approved by the planning board and recorded in land evidence in the office of the town clerk. 
(Ord. No. 96-01, § 2, 10-7-96) 
Sec. 38-103. - Additions and changes. 
    The town council is authorized and empowered to make, from time to time, additions to or modifications of the official map by placing thereon the exterior lines of planned new streets or street extensions, widenings, narrowings or vacations. No such changes shall become effective until after a public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. At least ten days' notice of such public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the town. Before making such additions or changes, the town council shall refer the matter to the planning board for report thereon, but if the planning board shall not make its report within 45 days of such reference, the necessity for such report may be deemed to be waived. The locating, widening or closing, or the approval of the locating, widening or closing of such streets by the town under the provisions of law, other than those contained in this division, shall be deemed to be a change or addition to the official map and shall be subject to all the provisions of this division, except provisions relating to public hearing and referral to the planning board. 
(Ord. No. 96-01, § 3, 10-7-96) 
Sec. 38-104. - Establishment or opening of streets not implied by placement on map. 
    The placing of any street or street line upon the official map shall not in and of itself constitute or be deemed to constitute the opening or establishment of any street or the taking or acceptance of any land for street purposes. 
(Ord. No. 96-01, § 4, 10-7-96) 
Sec. 38-105. - Regulation of buildings in bed of mapped streets. 
    For the purpose of preserving the integrity of the official map, no building permit shall be issued for any building in the bed of any street shown on the official map. Whenever the bed of a mapped street is located on one or more parcels of land and such parcels cannot yield a reasonable return to the owner unless a building permit is granted within the bed of the mapped street, the zoning board of review referred to in this section as the "board," may, in a specific case (after public hearing for which reasonable notice shall have been given to all interested parties and at which parties in interest and others shall have an opportunity to be heard), grant a permit for a building in the bed of such mapped street which will, as little as practicable, increase the cost of opening such street, or tend to cause a minimum change of the official map. The board may impose reasonable requirements as a condition of granting the permit so as to promote the health, safety, morals, convenience, economy, orderliness and general welfare of the community. The board shall refer any such application to the planning board for report and recommendation before taking action, and shall refuse a permit where the applicant will not be substantially damaged by placing his building outside the mapped street. 
(Ord. No. 96-01, § 5, 10-7-96) 
Sec. 38-106. - Buildings not on mapped streets. 
    No building permit for the erection of any building shall be issued unless the building lot abuts a street which has been placed on the official map giving access to the proposed structure, and before a permit shall be issued, such street shall have been certified to be suitably improved, or such suitable improvements shall have been assured by means of a performance guarantee, in accordance with rules and regulations adopted in the same manner as rules and regulations for subdivisions as provided in G.L. 1956, ch. 45-23 et seq. The following is a list of uncertified roads or sections of roads in the town and their approximate locations: 
Bell School House Road, from 800 feet north of the Richmond town line to intersection of New London Turnpike. 
Hog House Hill Road, from 1,550 feet west of the intersection with Liberty Church Road to 505 feet east of the intersection with Mail and Tripps Corner Roads. 
Kenny Hill Road, from 1,800 feet north of Hopkinton town line to the intersection with Route 138. 
New London Turnpike, from 2,250 feet south from the intersection of Ten Rod Road to Richmond town line. 
Old Voluntown Road, from 4,875 feet west of the intersection with Escoheag Hill Road to West Greenwich town line. 
Old Yawgoo School Road , from 665 feet southeasterly from the intersection of Gladys Kenyon to the intersection of Slocum Road. 
Pardon Joslin Road, from 3,840 feet east of the intersection with Widow Sweets Road to the intersection of Sunderland Road. 
Stony Lane, from 1,345 feet west of the intersection with New Road to the end, at the intersection of Sunderland Road. 
Tefft Hill Trail, from east of Route 3 easterly to the Richmond town line. 
Where enforcement of this section would entail practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship or where the circumstances of the case do not require the structure to be related to a street, the zoning board of review may, in a specific case, (and after a public hearing for which reasonable notice has been given to all interested parties and at which parties in interest and others shall have an opportunity to be heard), make reasonable exceptions and issue a permit subject to conditions that will ensure adequate access for firefighting equipment, ambulances and other emergency vehicles necessary for the protection of health and safety and that will protect any future street layout shown on the official map. 
(Ord. No. 96-01, § 6, 10-7-96; Ord. of 7-5-16(2); Amend. of 8-7-17(2)) 
Sec. 38-107. - Registration and revisions. 
    A certificate shall be recorded with the town clerk showing that the town has established an official map which was adopted on October 7, 1996 and which hereby supersedes any previous and existing street maps. There shall be a certified official map as described in section 38-102. The certified map shall be kept by the office of the town clerk and shall be available for inspection by any interested person during regular office hours. The certified map shall bear on its face a certification that it is a true official map described in and accompanying this division, shall show the date of October 7, 1996, shall be signed by the town council president and countersigned by the town clerk. Thereafter, no change or addition to such official map shall become effective until it shall have been indicated by the appropriate convention on the aforementioned certified official map and information placed thereon bearing the revision number and date of adoption. The official map with revisions shall be signed by the town council president and countersigned by the town clerk. 
(Ord. No. 96-01, § 7, 10-7-96) 
Sec. 38-108. - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by any decision of the zoning board of review or the town council, as the case may be, may present to the supreme court a duly verified petition for issuance of certiorari in accordance with the provisions of G.L. 1956, § 45-23.1-5. Such petition shall be filed with the court within 30 days after the filing of the decision from which relief is sought. 
(Ord. No. 96-01, § 8, 10-7-96) 
Secs. 38-109-38-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - STREETS AND CURB OPENINGS 

Sec. 38-121. - Excavations in streets. 
(a)  Permit required. No person, including any utility company, shall excavate or dig into any portion, including the curb, of any public highway or make access of any kind onto any of the public highways (which shall mean mapped streets as certified in the town's official street map) in the town, without having first obtained a special permit as outlined in this section. A dig safe number must be obtained prior to any excavation on town roads. 
(b)  Exception. The provisions of this section shall not apply to excavating or digging conducted by the state or town's highway department in the construction, improvement or maintenance of state or town roads. 
(c)  Application. Whenever the convenience of any person requires the taking up of any pavements, or the digging of any trench or hole in any of the streets or highways, such person shall obtain permission in writing of the town's highway supervisor, except when the highway supervisor declares the situation an emergency. The application for such permission shall contain an agreement to comply with the provisions of this section. A fee of $25.00 must be filed with the application at the office of the town clerk. The highway supervisor shall examine such street or highway prior to any work being performed. 
(d)  Contents of application. The highway supervisor may a any time issue a special permit authorizing any person to excavate or dig into the public highways of the town. Before issuing such a special permit, however, he shall first receive from such person a written application as attached setting forth the name and address of such applicant and a designation of the particular portion of the public highways which the applicant desires to excavate or dig into and a designation of the purpose for which such excavation or digging is to be carried on. The application must address the extent of obstruction, and describe the use of warning signs, lighted barricades, etc. Also required will be a sketch showing the details of the project. The completed application shall reflect specific performance standards for the work. 
(e)  Bond requirements. Before issuing the permit requited by this section the town clerk shall first receive a bond or certified bank check from the applicant running to the town, in the sum not less than $1,000.00 or as the highway supervisor may fix, with such surety or sureties as are satisfactory to the highway supervisor; the bond is to contain the conditions that the obligation of the applicant and surety or sureties shall be in full force and effect unless such applicant shall, upon the final completion of work, leave the public highways in as good condition as before the commencement of the work, that the town shall be free and harmless form all loss or damage arising by reason of any fault or neglect on the part of the applicant in the performance of the work. In addition, the highway supervisor may require a cash deposit in a lesser amount than the bond. In the event that such a cash deposit is required, the highway supervisor may waive requirements of the bond. The bond shall be returned canceled or remitted upon completion of work for which it was posted, upon the approval of the highway supervisor. 
(f)  Issuance of permit. An application that is signed and approved by the highway supervisor shall constitute the issuance of a permit. This permit shall designate the purpose of the excavating or digging permitted, and shall designate the particular portion of the public highways to be excavated or dug into, and also the time limit which such excavation or digging shall be completed. The highway supervisor shall retain on record a duplicate of the permit. 
(g)  Scope of permit. No person who has received the permit required by this section shall be authorized to excavate or dig into the public highways of the town at any other time or place or for any other purpose than the time, place and purpose designated in such permit. 
(h)  Conformity to regulations. No person who has received the permit required by this section shall do any work, excavating or digging thereunder, except in conformity with such orders, rules, or regulations, general or special, established by the highway supervisor of the town, as shall have brought to the attention of such person by notice in writing from the highway supervisor. 
(i)  Revocation of permit. The highway supervisor may at any time revoke any permit required by this chapter, and thereupon such person holding the permit shall cease to excavate or dig into the public highways of the town. 
(j)  Safeguards. Every person opening a street or public way must enclose the opening with sufficient barriers and must maintain yellow flashing lights at the same by night, and must take all necessary precautions to efficiently guard the public against all accidents to persons, vehicles or property of any kind. Whenever any excavation is made or any obstruction exists in any street or highway, the person having charge of such excavation or causing such obstruction, shall cause reflective signs to be placed across such street or highway, with the words "No Passing" painted thereon in dark letters, not less than two and one-half inches in length, upon a light background. Whenever any trench, hole or excavation must of necessity remain open after dark, the person making any such trench, hole or excavation shall cover the excavation with steel plates of sufficient thickness to carry vehicular traffic. Warning signs shall also be posted, etc., as described in the application/permit. 
(k)  Backfilling. After completion of the work, backfilling, compaction and replacing of pavement must be completed as soon as possible. All culverts and other drainage features, gutters, highway appurtenances and the roadway shall be restored to the satisfaction of the highway supervisor. Backfilling and compaction in the street should conform to town requirements. Usually a compaction of 95 percent in roadway is required. Trench and patch detail should be established. In case any person shall omit to fill up or repair such street or highway to the satisfaction of the town, the town shall fill or repair the same in a proper manner, and the cost, including reasonable charges for the superintendent of the same, shall be charged to and paid by the person digging up such street or highway or making any excavation therein. 
(l)  Public travel and convenience. All work done shall be done in such a manner and at such times as to minimize any interference with the public travel and convenience, and to this end every person shall conduct the work as the highway supervisor may from time to time direct. 
(m)  Notice prior to commencement of work. Notice of starting work under a permit must be given to the highway supervisor as far in advance of the starting as possible, but at least 48 hours in advance. 
(n)  Correction of unsatisfactory work. 
(1)  The highway supervisor, or his designated agent, is empowered to inspect, or cause to be inspected, at any time, any and all work being performed under a permit issued under this section. 
(2)  If, in the opinion of the highway supervisor, the work being performed does not meet the specifications and conditions approved or required, the permittee shall correct such condition, commencing work within 24 hours of notification, to make such corrections unless a longer period of time is allowed by the highway supervisor or his designated agent. 
(3)  Completed work from which equipment and materials have been removed will be subject to the same conditions as those cited in subsections (1) and (2) of this section (n) except the corrective work shall commence within five days of notice of correction from the highway supervisor and shall be completed within 20 days of the date of this notice. If the permittee fails to complete the corrective work as aforesaid, the highway supervisor as a condition for the granting of the permit, is authorized to proceed with such corrective work, and the cost of the same shall be paid by the permittee within 30 days of billing. 
(o)  Penalties. Any individual, firm or corporation who violates provisions of this ordinance shall be punished by a fine of or more than $500.00 for each offense. Each day that the violation exists or continues shall be deemed a separate offense. The highway supervisor shall notify the town council of any violation. The council shall consult with the town solicitor to institute appropriate action to abate such violation on behalf of the town. 
(Ord. of 2-1-99, § 1) 
Chapter 42 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any appropriation ordinance or any ordinance levying or imposing taxes saved from repeal, § 1-11(6); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor saved from repeal, § 1-11(7); any ordinance creating special districts or assessing taxes therefor saved from repeal, § 1-11(13); any ordinance granting specific tax exemption saved from repeal, § 1-11(14); administration, ch. 2; tax collector, § 2-81 et seq.; businesses, ch. 18. 
State Law reference- Taxation, G.L. 1956, Title 44; power to tax property, G.L. 1956, § 45-2-2; local taxes, G.L. 1956, § 44-5-1 et seq.; levy and assessment of local taxes, G.L. 1956, § 44-5-3 et seq.; exemptions, G.L. 1956, § 44-3-3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Nonissuance and nonrenewal of licenses or permits to applicants or licensees in arrears in taxes, liens and assessments. 
(a)  No license or permit issued by the town and required for the operation of a business shall be issued or renewed to any person or applicant who is in arrears for the payment of any local taxes, liens or other assessments applicable to the operation of such business, unless the matter has been duly appealed in a timely fashion to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)  No building permit shall be issued for new construction and/or the renovation or alteration of an existing structure if the property owner is in arrears for the payment of any real property tax, lien or other town assessment on real property unless the matter has been duly appealed in a timely fashion to a court of competent jurisdiction. This section shall apply only to that real property which is the subject of the building permit application. This section shall not apply to construction which serves to abate a pending notice of violation issued by the town or any of its officials and/or representatives. 
(c)  The applicant seeking any license or permit or any renewal thereof must submit, with his application, verification from the proper tax or assessment collection agency of the town that all town taxes, liens and assessments are paid to date, such verification to be submitted with the application to the town council. 
(Ord. of 3-2-98(1)) 
Cross reference- Amusements and entertainment, ch. 6; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; trailers and trailer parks, § 26-31 et seq.; earth removal, § 30-31 et seq.; solid waste, ch. 34. 
Secs. 42-2-42-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REAL PROPERTY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 42-31-42-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EXEMPTIONS FOR ELDERLY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of May 27, 1999 repealed division 2, sections 42-51-42-54, in its entirety and replaced it with a new division 2, sections 42-51-42-57. Former division 2 pertained to similar material and derived from Ord. of March 1, 1982, §§ 1-4. 
State Law reference- Tax exemptions, G.L. 1956, §§ 44-3-3-44-3-31; freezing of rates and valuation for elderly, G.L. 1956, § 44-3-16(f). 

Sec. 42-51. - Exemptions granted to qualified taxpayers. 
    An exemption from taxation assessment of real property in the amount of $5,000.00 shall be granted to all taxpayers in the town who qualify for such exemption under the terms of this division. 
(Ord. of 5-27-99; Amd. of 1-7-02) 
Sec. 42-52. - Qualifications. 
    In order to qualify for such exemption, the taxpayer must meet all of the following criteria: 
(1)  Age 65 or over on the date of assessment; 
(2)  Domiciled resident of the town on the date of assessment; 
(3)  The property being claimed as exempt must be the principal residence of the taxpayer; and 
(4)  The taxpayer must present to the assessor a true and exact account of his ratable estate, as provided by G.L. 1956 §§ 44-5-15 and 44-5-16, as amended, for the taxable year for which exemption is claimed, together with due evidence that he or she is so entitled to such exemption. 
(Ord. of 5-27-99) 
Sec. 42-53. - Limitation. 
    Only one such exemption shall be granted to cotenants, joint tenants and tenants by the entirety; even though all of such cotenants, joint tenants or tenants by the entirety are 65 years of age or over, or all occupy such property. The amount of such exemption and the entitlement thereto shall be determined by the age of the eldest of the cotenants, joint tenants or tenants by the entirety. 
(Ord. of 5-27-99) 
Sec. 42-54. - Applicable property. 
    This exemption shall apply to the real property of the applicant. For the purpose of this division, real property shall include mobile homes owned by the taxpayer, whether or not the taxpayer shall own the land on which the mobile home is situated. Mobile homes must be affixed to the land, as determined by the tax assessor, in order to qualify under this division. In addition, all other qualifications of this division must be met. 
(Ord. of 5-27-99) 
Sec. 42-55. - Age exemption declared additional. 
    The exemption provided by section 42-51 shall be in addition to any other exemption or exemptions to which said person may be entitled. 
(Ord. of 5-27-99) 
Sec. 42-56. - Age exemption to be uniform. 
    The exemption provided by section 42-51 shall be applied uniformly and without regard to ability to pay. 
(Ord. of 5-27-99) 
Sec. 42-57. - Termination of age exemption. 
    All age exemptions shall terminate upon the conveyance of the subject property, death of the person eligible for the exemption, or the cessation of the taxpayer's domiciled residency in the town. 
(Ord. of 5-27-99) 
Sec. 42-58. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PRO-RATION OF TAX ASSESSMENTS ON NEW CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 42-59. - Assessment and taxation of new real estate construction in Exeter. 
(a)  New construction of real estate in Exeter completed after any assessment date is liable for the payment of municipal taxes from the date the certificate of occupancy is issued or the date on which the new construction is first used for the purpose for which it was constructed, whichever is the earlier, pro-rated for the assessment year in which the new construction is completed. The pro-rated tax will be computed on the basis of the rate of tax applicable with respect to the property, including the applicable rate of tax in any tax district in which the property is subject to tax following completion of the new construction on the date the property becomes liable for the pro-rated tax in accordance with this section. 
(b)  The building inspector issuing the certificate shall, within ten days after issuing the certificate, notify, in writing, the assessor of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  Not later than 90 days after receipt by the assessor of the notice from the building inspector or from a determination by the assessor that the new construction is being used for the purpose for which it was constructed, the assessor shall determine the increment by which the assessment for the completed construction exceeds the assessment on the tax roll for the immediately preceding assessment date. The assessor shall pro-rate that amount from the date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy or the date on which the new construction was first used for the purpose for which it was constructed, as the case may be, to the assessment date immediately following and shall add the increment as so pro-rated to the tax roll for the immediately preceding assessment date and shall, within five days, notify the record owner as appearing on the tax roll and tax collector of the additional assessment. 
(d)  Any person claiming to be aggrieved by the action of the assessor may appeal the determinations of the assessor to the assessment board of review within 60 days from notification of the additional assessment or to Superior Court, as provided. 
(e)  Upon receipt of the notice from the assessor, the tax collector shall, if the notice is received after the normal billing date, within ten days thereafter mail or hand a bill to the owner based upon an amount pro-rated by the assessor. The tax is due and payable and collectible as other municipal taxes and shall be subject to the same liens and processes of collection; provided that the tax is due and payable in an initial or single installment due and payable not sooner than 15 days after the date the bill is mailed or handed to the owner, and in any remaining, regular installments as they are due and payable, and the several installments of a tax so due and payable shall be equal. 
(f)  Nothing in this section is deemed to authorize the collection of taxes twice in respect of the land upon which the new construction is located. 
(Ord. of 5-12-08) 
Sec. 42-60. - Effective date. 
    This article shall take effect upon passage. 
(Ord. of 5-12-08) 
Secs. 42-61-42-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXEMPTIONS OF TOTALLY DISABLED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of Oct. 2, 2000(1), §§ 1-5, did not specifically amend the Code. Hence, its inclusion herein as article III, sections 42-81-42-85, was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 42-81. - Disability tax exemption. 
    The tax assessor(s) shall grant upon a proper claim, a tax exemption in accordance with the schedule of exemptions provided in section 42-85, hereof, provided, that "income" shall include the aggregate income of the person and all other persons residing with him or her provided further that "income" shall be computed on a calendar year basis and shall include all income of every nature and description, whether or not taxable, and whether earned or unearned, and shall include, but be limited to dividends, interest, gross net gains, gifts, pensions, all types of compensation, social security and veterans benefits. Only one such exemption shall be granted to co-tenants, joint tenants or tenants by the entirety who are totally disabled and occupy said property. 
(Ord. of 10-2-00(2), § 1) 
Sec. 42-82. - Eligibility. 
    Such exemption shall be provided annually upon timely application, to every qualified person who is a resident domiciary of the town who is totally disabled on December 31st and continuously thereafter during the assessment year for which the exemptions is sought, continuously residing in the town in a dwelling house or mobile home owned by him or her. Provided further that at the time of making application, the applicant must have been a resident domiciliary of the town for a continuous period of five years ending with the date of assessment for the year for which the exemption is claimed and must have owned and had title to his or her dwelling house for the same five-year period. Applications must be completed and filed on before March 1st of the year for which the exemption is claimed and shall be signed by the applicant and notarized under the pains of perjury. 
(Ord. of 10-2-00(2), § 2) 
Sec. 42-83. - Proof of age and ownership. 
(a)  Current total disability shall be proven by furnishing to the tax assessor(s) a sworn affidavit of licensed medical doctor or osteopathic physician indicating the total disability of the applicant on December 31st and continuously thereafter during the assessment year for which the exemption is sought, the onset of such of such disability and the permanency or expected duration thereof to a reasonable degree of medical certainty. Such affidavit shall indicate that it is executed under pains of perjury. Disability may also be proven by presentation of certified copies of current determinations by the Social Security Administration relative to total disability pursuant to federal rules and procedures. 
(b)  Ownership may be established by furnishing the tax assessor(s) with the date of purchase and land evidence record of the same. 
(c)  Legal domicile may be established by the production of a current voter registration card. 
(d)  Income and occupancy may be proven by incorporation such facts in a sworn application, under the pains of perjury, the form of which shall be furnished by the assessor(s) together with the copies of all relevant United States and Rhode Island tax returns. 
(e)  Additionally, the assessor (s) may subject the exemption herein before provided to such verifications with respect to qualifications, as they deem necessary or appropriate. 
(f)  No property shall be exempt from taxation, which the assessor (s) shall adjudge to have been conveyed to an applicant to evade taxation. 
(Ord. of 10-2-00(2), § 3) 
Sec. 42-84. - Relation to other local property tax exemptions or relief. 
    Any person receiving and entitled to a local property tax exemption or freeze on the effective date hereof, based upon age or disability may continue to claim one such exemption or remain on such frozen tax role as long as such person remains qualified therefore. Otherwise, the exemptions provided herein shall supersede and shall be in lieu of any local property tax freeze, or exemption otherwise available due to age or disability. The exemptions provided herein shall, however, be in addition to any other exemption or exemptions to which such person shall be entitled. 
(Ord. of 10-2-00(2), § 4) 
Sec. 42-85. - Schedule of exemptions. 
Combined taxpayer income: Individual proportionate exemption on 100% assessed value: More than one qualified individual residing at dwelling, combined proportionate exemption on 100% of assessed value  $6,000.00 50% 60%  $8,000.00 45% 55% $10,000.00 40% 50% $12,000.00 35% 45% $14,000.00 30% 40% $16,000.00 25% 35% $18,000.00 20% 30% $20,000.00 15% 25% $22,000.00 10% 20% $24,000.00 5% 15% $26,000.00 10%  
(Ord. of 10-2-00(2), § 5) 
Secs. 42-86-42-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXEMPTION FOR VETERANS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of Oct. 7, 2002, §§ 1-5, did not specifically amend the Code. Hence, its inclusion herein as article IV, sections 42-101-42-105, was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 42-101. - Authorization. 
    Pursuant to the R.I.G.L. § 44-3-4, as amended, there is hereby enacted an article establishing an exemption for veterans, as set forth herein. 
(Ord. of 10-7-02, § 1) 
Sec. 42-102. - Veterans exemption established. 
    The property of each person who served in the military or naval service of the United States in the war of the rebellion, the Spanish-American war, the insurrection in the Philippines, the China-relief expedition, or World War I, and the property of each person who served in the military or naval service of the United States in World War II at any time during the period beginning December 7, 1941, and ending on December 31, 1946, and the property of each person who served in the military or naval services of the United States in the Korean conflict at any time during the period beginning June 27, 1950 and ending January 31, 1955 or in the Vietnam conflict at any time during the period beginning December 22, 1961 and ending May 7, 1975 or who actually served in the Grenada or Lebanon conflicts of 1983-1984, or the Persian Gulf Conflict, the Haitian conflict, the Somalian conflict, and the Bosnian conflict, at any time during the period beginning August 2, 1990 and ending May 1, 1994, or in any conflict or undeclared war for which a campaign ribbon or expeditionary medal was earned, and who was honorably discharged from the service, or who was discharged under conditions other than dishonorable, or who, if not discharged, served honorably, or of the unmarried widow or widower of that person, who is a legally domiciled resident of the town, is exempted from taxation to the amount of $5,000.00. 
(Ord. of 10-7-02, § 2) 
Sec. 42-103. - Application of exemption. 
    The exemption is not allowed unless the person entitled to the exemption has presented to the assessors, on or before the last day on which sworn statements may be filed with the assessors for the year for which exemption is claimed, sufficient evidence that he or she is entitled, which evidence shall stand so long as his or her legal residence remains unchanged. 
(Ord. of 10-7-02, § 3) 
Sec. 42-104. - Definition. 
    The term "legally domiciled resident" as used in this article shall mean a person who is eligible to become a qualified elector in the town, and who actually resides, and is domiciled in, the town. 
(Ord. of 10-7-02, § 4) 
Sec. 42-105. - Qualification procedure. 
    No person shall be entitled to the exemption as provided in this ordinance unless he or she has filed a signed, sworn, notarized, proper and complete application with the tax assessor and has met all the requirements thereof. The application form shall be provided by the tax assessor's office and shall elicit the following information: 
(1)  The full name and current legal address of applicant. 
(2)  The applicant's date of birth. 
(3)  If applicable, the plat and lot number as shown on the current tax assessor's plat map, identifying the property requested for stabilized tax assessment. 
(4)  The sufficient armed services records indicating qualification for exemption pursuant to section 42-101. 
(5)  A declaration of eligibility, which shall read: "I, the undersigned, have read and do understand the provisions and limitations set forth in the ordinance under which I am applying for a veterans tax exemption, and I declare and swear under pains of perjury by my signature that I am a legal domiciled resident of the Town of Exeter and that I am eligible for the exemption ordained by this ordinance." 
(6)  Following the declaration of eligibility, there shall appear the applicant's notarized signature and date. 
(7)  The tax assessor's approval. 
(8)  Proof of qualified veteran status and domicile shall be presented to the tax assessor at the time of application. The documents of verification along with the application shall be filed in the tax assessor's office and a copy of the application and ordinance shall be provided to the applicant upon request. 
(Ord. of 10-7-02, § 5) 
Secs. 42-106-42-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- An amemdment adopted July 5, 2006, repealed the former article V., §§ 42-121-42-125, which pertained to stabilization of taxes of the elderly and derived from Ord. of 9-9-02(3), §§ 1-5; Ord. of 8-22-05; Ord. of 12-19-05, §§ 1-5. 

Secs. 42-121-42-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TAX EXEMPTION TO CERTAIN PERSONS OVER THE AGE OF 65 YEARS OR FULLY DISABLED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of 1-5-04, §§ 1-8, did not specifically amend the Code. Hence, its inclusion herein as article VI, sections 42-151-42-158, was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 42-151. - Authorization. 
    Pursuant to the Rhode Island Public Laws as amended, the Town Code is hereby amended by adding article VI, which reads as set forth herein. 
(Ord. of 1-5-04, § 1) 
Sec. 42-152. - Statement of purpose. 
    In order to encourage, maintain, and preserve a sustainable supply of owner occupied housing that is affordable for low and moderate income senior citizens and individuals with disabilities that is in keeping with the rural character of the town and that is consistent with environmental and available infrastructure considerations, the assessor shall grant upon a proper claim a tax exemption in accordance with the schedule of exemptions provided in section 42-158 of this article. 
(Ord. of 1-5-04, § 2) 
Sec. 42-153. - Definitions. 
    The word "income," as used herein, includes the aggregate income of the person and all other persons residing with him or her. "Income" shall be computed on a calendar year basis and shall include all income of every nature and description, whether or not taxable, and whether earned or unearned, and includes, but is not limited to, interest, gross net gains, gifts, pensions, all types of compensation, Social Security and veterans benefits. 
(Ord. of 1-5-04, § 3) 
Sec. 42-154. - Number of exemptions. 
    This exemption applies to owner-occupants only. Only one exemption shall be granted to co-tenants, joint tenants, or tenants by the entirety who are 65 years of age or older or who are totally disabled and occupy the subject property. 
(Ord. of 1-5-04, § 4) 
Sec. 42-155. - Applicable property. 
    This exemption applies only to the legally zoned minimally required acreage, primary dwelling, and its associated accessory structures, owned and occupied by the applicant. Additional or excess acreage, sites, secondary dwellings and improvements inconsistent with the legal and conforming use of the primary dwelling are not eligible for this exemption. 
(Ord. of 1-5-04, § 5) 
Sec. 42-156. - Exemption of persons over the age of 65 years or fully disabled. 
    The elderly/disabled tax exemption as provided in this section is provided annually, upon timely application, to every qualified person who is a legally domiciled resident of the town of the age of 65 or more years and has reached his or her 65th birthday by December 31st of the assessment year for which the exemption is sought or who is totally disabled, and continuously residing in the town in a dwelling house or mobile home owned by him or her. Applications must be completed and filed on or before March 15th of each year for which the exemption is claimed and shall be signed by the applicant and notarized under the pains and penalties of perjury. 
(Ord. of 1-5-04, § 6) 
Sec. 42-157. - Qualification criteria. 
    Proof of the qualification of any applicant for the elderly/disabled tax exemption, as provided in this section, shall include the following together with such other and further information as may be deemed reasonable and necessary by the tax assessor or the town council: 
(1)  Age shall be proven by furnishing to the assessor either a birth certificate, certificate of citizenship, baptismal certificate or certified affidavit, under the pains of perjury, of a third party having knowledge, or a government issued ID card. 
(2)  Ownership shall be established by furnishing the assessor with sufficient evidence of the date of purchase and certified copies of the documentary land evidence records relating to acquisition of the subject property. 
(3)  Legal domicile shall be established by the production of a current voters registration card. 
(4)  Income and occupancy may be proven by incorporating required facts in a sworn application signed by the applicant and notarized, under the pains and penalties of perjury, (the form of which is furnished by the assessor) together with copies of all requested United States and state tax returns and schedules. 
(5)  Disability may be proven by a licensed medical doctor's sworn and notarized opinion, or by satisfactory federal or state documentation certifying such total disability. 
(6)  Additionally, the assessor may require such other and further verifications or documents respecting qualifications of the applicant as he or she deems reasonably necessary or appropriate. 
(7)  No property shall be exempt from taxation which the assessor determines to have been conveyed to an applicant for the purpose of evading taxation. 
(Ord. of 1-5-04, § 7) 
Sec. 42-158. - Income/exemption schedule. 
    The following schedule shall determine the amount of the exemption to which the applicant may be entitled pursuant to this article: 
Household Income Assessment Reduction 0-$20,000 50 percent $20,001-$25,000 40 percent $25,001-$30,000 30 percent $30,001-$35,000 20 percent $35,001-$40,000 10 percent $40,001-$52,000 5 percent  
(1)  When applying multiple exemptions, the assessor shall first apply the assessment reduction provided in this section and then apply any other applicable exemptions. 
(2)  The assessor shall grant upon a proper claim a tax exemption to any qualified person who meets the requirements contained in section 42-157 of this article. No such exemption shall exceed $5,000.00. This exemption is in addition to any other exemption from taxation provided under any other law or ordinance provided however that this exemption will supercede any previous elderly/disabled freeze or exemption. Any person with a pre-existing elderly/disabled freeze, sliding scale exemption on the effective date of this ordinance may choose to either continue on the existing program, or may apply for this exemption. 
(Ord. of 1-5-04, § 8) 
Secs. 42-159-42-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TAX EXEMPTION FOR VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTERS AND RESCUE PERSONNEL[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of Feb. 2, 2004, §§ 1-3, did not specifically amend the Code. Hence, its inclusion herein as article VII, sections 42-181-42-183, was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 42-181. - Exemption. 
(a)  The property taxes of each volunteer firefighter or volunteer rescue member of the town who has served as a volunteer for the Exeter #1, #2, and or Exeter Rescue Corps for not less than one immediately preceding calendar year and who is legally responsible to the town for town taxes for real property shall upon timely and complete annual application to the tax assessor, be exempted in the sum of $50,000.00 of value. 
(b)  Upon approval of amended enabling legislation by the state general assembly, an eligible member who does not have taxable estate (real property) for such tax exemption to be applied against, then, said eligible member shall be entitled to a tax exemption in the sum of $25,000.00 of value to be applied toward the eligible member's tangible personal property, excise or vehicle tax valuation. 
(Ord. of 2-2-04, § 1) 
Sec. 42-182. - Eligibility. 
    In order to be eligible for this exemption, a member must be in good standing and shall have attained a minimum of 120 service points during the preceding calendar year. Service points shall be calculated as follows: 
(1)  Fire department point system: 
Regular or special meeting 4 points Training drill 4 points Toned calls 4 points "Senior member"/"elected official" 75 points  
(2)  Exeter Rescue Corps point system: 
12 hours of duty time per month 5 points 15 hours of duty time per month 8 points 20 hours of duty time per month 10 points Toned calls 2 points non-transport 4 points transport Regular or special meeting 5 points Training drill 5 points "Elected official" of rescue 75 points  
(3)  Definitions: 
a.  For the purpose of this article the term "elected official" shall include: president, vice presidents, secretary, treasurer, financial secretary, chief, and board of director/trustees. 
b.  For the purpose of this article, "senior member" shall mean a member who has not less than 25 years of active volunteer service to Exeter #1, #2, Exeter Rescue Corps or in any combination of the fire department/rescue service. 
(Ord. of 2-2-04, § 3) 
Sec. 42-183. - Certification. 
    The board of directors and fire/rescue chief shall certify member eligible for the tax exemption for taxes assessed as of December 31 to the town tax assessor on or before the succeeding March 1. 
(Ord. of 2-2-04, § 3) 
Secs. 42-184-42-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - BOONE LAKE DAM MANAGEMENT DISTRICT 

Sec. 42-191. - Location and object. 
(a)  Location. The Boone Lake Dam Management District (hereinafter referred to as "management district") shall include all that part of the town located within the limits of that plat filed with the Exeter Town Hall, Assessors Tax Maps, dated 1988, maps numbered 19, 83 and 84, corrected to November 1989, as the same may be amended from time to time and which encompasses properties located on East Shore Drive, West Shore Drive and Birch Drive, said area being commonly known as Boone Lake or Boone Lake Shores. 
(b)  Object. The object of the management district is to apportion among and collect from the owners of property within management district the costs of maintaining and repairing State Dam No. 219 and the lake access routes now owned by, and to pay the costs of utilities servicing and taxes assessed against properties of the Boone Lake Improvement Association, Inc. that may be used by the management district, and to raise funds for administering the management district, by establishing and regulating procedures by which the assessment and collection of funds can be made for the aforementioned purposes in an organized, efficient and equitable manner. In connection therewith, the management district may raise money as provided herein and may borrow money and repay it through the sale and redemption of bonds or other securities. 
(Ord. of 11-15-07, § 1) 
Sec. 42-192. - Voting. 
    The owner or, if more than one, the owners collectively of any parcel located within the limits of the management district and assessed by the Exeter assessors' office as a separate parcel for real estate tax purposes (hereinafter parcel(s)) shall have one vote for each such parcel so owned on matters concerning the management district as hereinafter provided for; provided, however, that parcels in the same ownership that are contiguous to one another and used as one site shall be treated together as one parcel for voting purposes, and the term "parcel" shall include such contiguous parcels with regard to voting when the context so requires. The owner of any such parcel shall be the eligible voter entitled to cast such vote; but if there is more than one owner of any such parcel the owners thereof present at any meeting shall jointly: 
(1)  Designate one such owner as the eligible voter entitled to cast the vote on behalf of all owners, and 
(2)  If they so wish, designate one such owner who shall be the alternate eligible voter in circumstances where the eligible voter is not present and voting at a meeting, 
and a written record of such designation(s) shall be filed with the board of directors and shall remain in force and effect until modified or amended by subsequent designations filed in the same fashion. The term "eligible voter" when used herein shall mean the eligible voter or the alternative eligible voter, as the context so requires. A vote cast by an eligible voter shall be deemed to be cast pursuant to the consent of all the owners. The term "owner" or "owners" as used herein shall mean those persons identified as the assessed owners of such parcel or parcels according to the records of the Exeter assessors' office as of 60 days before the scheduled date of any meeting, the date on which notices are sent or the date on which bills are rendered, as the case may be; provided that if such owners have transferred the parcel or parcels and the successor or successors have not yet been identified by such records as the assessed owners thereof, a certified copy of the recorded deed or other official evidence of ownership, together with an affidavit under oath by one or more of the persons claiming to be such successor(s) stating that such deed or other evidence is correct, when filed with the board of directors shall serve to establish that such successors are the successors to such owners of the parcel, and shall be considered owners for all purposes hereunder. The term "Exeter assessors' office" as used herein shall, when the context so requires, include the Exeter collector's office, or other department of the town required to make and keep assessments of real property therein. 
(Ord. of 11-15-07, § 1; Ord. of 7-7-08, § 1) 
Sec. 42-193. - Budget meetings. 
(a)  After the initial board of directors has been appointed by the town council as hereinafter provided, the board of directors shall, within 18 months of such appointment, call the initial budget meeting of the management district, to be held in a place within the limits of the town or at a place within a town immediately adjacent thereto, mailing a copy of a proposed budget, and any proposed bylaws and a notice of the place and the time of the meeting (which shall be no sooner than 30 days after said notice is mailed) in the same fashion as provided hereafter for subsequent annual budget meetings. The chairman of the board of directors or the vice chairman in the absence of the chairman shall serve as the moderator at this initial budget meeting. All action, business and procedures that could take place at or which would govern any annual budget meeting as herein provided may take place and will govern at the initial budget meeting, except as otherwise provided herein and the assessment, collection and enforcement of any amounts approved at such meeting shall be governed accordingly. The first order of business at the initial budget meeting shall be the election of a clerk, a treasurer and a collector/assessor of the management district, all of whom must themselves be owners of parcels, who shall thereupon serve as such officers and constitute the board of directors of the management district and until the election of their respective successors. The second order of business shall be the adoption of bylaws, if any have been proposed. The third order of business at the initial budget meeting shall be the adoption of a budget, if any has been proposed. After such initial budget meeting, subsequent annual budget meetings shall be held at a place within the limits of the town or at a place within a town immediately adjacent thereto as specified in the notice hereinafter mentioned at 7:30 p.m. on the third Monday of July of each year, but if that Monday is a holiday the meeting shall be held on the next Monday that is not a holiday. 
(b)  In connection with annual budget meetings, each year on or before the first day of June, a proposed budget for the management district shall be prepared by the board of directors and shall be mailed to the owners of each parcel, in each case addressed to such owners in the same manner as, and mailed via first class mail to the mailing address specified in the records of the town assessors' office for the mailing of real estate tax bills, unless a successor or successors has been established as provided herein, in which case the budget shall be so mailed to such successor or successors to the address, if any, provided to the board of directors in writing by such successor or successors. The budget shall be accompanied by a notice of the date, time and place of the annual budget meeting. 
(c)  A quorum at the annual budget meeting shall be eligible voters for 25 parcels. In the event that, for any reason, a quorum is not present at the time a meeting is scheduled to open, the board of directors is authorized to delay the opening time of, or postpone said meeting for such period of time, as in the discretion of the board of directors shall best serve the interests of the management district, said postponement to be done by proclamation and posting at two conspicuous places within the management district. If a quorum is not present when the meeting is resumed on the date to which is has been postponed the meeting may be held with only the board of directors and such eligible voters of parcels in the management district as may be in attendance and they shall be empowered to vote upon all matters legally before the meeting, each member of the board of directors having one vote and eligible voters of parcels (other than members of the board of directors) casting votes in the manner above described. In voting upon or in connection with any amendments to the proposed budget the following matters shall be considered: 
(1)  The proper construction, management, preservation and support of the dam and related facilities, lake and property. 
(2)  The purchase or rental of all necessary equipment and generally all things necessary and proper for managing the management district, and carrying into effect and attaining the objectives of which this article is declaratory. 
(3)  The improvement, or the payment of expenses relating to property belonging to the Boone Lake Improvement Association, Inc., including access routes and facilities, used by the residents of Boone Lake in connection with the lake or by the management district for its operation. 
(4)  The creation of a reserve fund for the future management and replacement of property and equipment. 
(5)  The periodic auditing of the financial records of the management district. 
(6)  The times for payment of management charges and fees and the penalties for late payments. 
(7)  Payment of any charges and expenses arising within the management district, incidental or not to the above. 
(8)  Remuneration for the officers of the management district. 
(9)  Liquidating any obligations previously assumed by the Boone Lake Improvement Association, Inc. for repairs done to the dam. 
(d)  In addition to voting upon the budget, the following action may be taken: 
(1)  Voting to fill vacancies on expired or unexpired terms of duly elected officers, who shall consist of a clerk, collector/assessor and a treasurer. All candidates for elected office must submit their name and the particular office which they are seeking, in writing, to the clerk by 4:30 p.m. 30 days prior to the initial budget meeting or any annual budget meeting or special meeting. As to each office, the candidate with the most votes shall be deemed to be elected to that office. 
(2)  Voting upon any other matters that shall legally come before the meeting. 
(e)  Approval of matters voted upon at the initial budget meeting, or any annual budget meeting or special meeting, except the election of officers, shall be by a majority of the votes cast; as to the election of officers, the candidate for any particular office with the most votes shall be deemed to be elected to that office. 
(Ord. of 11-15-07, § 1) 
Sec. 42-194. - Collection of management fees. 
    Any amounts approved for the budget at the initial budget meeting, an annual budget meeting or special meeting shall immediately become a lien upon all parcels within the management district as provided for in the enabling legislation, in proportion, in the case of each parcel, to the relative weighted value of that parcel as defined herein, and shall be payable as established at the initial budget meeting, annual budget meeting or special meeting, as the case may be. The relative weighted value shall, for any parcel, be equal to the quotient resulting from dividing the assessed value of that parcel, as established by the town assessors' office for general tax purposes, by the assessed values of all parcels, as so established, situated within the limits of the management district. The lien hereunder shall endure as provided in the enabling legislation. 
    Within 60 days after the approval of any budget at the initial budget meeting or any annual budget meeting or special meeting the board of directors shall cause the collector/assessor to mail to the owners of each parcel of land located within the management district bills for the collection of the amounts due with respect to each parcel, with the bills in each case addressed to such owners in the same manner as, and mailed via first class mail to the mailing address specified in the records of the town assessors' office for the mailing of real estate tax bills, unless a successor or successors has been established as provided herein, in which case the bill shall be so mailed to such successor or successors to the address, if any, provided to the board of directors by such successor or successors. Parcels owned by the same person or persons may be included in the same bill. The amount due with respect to any parcel shall be determined by multiplying that parcel's relative weighted value by the amount of the budget, as approved. Bills shall be payable in full on or before the thirtieth day after they have been mailed or in any other manner as may have been established at the initial budget meeting or any annual budget meeting or special meeting. Amounts due, and any costs incurred in connection with the collection of management fees or the enforcement of the lien securing them shall, in addition to being added to the amount of the lien, be the personal liability of all owners of a parcel at the time the lien arises, which liability shall be joint and several with respect to all owners of the parcel, in favor of the management district, shall be payable as aforesaid and shall bear interest and penalties in the same manner as determined under law with respect to real estate taxes. 
    The treasurer shall upon request and for a fee of $25.00 issue a certificate which shall state any amounts of management fees that are due and owing on the date said certificate is given. Any such certificate may be recorded within 150 days after its date with the town clerk in the land evidence records, and if so recorded shall operate to discharge the parcel of real estate specified from the lien of all amounts then due for management fees which do not appear by said certificate to be then due and owing, except such fees that are the subject of a recorded notice or statement of lien, which such notice or statement of lien can be discharged by specific release, all as hereinafter provided; but a certificate issued under this section shall not affect the obligation of any person liable for the payment of any management fee by reason of being the assessed owner of such parcel of real estate at the time any such lien arose. 
    Collection and enforcement of the liens securing amounts due for management fees shall be in the same manner as provided for the collection of taxes by municipalities in this state, or as may otherwise or hereafter be permitted or established by law. 
(Ord. of 11-15-07, § 1) 
Sec. 42-195. - Special meetings. 
    Special meetings of the management district may be called upon written request, signed by one or more of the owners of at least 50 parcels, setting forth the purpose of said call, delivered to the clerk, or in the absence thereof, a duly elected officer of the management district. Said special meeting shall be scheduled to be held at a place within the limits of the town or at a place within a town immediately adjacent thereto within 45 days after delivery of the aforementioned written request and notice thereof shall be given at least ten days before the scheduled meeting in the same form and mailed in the same manner as in the case of the annual budget meeting. 
    All action, business and procedures that could take place at or which would govern any annual budget meeting as herein provided may take place at and will govern any special meeting, and the assessment, collection and enforcement of any amounts approved at such meeting shall be governed accordingly. 
(Ord. of 11-15-07, § 1) 
Sec. 42-196. - Officers. 
    The officers of the management district shall be the clerk, collector/assessor and the treasurer and they shall be collectively referred to as the board of directors. Each shall, except in the case of death, resignation or disability or removal from office for cause, hold office for two years and until their respective successors are elected. The persons who shall serve as the initial board of directors shall be appointed by the town council as soon as reasonably possible after the passage of this article, and they shall serve until their respective successors are elected at the initial budget meeting. 
(1)  Board of directors. The board of directors shall consist of the officers of the management district, whether appointed by the town council, or elected at the initial budget meeting or any subsequent annual budget meeting or special meeting. 
a.  The board of directors shall elect one of its members as chairperson, who shall not be the clerk, and one of its members as vice chairperson. The chairperson, and in the chairman's absence, the vice chairman, shall preside at all meetings of the management district and shall conduct all meetings in accordance with Roberts Rules of Order (latest revision). 
b.  The board of directors shall appoint all committees, subject to confirmation by a majority vote thereon at any meeting. 
c.  The board of directors, at each annual budget meeting, shall make a written report to the owners of parcels of the state of affairs of the management district. Financial and other records of the management district shall be open for inspection by the owners of properties within the management district at reasonable times and upon reasonable notice. 
d.  Whenever a vacancy shall occur in the board of directors either through death, resignation or disability or removal for cause, the remaining members of the board of directors shall appoint an owner of a parcel to serve in such capacity until the next annual budget meeting or special meeting, and until his or her successor is elected. 
e.  The board of directors shall have the authority to retain legal counsel at an annual cost to be determined by a majority vote thereon at any meeting. Said legal counsel shall be available in an advisory capacity for all committees of the management district and shall render legal opinions, whenever requested to do so, on any question pertaining to the management district. 
f.  The board of directors, acting in behalf of the management district, shall have the right to sue and be sued in the courts of this state having jurisdiction to hear, try or determine such causes. Any elected or appointed district official, employee or member of the management district is entitled to all rights and benefits of indemnification as set out or referred to in the enabling legislation. 
(2)  Clerk. The clerk shall on behalf of the board of directors give notice of the initial budget meeting and every annual budget meeting or special meeting of the management district by notifying all property owners by mail as herein provided. The clerk shall take the minutes of all meetings and shall be held responsible for the management of same. 
(3)  Treasurer. The treasurer before proceeding to discharge these duties shall, if required so to do after a majority vote, give bond to the management district in such sum and with such surety as may be determined by said vote, which will provide for the faithful discharge of the duties of office. The premium for said bond shall be paid by the management district. Said bond shall be deposited with the town council. The treasurer shall pay out and expend only those funds that are authorized by general or specific vote of the management district at the initial budget meeting or any annual budget meeting or special meeting. The treasurer shall have the authority to borrow such sums that may be so authorized at the initial budget meeting, annual budget meeting or special meeting, and shall have the authority to invest any surplus funds, subject to the advice and consent of the board of directors, in any interest-bearing accounts as provided by law. 
(4)  Collector/assessor. The collector/assessor, before proceeding to discharge these duties, shall, if required so to do after a majority vote, give bond to the management district in such sum and with such surety as may be determined by said vote, which will provide for the faithful discharge of the duties of office. The premium for said bond shall be paid by the management district. Said bond shall be deposited with the town council. The collector/assessor shall determine the management fees due with respect to any parcels. Upon approval of any budget at the initial budget meeting, annual budget meeting or special meeting the collector/assessor shall on behalf of the board of directors produce management fee bills based on the budget approved by the management district and shall immediately provide the treasurer with a true and complete list of the same and further shall maintain records of all collections and delinquent charges and provide annual written reports thereof. The bills shall be mailed as herein provided no later than 60 days after the initial budget meeting or any annual budget meeting or special meeting establishing amounts due and shall be payable within 30 days after they have been mailed, unless otherwise established at such meetings, and shall indicate when payments are due and the penalties for late payments. The collector/assessor shall pay over to the treasurer on the first day of each month the total management fees collected during the previous month, or at more frequent intervals, at the option of the collector/assessor. The collector/assessor may at any time while a management fee is due and owing but unpaid record a notice or statement of lien with the town clerk in the land evidence records indicating the amount due. Additional amounts thereafter becoming due shall be secured by said notice or statement without the necessity of recording further statements. The treasurer may discharge the lien by a release filed with the town clerk in the land evidence records that makes specific reference to the recorded notice or statement and states that all amounts thereunder have been paid. 
The collector/assessor for said management district shall collect all management fees due, and for the purpose of collecting the same shall have the same powers and authority as are now by law conferred on collectors of taxes for towns in the state. 
The collector/assessor shall be empowered, subject to unanimous approval of the board of directors, to appoint an agent for collection of management fees. Said agent at the time of appointment shall give bond to the management district in such sum and with such surety as the management district shall determine, which will provide for the faithful performance of the duties of said agent. The premium for said bond shall be paid by the management district. Said bond shall be deposited with the town council. 
(Ord. of 11-15-07, § 1) 
Sec. 42-197. - Reporting to town and department of environmental management. 
    At least annually the management district shall submit complete and detailed reports to the town and the department of environmental management. 
(Ord. of 11-15-07, § 1) 
Sec. 42-198. - Amendments to article. 
    In the event that the eligible voters for 15 parcels at any duly called meeting of the management district shall deem that this article should be amended or revised, then and in that event, the board of directors shall appoint a committee, approved by a majority vote at such meeting, to study such proposed amendment or revision. Said committee shall report its findings at the next annual meeting at which time the approval or disapproval of the proposed amendment or revision shall be voted upon. Upon approval of any amendment or revision by the management district, the same shall be referred to the town council during the current session, or if not in session at the time, the next session for its consideration. 
    Nothing herein shall be construed as limiting the adoption of or amendments to bylaws concerning the administration of the management district. 
(Ord. of 11-15-07, § 1) 
Secs. 42-199-42-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - EXEMPTION FOR OWNERS OF LOW- OR MODERATE-INCOME HOUSING[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of March 2, 2009, §§ 1-5, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as article IX, §§ 42-211-42-215 is at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 42-211. - Tax exemption. 
    The tax assessor(s) shall grant, upon proper and timely annual claim, a tax exemption in accordance with the schedule of exemptions provided in section 42-215. "Income," as referenced therein, shall include the aggregate income of the qualified resident owner(s) of housing units which are duly-qualified as low- or moderate-income housing by Rhode Island Housing and Mortgage Finance corporation (hereinafter, "RIHMFC"), the spouse of the owner, and all other persons residing with him or her; provided, further, that "income" shall be computed on a calendar-year basis and shall include all income of every nature and description, whether or not taxable and whether earned or unearned and shall include, but not be limited to, dividends, interest, gross net gains, gifts, pensions, all other types of monetary compensation, social security and veterans' benefits. Only one such exemption shall be granted to co-tenants, joint tenants or tenants by the entirety who own or occupy said property. 
(Ord. of 3-2-09, § 1) 
Sec. 42-212. - Eligibility. 
    Such exemption shall be provided annually, upon timely application, to every qualified person who is a resident domiciliary of a duly-qualified (RIHMFC) low- or moderate-income dwelling in the town by December 31 of the assessment year for which the exemption is sought, and who continuously resides in the town, in a duly-qualified low- or moderate-income dwelling house or mobile home owned by him or her. Applications must be completed and filed on or before March 1 of the year for which the exemption is claimed and shall be signed by the applicant and notarized under the pains of perjury. No exemption shall be extended beyond the term of one assessment year or renewed thereafter unless the applicant has first fulfilled all annual application requirements and has again been determined qualified pursuant to the terms of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-2-09, § 2) 
Sec. 42-213. - Proof of income qualification and ownership. 
(a)  Income qualification of the owner(s) and all persons residing or contributing to the total household income shall be proven by furnishing to the tax assessor(s) copies of acceptable verified statements, including documentation and tax returns, reflecting the following income sources: 
Social Security (including Medicare premiums) and Railroad Retirement Benefits; 
Unemployment benefits; 
Wage, salaries, tips, consultation or speaker's fees, etc.; 
Dividends and interest (taxable and non-taxable); 
Business and farm income (net of expenses); 
Pension, annuity and survivorship income (taxable and non-taxable); 
Rental income (net of expenses); 
Partnership, estate and trust income; 
Total gain on sale or exchange of property; 
Investment income; 
Cash public assistance (welfare, etc.); 
Alimony and support money; 
Non-taxable military compensation and cash benefits; 
Income from childcare; 
Worker's Compensation or TDI benefits received; 
Other income, including gifts. 
(b)  Property ownership may be established by furnishing the tax assessor(s) with the date of purchase and a copy of the deed of same filed in the land evidence records, together with any other recorded documents reflecting low- and moderate-income income restrictions. 
(c)  Legal domicile may be established by presentation of a current voter's registration card. 
(d)  Income, ownership, domicile and occupancy shall be proven and supplemented by incorporating the indicia required by of subsections (a)-(c) in an application signed and sworn under the pains of perjury, the form of which shall be furnished by the assessor(s) and submitted by the applicant, together with copies of all relevant United States and Rhode Island tax returns. 
(e)  Additionally, the assessor(s) may require such other and further verifications with respect to qualifications and ownership as the assessor deems necessary or appropriate. 
(f)  No property which the assessor shall adjudge to have been conveyed to an applicant in order to evade taxation shall be exempt from taxation. 
(Ord. of 3-2-09, § 3) 
Sec. 42-214. - Relation to other local property tax exemptions or relief. 
    The exemptions provided herein shall supersede and shall be in addition to any other exemption or exemptions to which such person(s) shall be entitled. Provided, however, that no exemption under this article shall apply if the property subject to exemption is, for any reason, assessed at a suppressed value resulting from deed restrictions imposed for the purposes of low- or moderate-income housing. 
(Ord. of 3-2-09, § 4) 
Sec. 42-215. - Schedule of exemptions. 
Total Household Income of One- to Two-Person Residences 
Tax Dollar 

Exemption $60,001.00-$77,300.00 (or the current RI housing affordable maximum income for households with one to two people) ..... $ 250.00  50,001.00-60,000.00 ..... 400.00  45,001-50,000 ..... 600.00  40,001.00-45,000.00 ..... 800.00 Under 40,000.00 ..... 1,000.00  
Total Household Income of Residences with Three or More People 
Tax Dollar 

Exemption $70,001.00-88,950.00 (or the current RI housing affordable maximum income for households with three or more people) ..... $ 250.00  60,001.00-70,000.00 .....  400.00  50,001.00-60,000.00 .....  500.00  45,001.00-50,000.00 .....  700.00  40,001.00-45,000.00 .....  800.00 Under 40,000.00 ..... 1,000.00  
    The term "tax dollar exemption", as used herein, shall be defined as the amount to be deducted from the real estate tax bill otherwise payable by the applicant. 
(Ord. of 3-2-09, § 5) 
ARTICLE X. - WAIVER OF INTEREST 

Sec. 42-231. - Waiver of interest on overdue quarterly tax payments. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter to the contrary, the tax collector of the Town of Exeter is authorized to grant a waiver of interest on one quarter's overdue property tax payment and to allow the remaining balance of taxes owed by a qualified taxpayer to be paid on a quarterly basis provided that all of the following conditions are satisfied by the taxpayer: 
(1)  The property subject to the overdue payment is the residence of the taxpayer and has been for the five years immediately preceding the due date of the tax payment which is overdue. 
(2)  The request for a waiver of interest is in writing, signed and dated by the taxpayer. 
(3)  The taxpayer has, without prior waiver, made timely payments of taxes to the Town of Exeter for the five years immediately preceding the tax payment which is overdue. The burden of proof of timely payments shall be upon the taxpayer and shall be so proven at the time that the written request for waiver is made. 
(4)  The bill for which the payment is overdue was issued less than two years prior to the date of the request for a waiver of interest. 
(b)  In no event shall the waiver of interest on a tax bill exceed $500.00. Decisions of the tax collector shall be in writing and contain a notice to the Exeter Town Council. If the taxpayer receives an adverse decision from the tax collector, the taxpayer must pay the interest and may file a claim for reimbursement with the Exeter Town Council within ten days of the decision. 
(c)  Any such request for waiver of taxes which meets the criteria of this article shall be granted. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2016(1)) 
State Law reference- G.L. 1956 544-5-8.1 (P.L. 2001, ch. 92, §1.) 
Editor's note- Ord. of 4-7-2016(1) amended the Code by add provisions designated as § 42-211. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, the provisions have been redesignated as § 42-231, at the discretion of the editor. 
ARTICLE XI. - TAXATION OF RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEMS 

Sec. 42-232. - Taxation of renewable energy systems. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 44-3-3(a)(48)(49) of the Rhode Island General Laws, residential and manufacturing properties utilizing installed renewable energy systems for the purpose of off-setting electrical costs for energy consumed on the premises are exempt from local taxation of such systems. 
(b)  Pursuant to section 44-5-3(c)(e) of the Rhode Island General Laws, commercial renewable energy systems are subject to a tangible tax payment to the municipality in accordance with rules and regulations adopted by the Rhode Island Office of Energy Resources for all commercial renewable energy systems. 
(c)  Pursuant to [section] 44-3-21 of the Rhode Island General Laws, city or town councils of the various cities and towns may, in their discretion and by ordinance, exempt from taxation any renewable energy system located in the city or town. 
(Amend. of 3-6-17) 
Sec. 42-233. - Taxation. 
    In accordance with section 44-5-3(c) of the Rhode Island General Laws, the Town of Exeter hereby authorizes its assessor to levy a tax on renewable-energy-related tangible property as defined in 39-26-5 in accordance with standardized rules and regulations as adopted by the Rhode Island Office of Energy Resources. 
(Amend. of 3-6-17) 
Sec. 42-234. - Limited exemption. 
    In accordance with section 44-3-21 of the Rhode Island General Laws, the Town of Exeter hereby exempts from taxation commercial net-metered renewable energy systems whose sole purpose is to offset the taxpayer's electricity bills and not for any other purpose, including selling of generated power back to the electric distribution system. 
(Amend. of 3-6-17) 
Sec. 42-235. - Required submissions. 
    All commercial renewable energy systems shall be required to provide the tax assessor with a copy of the initial interconnection application and final interconnection agreement prior to construction or installation. Upon request all commercial renewable energy systems must provide the tax assessor with any further information and documentation. 
(Amend. of 3-6-17) 
Sec. 42-236. - Effective date. 
    This Ordinance shall take effect upon passage. 
(Amend. of 3-6-17) 
Chapter 46 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, prescribing through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones, not inconsistent with such Code saved from repeal, § 1-11(11); unlawful noise from vehicle repairs, § 22-39; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 26; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 38. 
State Law reference- Motor and other vehicles, G.L. 1956, Title 31; uniformity of vehicle regulations, G.L. 1956, § 31-12-11; powers of local authorities, G.L. 1956, § 31-12-12; local regulations to be posted, G.L. 1956, § 31-12-13; traffic-control devices on local highway, G.L. 1956, § 31-13-3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial vehicle means any vehicle registered for commercial purposes and designed and used primarily for the transportation of goods, wares and merchandise. 
    Crosswalk means that part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway measured from the curb, or in the absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway or any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other marking on the surface. 
    Official curb marking means that portion of the curbing, the painting of which has been authorized by the traffic control officer of the town. 
    Official street marking means any painted line, legend, marking or marker of any description painted or placed upon any way which purports to direct or regulate traffic and which has been authorized by the traffic control officer of the town. 
    Parking or park means the stopping or standing of a vehicle on a roadway, whether occupied or not, other than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading, or in obedience to a police officer, the traffic control officer or traffic signs or signals, or while making emergency repairs or, if disabled, while arrangements are being made to move such a vehicle. 
Whenever in this chapter words or phrases, other than the foregoing, which are defined in the state motor vehicle code G.L. 1956, § 31-1 et seq. are used, they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in the state motor vehicle code. 
(Ord. of 6-2-97, § 1-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Definitions, G.L. 1956, § 31-1-2 et seq. 
Sec. 46-2. - Defacing or damaging parking or traffic control devices. 
    A person shall not willfully deface, injure, move, remove, obstruct or interfere with any official sign, signal, marking or device. 
(Ord. of 6-2-97, § 1-2) 
State Law reference- Injury to signs and traffic-control devices, G.L. 1956, § 31-13-11. 
Sec. 46-3. - Unofficial parking or traffic control devices. 
    The location of all parking or traffic control signs shall be under the director of public works, and no person, unless so directed, shall place, maintain or display, upon or in view of any street, any unofficial sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic sign, signal, mark or device, or which attempts to direct or regulate the movement of traffic, or which obstructs or hides from view any official sign or signal. 
(Ord. of 6-2-97, § 1-3) 
State Law reference- Unauthorized signs and devices, G.L. 1956, § 31-13-10. 
Secs. 46-4-46-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 46-36-46-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TRAFFIC CONTROL OFFICIAL 

Sec. 46-56. - Designated. 
    The director of public works shall be designated as the traffic control official. 
(Ord. of 6-2-97, § 2-1) 
Charter reference- Department of public works, § 801. 
Sec. 46-57. - Authority to make rules and regulations. 
    The traffic control official shall have the authority to make all necessary rules and regulations for the regulation of parking and traffic in the town, not inconsistent with the laws of the state; provided, however, that all regulations relative to the establishment of one-way streets, winter parking regulations and snow routes, and regulations restricting the use of streets by commercial vehicles shall first be approved by the town council. 
(Ord. of 6-2-97, § 2-2) 
Sec. 46-58. - Posting of rules and regulations required. 
(a)  No rule or regulation of the traffic control official shall be effective unless the rule or regulation is conspicuously posted and marked in the area affected or, if not conspicuously posted or marked, is advertised at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the area. 
(b)  The requirements of this section shall apply to the traffic control official only. Rules established by ordinance of the town council shall become effective as set forth in the Charter. 
(Ord. of 6-2-97, § 2-3) 
State Law reference- Local regulations to be posted, G.L. 1956, § 31-12-13. 
Sec. 46-59. - Duties. 
    Without intending in any manner to limit the generality of the powers conferred under this article, the traffic control official shall have full authority to perform and carry out the following duties: 
(1)  Establish rules and regulations governing parking and the use of public highways by vehicles and pedestrians within the limits established by state law and the provisions of this chapter, including, but not to the exclusion of, other regulatory powers conferred or as may be prescribed by future ordinances; 
(2)  Install parking and traffic control devices as may be allowed by law or ordinance; 
(3)  Designate throughways and stop streets, curb parking zones and the manner of their use; and 
(4)  Perform enforcement and administrative powers as specified herein. 
(Ord. of 6-2-97, § 2-4) 
Charter reference- Department of Public Works-duties, § 801. 
State Law reference- Powers of local authorities, G.L. 1956, § 31-12-12. 
Secs. 46-60-46-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARKING, STOPPING AND STANDING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Off-street parking and loading, app. A, art. V. 
State Law reference- Stopping, standing and parking restrictions, G.L. 1956, § 31-21-1 et seq. 

Sec. 46-91. - Manner of parking generally. 
    A vehicle shall not be parked on any street unless the curbside wheels of the vehicle are drawn within one foot of the right curb, edge of the roadway or sidewalk line in the direction in which traffic is headed, unless otherwise provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 6-2-97, § 4-1(a)) 
Sec. 46-92. - Stopping at left curb. 
    No vehicle shall stop with its left side to the curb except on a one-way street or in an emergency or to allow another vehicle or pedestrian to cross its way. 
(Ord. of 6-2-97, § 4-1(b)) 
Sec. 46-93. - Stopping so as to obstruct traffic or pedestrians. 
    It shall be unlawful for any operator of a vehicle to place the same in any street, crosswalk, footpath or sidewalk so as to prevent or obstruct the passing of other vehicles or pedestrians unless for a reasonable time when necessary, but not exceeding five minutes at a time. 
(Ord. of 6-2-97, § 4-1(c)) 
Sec. 46-94. - Prohibited in specified places. 
    It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer, the traffic control official, or a traffic control sign: 
(1)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
(2)  On a sidewalk. 
(3)  Within an intersection. 
(4)  On or within ten feet of a crosswalk. 
(5)  Within ten feet of a point where, if curblines were extended, they would intersect at a street corner. 
(6)  In any place where the use of any public or private driveway will be obstructed. 
(7)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such standing or parking would obstruct traffic. 
(8)  Within ten feet of fire hydrant. 
(9)  Upon, or within 50 feet of, any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel. 
(10)  On any railroad track and within 50 feet of the nearest railroad crossing. 
(11)  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of the entrance (when properly posted). 
(12)  Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign or traffic control sign located at the side of a roadway. 
(13)  At angles in streets and at or near intersections where the standing, stopping or parking of vehicles would obstruct the free movement of traffic. 
(14)  Within the area marked and specifically reserved for handicapped parking except for those vehicles displaying handicapped plates issued by the state registry of motor vehicles. The traffic control official is authorized to designate and erect signs in those areas reserved for the handicapped. 
(Ord. of 6-2-97, § 4-1(d)) 
Sec. 46-95. - Standing prohibited near bus stops; exception. 
    No vehicle shall remain standing within ten feet of any pole or sign indicating a motor bus stop on the side from which passengers board or alight, except that in lieu of this regulation, the police department may, where deemed necessary, indicate by proper signs spaces which will provide proper access to motor buses at such stops. 
(Ord. of 6-2-97, § 4-1(e)) 
Sec. 46-96. - Parking in school zones. 
(a)  The traffic control officer is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school property, public or private, when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
(b)  When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon either side of a street adjacent to any school property as authorized in this section, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(c)  No person shall park a vehicle in any place marked as a school bus loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. The zones are specifically for the use of school buses engaged in the loading and unloading of school children. 
(d)  The driver of a vehicle may stop temporarily at a place marked as a school bus loading zone for the purpose of, and while engaged in, the loading or unloading of passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any school bus which is waiting to enter or leave such zones. 
(Ord. of 6-2-97, § 4-1(f)) 
Sec. 46-97. - Prohibited on specified streets or parts of streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop, stand or park any such vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control sign. 
(Ord. of 6-2-97, § 4-1(g)) 
Sec. 46-98. - Prohibited in specified places. 
    A vehicle shall not be stopped or permitted to stand in any place where prohibited by the rules and regulations of the traffic control officer. 
(Ord. of 6-2-97, § 4-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 31-21-4. 
Sec. 46-99. - Parking of certain commercial vehicles, campers, trailers restricted. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to park any commercial vehicle or any trailer or camper or any vehicle that is not registered as a passenger vehicle in excess of two tons hauling capacity on any street or highway within the town for a period exceeding 30 minutes except when engaged in active deliveries, construction, repairs or other similar business activities. This section shall not in any event be construed to permit the overnight parking of commercial vehicles, as described in this section, on any public street or highway if otherwise allowed by the terms of this article. 
(b)  The fine for a first violation of this section shall be $25.00; for the second violation within one calendar year, $50.00; for the third violation within one calendar year, $100.00; for each additional violation within one calendar year, $100.00. 
(Ord. of 6-2-97, § 4-3) 
State Law reference- Fines for traffic and parking violations, G.L. 1956, § 12-44-4. 
Sec. 46-100. - Winter parking and storm emergencies. 
(a)  When effective. The parking regulations enumerated in this section are effective each year in the town from December 1 to April 1. 
(b)  Parking prohibited on snow routes. Snow routes shall be designated from time to time by the town council, and a schedule of such snow routes shall be filed in the office of the town clerk. All parking shall be prohibited thereon upon declaration of storm emergency and until the emergency has been declared at an end by the director of public works. 
(c)  Parking restricted on all other streets. On all other streets and highways except dead-end streets in the town, parking shall be prohibited on the odd-numbered side, unless otherwise posted, upon declaration of a storm emergency and until such emergency shall have abated. 
(d)  Parking restrictions on dead-end streets. On dead-end streets in the town, unless otherwise posted, parking will be prohibited on the right side facing into the end of the street upon declaration of a storm emergency and until such emergency has been declared at an end. 
(e)  Declaration of storm emergency. The director of public works, after consultation with the president of the town council, is hereby authorized to declare a storm emergency once the snow reaches a depth of two inches, or when such weather conditions are deemed in the discretion of the director exist to constitute a hazard to the public health and safety. Normal parking regulations will resume when the director of public works has declared the storm emergency at an end that the hazard has passed. 
(f)  Notice of declaration of storm emergency. Notice of a declaration of a storm emergency shall be posted in at least two public places within the town and shall be made through public service announcements in the media. 
(g)  Penalties. Any vehicle illegally parked, disabled or impeding snow removal which, in the opinion of the traffic control official constitutes a hazard to the public health and safety, will be towed away at the expense of the owner. Vehicles parking in violation of this section will be tagged. The fine for a violation upon the first offense during the period of December 1 through April 1, shall be $10.00. The fine for the second offense shall be $15.00. The fine for the third offense shall be $25.00. 
(Ord. of 6-2-97, § 4-5) 
Sec. 46-101. - Fire lanes. 
(a)  Traffic control official authorized to establish; maintenance. The traffic engineer, in consultation with the chief of the appropriate fire district, is hereby authorized to establish fire lanes on private property devoted to public use. The designations by the traffic engineer of such fire lanes shall not render the town responsible for maintenance of such fire lanes, but the owner of such property shall continue to be responsible for the maintenance of such area. 
(b)  Parking. Parking of motor vehicles in, or otherwise obstructing, fire lanes shall be prohibited at all times. 
(c)  Owner to post signs; specification of signs. Upon the designation of a fire lane, pursuant to this section, the traffic engineer shall give notice of such designation to the owner of such area directing the owner to cause signs to be posted at the expense of the owner at designated locations which sign shall state "Fire Lane-No Parking Anytime - Tow Zone." Such signs shall be of a standard size and color, of standard lettering and mounting, conforming to specifications established by the traffic engineer, and shall contain a notice as to the maximum penalty for violations. 
(d)  Official record of designations and locations. The official record of the designation and location of fire lanes shall be kept in the office of the town clerk. 
(e)  Penalties. It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle to park the vehicle in any area designated as a fire lane. Violators of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $5.00 for each offense. A vehicle illegally parked or disabled in a fire lane may be towed away at the expense of the owner. The fee to be charged shall be the actual cost of the towing. 
(Ord. of 6-2-97, § 4-6) 
Sec. 46-102. - Removal of illegally parked vehicles. 
    Any state or town police officer, if applicable, or the town traffic control official in his discretion may remove or cause to be removed any vehicle left upon any street, and not in the apparent charge of any person, or in violation of any regulation of the town, to another place on such street, or from such street to some other street, or to a garage which will provide for the vehicle, or to a police station and there leave it, and possession of any such vehicle shall be withheld from any person entitled to possession thereof until any expenses incurred in removal thereof shall have been paid. The violation of any regulation of the town by the owner or other person having possession of such vehicle with the consent of the owner thereof shall be a consent by the owner of such vehicle to the removal thereof by any police officer and shall be a consent to park such vehicle at the place to which the vehicle is removed. 
(Ord. of 6-2-97, § 4-4(a)) 
State Law reference- Removal of vehicles under jurisdiction of state, G.L. 1956, § 31-21-10.1. 
Sec. 46-103. - Notice of removal and impoundment; vehicle disposition. 
(a)  Not later than 48 hours after a vehicle and its contents have been removed by the town, excluding holidays and weekends, the traffic control officer shall cause a notice to be given to the owner of record of such vehicle as indicated in the motor vehicle records of the state registry of motor vehicles or the corresponding agency of any other state. Notice shall also be given to any lienholder of records as indicated on the motor vehicle records. The notice shall describe the vehicle and its contents, give the date the vehicle was impounded, state the grounds for impoundment, the location of the place of impoundment, and state that unless the vehicle is redeemed within 30 days after the date of notice, the vehicle and its contents will be sold or otherwise disposed of as provided by law. The notice shall also state that if requested within five days after the date of such notice, a hearing will be conducted to review the removal and impoundment of the vehicle. The right to a hearing shall be deemed waived if not timely requested. Any hearing under this section shall be conducted in the manner provided hereafter. 
(b)  The notice referred to in subsection (a) of this section shall be given either by personal delivery to the person to be notified or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the person at his address as shown on the motor vehicle records. Notice by personal delivery shall be complete upon delivery and notice by mail shall be deemed complete upon the return of the receipt or upon return of the notice as undeliverable, refused or unclaimed. Proof of the giving of notice in either manner may be made by affidavit of the person giving notice by personal delivery or by mail, naming the person to whom the notice was given and specifying the time, place and manner of giving notice. No notice shall be required if the vehicle is redeemed within 48 hours of the impoundment. 
(c)  Vehicles impounded by the town shall be redeemed only by the registered owner, a person authorized by the registered owner, a person entitled to possession, or one who has purchased the vehicle from the registered owner, who produces proof of ownership, authorization or entitlement and signs a receipt therefor. 
(Ord. of 6-2-97, § 4-4(b)) 
Sec. 46-104. - Administrative hearing. 
(a)  Upon written request of the legal owner or the person entitled to possession of the vehicle delivered to the town clerk, an administrative hearing shall be held before a hearing officer. The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in an informal manner and shall not be bound by technical rules of evidence. Such hearing shall be set and conducted within five regular business days of the receipt of the request, holidays, Saturdays or Sundays not included. The hearing can be set for a later date if the owner or person entitled to possession so requests. At the hearing, the following may be contested: 
(1)  The validity of the action of the law enforcement or traffic control official in taking the vehicle into custody; and 
(2)  Removing and the creation and amount of the lien attached to the vehicle. 
(b)  At any time prior to the requested hearing, the owner or the person entitled to possession of the vehicle may regain possession of the vehicle by posting with the town security in the form of cash in an amount sufficient to cover costs of removing and storage. 
(c)  If the hearing officer finds that: 
(1)  The action of the town in taking the vehicle into custody was proper, the hearing officer shall enter an order supporting the removal and ordering the costs of removal and storage be paid before redemption of the vehicle. 
(2)  The action of the law enforcement officer in taking the vehicle into custody was invalid, the hearing officer shall: 
a.  Order the vehicle released to the owner; 
b.  Find that the owner is not liable for any towing or storage charges occasioned by the taking; and 
c.  Order the town to satisfy the towing and storage lien. If the owner or person entitled to possession of the vehicle does not redeem it promptly, any subsequent charges shall be paid by the owner or person entitled to possession. 
(3)  If creation and amount of the towing and storage lien is correct, the hearing officer shall order the lien satisfied before release of the vehicle. 
(4)  If creation and amount of the towing and storage liens is not correct, the hearing officer shall correct the amount of the lien and order the corrected lien satisfied before release of the vehicle. 
(d)  If the person requesting the hearing does not appear at the scheduled hearing, the hearing officer may enter an order affirming the removal and assessment of towing and storage costs and apply any security posed against such costs. 
(e)  The action of the hearing officer pursuant to this section is final. 
(Ord. of 6-2-97, § 4-4(c)) 
Sec. 46-105. - Hearing officers. 
    Hearing officers shall be appointed by the town council. A hearing officer shall be someone other than the person who directed the impounding and storage of the vehicle. The issues before any hearing officer shall be whether there was probable cause to impound the vehicle in question and the creation and amount of the lien attached to the vehicle. The expression "probable cause to impound" shall mean such a state of facts as would lead a person of ordinary care and prudence to believe that there was authority for the removal of the vehicle. 
(Ord. of 6-2-97, § 4-4(c)) 
Sec. 46-106. - Alternate hearing officer. 
    The town council president may, in emergency situations, assume the position of, or designate an alternate hearing officer who will serve in the place of any hearing officer if regularly appointed hearing officers are unable to serve. 
(Ord. of 6-2-97, § 4-4(d)) 
Sec. 46-107. - Violations; payment of fines by mail. 
(a)  Unless otherwise designated in this section, a person charged with a violation of the provisions of this article relating to parking and notified in writing by a police officer or the traffic control officer, may personally appear at the town hall within seven days of the violation, instead of before the court and admit the truth of the charge and pay to the town clerk the fines for such violation which fines shall be set from time to time by the town council. A schedule of such fines shall be maintained on file in the town clerk's office. 
(b)  All persons charged with a violation may pay such fine by mailing the tag and the amount of such violation, within seven days from such violation, by mail postage prepaid addressed to the Town Clerk, Town Hall, Ten Rod Road, Exeter, Rhode Island. Failure to appear within such time limits shall be deemed a waiver of the right to appear and to dispose of such charge without personal appearance in the court. The payment of the fine in the manner provided in this section shall operate as a final disposition of such charge, and such proceedings shall not be deemed to be of a criminal nature. The right to dispose of such charge without personal appearance in court may not be exercised by any person who in any consecutive period of 12 months next preceding such charge has been judged guilty by the court three or more times in the same period in the aggregate, or has admitted the truth of the charges relating to parking. 
(c)  The notice in writing shall indicate the offense charged and shall also contain such information as will enable the person charged to take advantage of the provision relating to personal disposition without a court appearance. The notice may be by way of a parking tag or summons. 
(d)  Unless otherwise specified in this section, a person charged with violating any provisions of this article shall be punished by a fine of not less than $5.00 nor more than $100.00 for each offense, and a person so charged shall not be permitted to dispose of such offense other than by a personal court appearance. 
(Ord. of 6-2-97, § 4-8) 
Secs. 46-108-46-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MOTOR VEHICLES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 46-141-46-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SNOWMOBILES, GO-CARTS, MINIBIKES AND ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES 

Sec. 46-161. - Operation on land of another; permission required. 
    No person shall operate a snowmobile, motorized go-cart, minibike or an all-terrain vehicle upon town roads, or upon the land of another, without permission of the owner of the land to do so. 
(Ord. of 1-3-72, § 1) 
Sec. 46-162. - Carrying of firearms or hunting while using. 
    No person shall carry a firearm upon a snowmobile, a motorized go-cart, a minibike or an all-terrain vehicle, or use any of such vehicles to chase or pursue game. 
(Ord. of 1-3-72, § 2) 
Secs. 46-163-46-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COMMERCIAL VEHICLES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18. 

Sec. 46-186. - Restricted on certain streets. 
    The town council shall, with the advice of the traffic control officer, designate from time to time certain streets within the jurisdiction of the town where commercial vehicles shall not be driven or operated on except for the purpose of receiving, transporting or delivering merchandise or necessities to those who reside thereon. A current schedule of such streets shall be maintained on file in the town clerk's office. 
(Ord. of 6-2-97, § 3-1) 
Chapter 50 - WATERWAYS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 22; natural resources, ch. 30; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 38; zoning, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 50-1-50-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOONE LAKE 

Sec. 50-31. - Application of article provisions. 
    The regulations in this article shall apply to certain activities on and about Boone Lake (sometimes also called Boone Pond), a body of water situated in the town. 
(Ord. of 5-29-67, § 1) 
Sec. 50-32. - Motor-powered boats. 
    No motor in excess of 50 horsepower shall be used with any boat operated on the lake. No boat shall be operated at a speed in excess of five miles per hour on the lake during the hours from 9:00 p.m. to 8:30 a.m., except in an emergency. No boat shall be operated under motor power on the lake whenever visibility is restricted by fog or other conditions to less than 50 feet, except in an emergency. Furthermore, no boat shall operate at a speed of more than 30 miles per hour. All boats shall operate counter clockwise, except sailboats. 
(Ord. of 5-29-67, § 1(A); Amend. of 12-5-11) 
Sec. 50-33. - Swimming. 
    No person shall swim at a distance of more than 50 feet from shore unless accompanied by and within 15 feet of a boat. 
(Ord. of 5-29-67, § 1(B)) 
Sec. 50-34. - Water skiing. 
    Water skiing shall not be permitted in the Main Beach Cove and South Cove area of the lake, except for water skiing directly away from or on shore for the purpose of reaching other parts of the lake in which to water ski. The Main Beach Cove area is defined as follows: The area from the spillway of the dam to a point 350 feet in an easterly direction, known as Main Beach; and including the water 100 feet from such beach. The South Cove area is defined as follows: The area to the south of a line from the island to the point of land with a large pine tree, known as Thavenets. Water skiing shall not be permitted within 50 feet of shore, except for water skiing directly away from or to shore for the purpose of reaching the area of the lake beyond 50 feet from shore. The number of water skiers per boat on the lake shall be limited to two persons. The erection or use of any structures or devices in connection with water skiing on the lake is prohibited. 
(Ord. of 5-29-67, § 1(C)) 
Sec. 50-35. - Scuba diving. 
    Scuba diving, so-called, in the lake shall be limited to the Main Beach Cove area as indicated in section 50-34, except in emergency only. 
(Ord. of 5-29-67, § 1(D)) 
APPENDIX A - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the zoning ordinance of the town, as adopted on December 12, 1995. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Charter reference- Planning board, § 901; zoning board of review, § 903. 
Cross reference- Any zoning map amendment or land use, rezoning or zoning ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-11(10); buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 22; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 26; natural resources, ch. 30; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 38; waterways, ch. 50. 

INTRODUCTION 
    Exeter, at this time, is in an excellent position to develop a series of goals and objectives for future town growth. The community presents, with minor exceptions, an unspoiled landscape which the people of Exeter and the town government have expressed a firm commitment to preserve through the adoption of a comprehensive plan. Now our Town can take positive actions to avoid the mistakes of other communities. 
    The general objectives of this zoning ordinance are: to utilize all land resources wisely and to prevent the despoiling of agricultural land and woodland (prime community resources); to protect residential area while maintaining the environment along with adequate open space, recreation, and community facilities; to limit high population concentrations in areas where soil conditions and terrain may not possess the capability for serving a high density population; to preserve the purity of individual water supply systems and surface and groundwater resources; to recognize the fact that future population densities must be kept at a point which will not jeopardize the natural environment and fresh water supply; and to provide commercial areas to enterprises to serve the community's needs, but limiting long strips of business to prevent impairment of normal highway functions. 
    It is ordained by the Town Council of the Town of Exeter as follows: 
TOWN OF EXETER 
RHODE ISLAND 
ARTICLE I. - ADMINISTRATION PROCEDURES[2] 
    In accordance with title 45, chapter 24 of the General Laws of Rhode Island, 1956, as amended by chapter 83 of the Public Laws of 1957 and chapter 173 of the Public Laws of 1967, Zoning Enabling Act of June, 1991, Public Law 91-307, the following zoning ordinance is hereby effective. All ordinances and amendments or parts of ordinances and amendments which are inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 1.1. - Statement of purpose. 
    The zoning regulations set forth in this ordinance have been made in accordance with the town's comprehensive plan for the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, morals, general welfare, and the conservation of the natural resources of the Town of Exeter. They are designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to provide adequate light and air; to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; and to facilitate the parks and other public requirements. They are made with reasonable consideration, among other things, of the character of each district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, and with a view to conserving the value of the buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the town, and to preserve and enhance the beauty of the community and the character of the neighborhoods. 
    Further, the zoning regulations are developed and maintained for the following purposes: 
1.  Promote the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
2.  Provide for a range of uses and intensities of use appropriate to the character of the Town of Exeter and reflecting current and expected future needs. 
3.  Provide for orderly growth and development which recognizes: 
A.  The goals and patterns of land use contained in the Exeter Comprehensive Plan adopted pursuant to Chapter 45-22.2 of the General Laws of Rhode Island; 
B.  The natural characteristics of the land, including its suitability for use, based on soil characteristics, topography, and susceptibility to surface [water] or groundwater pollution; 
C.  The values and dynamic nature of freshwater ponds, the shoreline, and freshwater and coastal wetlands; 
D.  The values of unique or valuable natural resources and features; 
E.  The availability and capacity of existing and planned public and/or private services and facilities; 
F.  The need to shape and balance rural development; 
G.  The use of innovative development regulations and techniques; 
4.  Provide for the control, protection, and/or abatement of air, water, groundwater, and noise pollution, and soil erosion and sedimentation. 
5.  Provide for the protection of the natural, historic, cultural, and scenic character of the Town of Exeter or areas therein. 
6.  Provide for the preservation of agricultural production, forest (silviculture), aquaculture, timber resources and open space. 
7.  Provide for the protection of public investment, if any, in transportation, water, stormwater management systems, sewage treatment and disposal, solid waste treatment and disposal, schools, recreation, public facilities, open space, and other public requirements. 
8.  Promote a balance of housing choices for all income levels and groups to ensure the health, safety and welfare of all citizens and their rights to affordable, accessible, safe and sanitary housing. Provide opportunities for the establishment of low and moderate income housing. 
9.  Promote safety from fire, flood, and other natural or manmade disasters. 
10.  Promote a high level of quality in design in the development of private and public facilities. 
11.  Promote implementation of the comprehensive plan of the Town of Exeter adopted pursuant to G.L. 1956, § 45-22.2. 
12.  Provide for coordination of land uses with contiguous municipalities, other municipalities, the state and other agencies, as appropriate, especially with regard to resources and facilities that extend beyond the boundaries of the Town of Exeter or have a direct impact on the Town of Exeter. 
13.  Provide for efficient review of development proposals, to clarify and expedite the zoning review process. 
14.  Provide for procedures for the administration of the Exeter Zoning Ordinance including, but not limited to, variances, special use permits and, where adopted, procedures for modifications. 
Sec. 1.2. - Definitions. 
    Where words or terms used in this ordinance are defined in the definitions section of the "Rhode Island Comprehensive Planning and Land Uses Act," G.L. 1956, § 45-22.2-4, they shall have the meanings stated therein. In addition, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
1.  Abutter. One whose property abuts, that is, adjoins at a border, boundary or point with no intervening land. 
2.  Accessory family dwelling unit. An accessory dwelling unit contained within the principal unit for the sole use of one or more members of the family of the occupant or occupants of the principal residence, but need not have a separate means of ingress and egress. 
3.  Accessory use. A use of land or of a building, or portion thereof, customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building. Such accessory use may be restricted to the same lot as the principal use. Such accessory use shall not be permitted without the principal use to which it is related. 
4  Affordable housing. Year-round housing that has a sales price or rental amount that is within means of a household that is moderate income or less, as defined by R.I. Gen. Laws § 42-128-8.1(d), as amended 
5.  Age restricted housing: Housing expressly for, and limited to, use and residency by (or at least co-use and co-residency by, as more particularly described below) persons 55 years of age or older, or as otherwise expressly required by state and federal law and regulation, and as defined by the Rhode Island Fair House Act, as amended. 
6.  Agency. An agent of the local government, a person or board appointed to act for the public in some matter pertaining to the administration of municipal government. 
7.  Aggrieved party. An aggrieved party, for purposes of this act shall be: 
A.  Any person or persons or entity or entities who can demonstrate that their property will be injured by a decision of any officer or agency responsible for administering the zoning ordinance of the Town of Exeter; or 
B.  Anyone requiring notice pursuant to G.L. 1956, title 45, chapter 24. 
8.  Agricultural land. Agricultural land as defined in G.L. 1956, § 45-22.2-4. 
9.  Airport hazard area. Airport hazard area as defined in G.L. 1956 § 45-24-31. 
10.  Appeal. A course of action an individual may take before the zoning board of review when he/she feels there has been an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the zoning inspector in the enforcement of the zoning ordinance. 
11.  Applicant. An owner (i.e., person, group, agency, or corporation) or an attorney for the owner submitting an application or appealing an action of any official, board or agency of the Town of Exeter. 
12.  Application. The completed form or forms and all accompanying documents, exhibits and fees required of an applicant by an approving authority for development review, approval, or permitting purposes. 
13.  Area median income (AMI). The median household income as determined annually by the federal Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and adjusted for household size by HUD and by Rhode Island Housing for the designated statistical area that includes the town as of the date of marketing of the housing unit to which it is being applied. 
14.  Articulation: The degree or manner in which a building wall or roofline is made up of distinct parts or elements. A highly articulated wall will appear to be composed of a number of different vertical and horizontal planes, usually made distinct by their change in direction (projections and recesses) and/or changes in materials, colors or textures. 
15.  Arterial roads: For the purposes of the zoning ordinance, arterial roads in Exeter include Route 2, Route 3, Route 102, and Route 165. 
16.  Awning: An overhead cover of canvas or other material extending over building openings to provide protection from the sun and rain. 
17.  Buffer. Land which is maintained in either a natural or landscaped state, and is used to screen and/or mitigate the impacts of development on surrounding areas, properties or rights-of-way. 
18.  Building. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. 
19.  Building envelope. The three-dimensional space within which a structure is permitted to be built on a lot and which is defined by regulations governing: building setbacks, maximum height, bulk, or other regulations, and/or any combination thereof. 
20.  Building height. The vertical distance from the highest point of finished grade, to the top of the highest point of the roof or structure. The distance may exclude spires, chimneys, flagpoles and the like. 
21.  Building inspector. An appointed official responsible for issuing building permits and examining all structures during the course of their erection, alteration, repair, moving or demolition. 
22.  Building types: The various general forms and functions of structures as depicted on development applications to the town through the use of massing blocks and/or architectural elevations. 
23.  Common ownership. Either (1) ownership by one or more individuals or entities in any form of ownership of two or more contiguous lots, or (2) ownership by any association (such ownership may also include a municipality) of one or more lots under specific development techniques. 
24.  Community residence. A home or residential facility where children and/or adults reside in a family setting and may or may not receive supervised care. This shall not include halfway houses or substance abuse treatment facilities. This shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
A.  Whenever six or fewer retarded children or adults reside in any type of residence in the community, as licensed by the state pursuant to G.L. 1956, § 40.1-24-1. All requirements pertaining to local zoning are waived for these community residences. 
B.  A group home providing care or supervision, or both, to not more than eight mentally disabled or mentally handicapped or physically handicapped persons, and licensed by the state pursuant to G.L. 1956, § 40.1-24-1. 
C.  A residence for children providing care or supervision, or both, to be not more than eight children, including those of the caregiver and licensed by the state pursuant to G.L. 1956, § 42-72.1. 
D.  A community transitional residence providing care or assistance, or both, to no more than six unrelated persons or no more than three families, not to exceed a total of eight persons requiring temporary financial assistance and/or to persons who are victims of crimes, abuse or neglect, and who are expected to reside in such residence not less than 60 days nor more than two years. Residents will have access to and use of all common areas, including eating areas and living rooms, and will receive appropriate social services for the purpose of fostering independence, self-sufficiency and eventual transition to a permanent living situation. 
25.  Comprehensive plan. The comprehensive plan adopted and approved pursuant to G.L. 1956, § 45-22.2 and to which any zoning adopted pursuant to this act shall be in compliance. 
26.  Conservation development . A type of land development project, which allows a community to guide growth to the most appropriate areas within a parcel of land to avoid impacts to the environment and to protect the character-defining features of the property. See the town land development and subdivision regulations. 
27.  Cornice: A continuous molded projection that crowns a wall or other construction or divides it horizontally for compositional purposes; usually consists of bed molding, soffit, fascia, and crown molding. 
28.  Day care, day care center. Any other day care center which is not a family day care home. 
29.  Day care, family day care home. Any home other than the individual's home in which day care in lieu of parental care or supervision is offered at the same time to six or less individuals who are not relatives of the care giver, but may contain more than a total of eight individuals receiving such care. 
30.  Density, residential. The number of dwelling units per unit of land. 
31.  Development. The construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any structure, any mining, excavation, landfill or land disturbance, any change in use, or alteration or extension of the use of land. 
32.  Development plan review. The process whereby authorized local officials review the site plans, maps and other documentation of a development to determine the compliance with the stated purposes and standards of the ordinance. 
33.  Development project. See Land development project. 
34.  Development rights: Those rights to develop, expressed as the maximum number of dwelling units for residential parcels that could be permitted on a designated sending area parcel under the applicable zoning and subdivision rules and regulations in effect on the date of the transfer of development rights. 
35.  District. See Zoning use district. 
36.  Dormer: A window set upright in a sloping roof. The term is also used to refer to the roofed projection in which this window is set. 
37.  Drainage system. A system for the removal of water from land by drains, grading or other appropriate means. Such techniques may include runoff control to minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or development, the means for preserving surface [waters] and groundwaters and the prevention and/or alleviation of flooding and pollution. 
38.  Dwelling unit. A structure or portion thereof providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation and containing a separate means of ingress and egress. 
39.  Extractive industry. The extraction of minerals including: solids, such as coal, ores and gravel and soil material; liquids, such as crude petroleum; and gases, such as natural gases. The term also includes quarrying; well operation; milling, such as crushing, screening, washing and flotation; and other preparation customarily done at the extraction site or as a part of the extractive activity. 
40.  Façade: The front of a building or any of its sides facing public spaces, frequently distinguished by distinctive architectural treatment. 
41.  Family. A person or persons related by blood, marriage or other legal means. See also Household. 
42.  Farm: Five acres or more of land which is, together with principal and accessory buildings, actively devoted to agricultural or horticultural production and operated by an individual, partnership, or corporation that has filled a U.S. Internal Revenue Form 1040 (Schedule F) with the Internal Revenue Service and has a State of Rhode Island farm tax number, and has earned at least $2,500.00 gross income on farm products in either of the proceeding two years. 
43.  Farm brewery. A brewery that is located on a farm of no less than five acres and that produces beer which is manufactured with at least one primary ingredient (hops or grain) grown on the farm and whose annual production does not exceed 150,000 gallons of beer, and where customers would have the opportunity to tour the farm and try small samples (3 ounces or less), and purchase bottles (of up to 64 ounces each) to take home and consume off site. 
A farm brewery may also sell beer at wholesale to retailers with the appropriate State license. A farm brewery must have the appropriate State license to operate a brewery. 
44.  Fast food restaurant. Any business, the major operation of which is over the counter service, generating a high turnover of customers and a large volume of traffic. 
45.  Filing fee. A sum of money which accompanies an application for an appeal, variance, special use permit, or amendment. This is to cover any legal advertising and/or stenographic record. 
46.  Floodplains or flood hazard area. As defined in G.L. 1956, § 45-22.2-4. 
47.  Gross floor area: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings. Gross floor area does not include basements when at least one-half the floor-to-ceiling height is below grade, accessory parking (i.e., parking that is available on or off-site that is not part of the use's minimum parking standard), attic space having a floor-to-ceiling height less than seven feet, exterior balconies, uncovered steps, or inner courts. 
48.  Groundwater. Groundwater and associated terms as defined in G.L. 1956, § 46-13-1-3. 
49.  Habitat. That fixed place of residence to which a person intends to reside permanently. 
50.  Halfway houses. A residential facility for adults or children who have been institutionalized for criminal conduct and who require a group setting to facilitate the transition to a functional member of society. 
51.  Hardship. See article 1, section 3.E [of this appendix]. 
52.  Historic district or historic site. As defined in G.L. 1956, § 45-22.2-4. 
53.  Home occupation. Any activity customarily carried out for gain by resident, conducted as an accessory use in the resident's dwelling unit. 
54.  Household. One or more persons living together in a single dwelling unit, with common access to, and common use of, all living and eating areas and all areas and facilities for the preparation and storage of food within the dwelling unit. The term "household unit" shall be synonymous with the term for determining the number of such units allowed within any structure on any lot in a zoning district. An individual household shall consist of any one of the following: 
A.  A family, which may also include servants and employees living with the family. 
B.  A person or group of unrelated persons living together. The maximum number may be set by local ordinance, but this maximum shall not be less than three. 
55.  Inclusionary (housing) unit. A low or moderate income housing unit (as defined herein) which meets the affordability level, unit type, and other requirements of article IX, enabling it to be counted towards satisfying the requirements of that section. 
56.  Infrastructure. Facilities and services needed to sustain residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, and other activities. 
57.  Junk. The term "junk" shall include, but shall not be limited to, old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber debris, construction debris, waste; or junked, dismantled or wrecked automobiles, or parts thereof; [and] iron, steel and other old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous material. 
58.  Junkyard. The use of any lot, whether inside or outside a building, where an establishment or place of business which is maintained, operated, or used for storing, keeping, buying, or selling junk. 
59.  Kennel Class 1. A fully enclosed/indoor structure or establishment other than a pound or animal shelter where over ten dogs are kept, owned, trained and/or boarded. 
60.  Kennel Class 2. A structure or establishment other than a pound or animal shelter where four to ten dogs are kept, owned, trained and/or boarded. 
61.  Land development project. A project in which one or more lots, tracts, or parcels of land are to be developed or redeveloped as a coordinated site for a complex of uses, units, or structures, including, but not limited to, planned development or conservation development for residential, commercial, institutional, recreational, open space, and/or mixed uses as may be provided for in the zoning ordinance. 
62.  Land unsuitable for development. Land having natural or man-made limitations, which make it unsuitable for development. Land unsuitable for development shall be excluded from density calculations in conservation developments, rural residential compounds, and planned districts, and may not be considered as part of the minimum lot area required. These lands include: 
A.  Fresh water wetlands, including that area of wetland within 50 feet of the edge of any bog, marsh, swamp, pond or river; as defined by G.L., § 2-1-20, as amended. 
B.  Any area of the tract proposed to be developed equal to the area of any street, common private way, and/or utility rights-of-way, including drainage, gas or electrical power line easements. 
63.  Landscaping business. Any business whose purpose is to change or improve the natural scenery of a business or residence by placing or arranging trees, bushes, shrubs, ornamental grasses or other vegetation and also maintaining existing vegetation by pruning, mowing or other normal vegetative maintenance and also includes installation and maintenance of landscape features such as decorative ponds, waterfalls or other water elements as part of an overall landscape design. 
64.  Lot. Either (1) the basic development unit for determination of lot aRea, depth, and other dimensional regulations, or (2) a parcel of land whose boundaries have been established by some legal instrument such as a recorded deed or recorded map and which is recognized as a separate legal entity for purposes of transfer of title. 
65.  Lot area. The total area within the boundaries of a lot, including at a minimum, one acre of contiguous land that is suitable for development, usually reported in acres or square feet. 
66.  Lot building coverage. That portion of the lot that is or may be covered by buildings and accessory building(s). 
67.  Lot depth. The distance measured from the lot line to the rear lot line. For lots where the front and rear lot lines are not parallel, the lot depth is an average of the depth. 
68.  Lot frontage. That portion of a lot abutting a public or accepted town street. Lot frontage must be contiguous frontage to be considered to meet minimum frontage requirements. 
69.  Lot line. A line of record, bounding a lot, which divides one lot from another lot or from a public or private street or any other public or private space and shall include: 
A.  Front: The lot line separating a lot from a street right-of-way. A zoning ordinance shall specify the method to be used to determine the front lot line on lots fronting on more than one street, for example, corner and through lots. 
B.  Rear: The lot line opposite and more distant from the front lot line, or in the case of triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped lots, an assumed line at least ten feet in length entirely within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line; and 
C.  Side: Any lot line other than a front on rear lot line. On a corner lot, a side lot line may be a street lot line, depending on requirements of the local zoning ordinance. 
70.  Lot through. A lot which fronts upon two parallel streets, or which fronts upon two streets which do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot. 
71.  Lot width. The horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot measured at right angles to its depth along a straight line parallel to the front lot line at the minimum front setback line. 
72.  Low income household. A household with an adjusted gross income that is eighty (80) percent or less of the area median income as defined in this ordinance. 
73.  Low or moderate-income housing. Affordable housing (as defined in this ordinance and in G.L. § 42-128-8.1(d), as amended) that satisfies the criteria for "low or moderate income housing" under G.L. § 45-53-3(5), as follows: 
A.  subsidized by a federal, state, or municipal government subsidy under any program to assist the construction or rehabilitation of housing; and 
B.  affordable to low or moderate income households, as defined in the applicable federal or state statute, or local ordinance; and 
C.  subject to a land lease and/or deed restriction that assures such affordability for ninety-nine (99) years or such other period that is either agreed to by the applicant and town or prescribed by the federal, state, or municipal government subsidy program but that is not less than thirty (30) years from initial occupancy. 
74.  Manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, that, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width and 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on-site, is 320 square feet or more, that is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and that includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. 
75.  Massing: The three dimensional bulk of a structure consisting of its height, width, and depth. 
76.  Maximum gross building footprint per retail structure. The maximum gross building footprint per retail structure shall be calculated by including the total footprint in square feet of all indoor space devoted to storage, display, and/or sale of goods to be sold at retail, and sales areas for retail goods located on the same or on contiguous lots or parcels of land for a single or commonly controlled retail business operation. Thus, even if more than one structure is utilized for a single or commonly controlled retail business operation, the combined gross footprint may not exceed 40,000 square feet. Nothing herein is intended to prohibit multiple retail structures on a single lot from exceeding a total of 40,000 square feet, as long as they are not for a single or commonly controlled retail business operation. 
77.  Mere inconvenience. See G.L. 1956, § 45-24-41. 
78.  Mixed use. A mixture of land uses within a single development, building, or tract. 
79.  Mixed use commercial development. Commercial development in a business zone that contains a mix of commercial and residential uses as provided for in sec. 4.6 of these regulations. A mixed use commercial development is considered a land development project, pursuant to G.L. § 45-24-47, and shall be subject to development plan review, pursuant to section 2.5 of this ordinance. 
80.  Mobile home (including doublewide trailer). A structure designed or used for residential occupancy built upon or having a frame or chassis to which wheels may be attached by which it may be moved upon a highway, whether or not such structure actually has, at any given time, such wheels attached, or is jacked up or skirted, or attached to a permanent foundation. 
81.  Moderate income household. A household with an adjusted gross income that is more than eighty (80) percent but less than one hundred twenty (120) percent (120%) of the area median income as defined in this ordinance. 
82.  Modification. Permission granted and administered by the zoning inspector, and pursuant to the provisions of G.L. 1956, title 45, chapter 24 contained herein to grant a dimensional variance other than lot area requirements from the Exeter zoning ordinance to a limited degree as determined by the Exeter zoning ordinance, but not to exceed the specified percentage of each of the applicable dimensional requirements. 
83.  Mullion: A structural element which serves to frame a multi-pane window unit. 
84.  Municipal government subsidy. Assistance that is made available through a town program sufficient to make housing affordable, as affordable housing is defined in this ordinance and in G.L. § 42-128-8.1(d)(1). Such assistance may include, but is not limited to, direct financial support, waiver of fees and charges, and approval of density bonuses and/or internal subsidies, and any combination of forms of assistance. 
85.  Natural vegetation. Trees, shrubs, grass, or other plants which grow naturally or have been planted. 
86.  Nonconformance. A building, structure, or parcel of land, or use thereof, lawfully existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of the Exeter zoning ordinance and not in conformity with the provisions of such ordinance or amendment. Nonconformance shall be of only two types: 
A.  Nonconforming by use: A lawfully established use of land, building or structure which is not a permitted use in that zoning district. A building or structure containing more dwelling units than are permitted by the use regulations of a zoning ordinance shall be nonconforming by use. 
B.  Nonconforming by dimension: A building, structure or parcel of land not in compliance with the dimensional regulations of the Exeter zoning ordinance. Dimensional regulations include all regulations of the zoning ordinance, other than those pertaining to the permitted uses. A building or structure containing more dwelling units than are permitted by the use regulations of the Exeter zoning ordinance shall be nonconforming by use, a building or structure containing a permitted number of dwelling units by use regulations of the zoning ordinance, but not meeting the lot are per dwelling unit regulations, shall be nonconforming by dimension. 
87.  Overlay district. A district established in the Exeter zoning [ordinance] that is superimposed on one or more districts or parts of districts and that imposes specified requirements in addition to but not less than those otherwise applicable for the underlying zone. 
88.  Owner. Shall be held to mean any person who alone, or jointly, or severally with others: 
A.  Has a legal title to any premises; or 
B.  Has control of any premises as agent, executor, executrix, administrator, administrator trustee, guardian of the estate of the holder of a legal title, or the holder of equitable title; or 
C.  A partnership, corporation, or company. 
89.  Performance standards. A set of criteria or limits relating to elements which a particular use or process either must meet or may not exceed. 
90.  Permitted use. A use by right which is specifically authorized in a particular zoning district. 
91.  Planned development. Land development project as defined herein and developed according to plan as a single entity and containing one or more structures with appurtenant common areas. 
92.  Planned districts. The basic unit in zoning, either mapped or unmapped, to which a uniform set of regulations applies, or a uniform set of regulations for a specified use. The districts include, but are not limited to, residential, rural, conservation, business, light industrial, groundwater protection overlay, and open space and public lands. Each district may include subdistricts. Districts may be combined. 
93.  Planned village development (PVD): A major land development project within a planned village overlay district that incorporates a mix of residential and/or nonresidential uses in a compact, walkable environment, and complying with the standards set forth in article X of this ordinance. 
94.  Preapplication conference. A review meeting of a proposed development held between applicants and reviewing agencies as permitted by law and municipal ordinance, before formal submission of an application for a permit or for development approval. 
95.  Rear depth. The distance between a rear lot line and a structure. 
96.  Recreational vehicle. Major recreational equipment including, but not limited to, camp or travel trailers, tent trailers, boats and boat trailers. 
97.  Residential compound. A residential compound is a parcel of land containing lots for single-family dwellings having an average overall density of no greater than one dwelling unit per ten acres of land. 
98.  Rhode Island Housing. The Rhode Island Housing and Mortgage Finance Corporation, an agency of the State of Rhode Island. 
99.  Roofline: The top covering of a building which may consist of a variety of styles including, but not limited to: gable roof, hip roof, shed roof, and gambrel roof. 
100.  Scale: The general feeling of mass and size of a building as it relates to that of other buildings along a street or block front. 
101.  Setback line or lines. A line or lines parallel to a lot line at the minimum distance of the required setback for the zoning district in which the lot is located that establishes the area within which the principal structure must be erected or placed. 
102.  Site plan. The development plan for one or more lots on which is shown the existing and/or proposed conditions of the lot. 
103.  Special use. A regulated use which is permitted pursuant to a special use permit issued by the authorized governmental entity, pursuant to G.L. 1956, § 45-24-42. 
104.  Street. A street accepted by the Town of Exeter and maintained by the state or town for vehicular traffic. 
105.  Street line. A lot line that separates a lot from a street. 
106.  Structure. A combination of materials to form a construction for use, occupancy, or ornamentation, whether installed on, above, or below the surface of land or water. 
107.  Substandard lot of record. Any lot lawfully existing at the time of adoption or amendment of the Exeter zoning ordinance and not in conformance with the dimensional and/or area provisions of such ordinance. 
108.  Stepback: A condition in which the upper story or stories of a building are set back inward from the lower story. 
109.  Transfer of development rights: The ability to separate development rights from a particular parcel and use them to increase the development potential on another. 
110.  Use. The purpose or activity for which land or buildings are designed, arranged, or intended, or for which land or buildings are occupied or maintained. 
111.  Variance. Permission to depart from the literal requirements of the Exeter zoning ordinance. An authorization for the construction or maintenance of a building or structure, or for the establishment or maintenance of a use of land, which is prohibited by the Exeter zoning ordinance. There shall be only two categories of variance, a use variance or a dimensional variance. 
A.  Use variance. Permission to depart from the use requirements of the Exeter zoning ordinance where the applicant for the requested variance has shown by evidence upon the record that the subject land or structure cannot yield any beneficial use if it is to conform to the provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
B.  Dimensional variance. Permission to depart from the dimensional requirements of the Exeter zoning ordinance where the applicant for the requested relief has shown, by evidence upon the record, that the hardship that will be suffered will amount to more than a mere inconvenience unless granted the requested relief from the dimensional regulations. However the fact that a use may be more profitable or that a structure may be more valuable after the relief is granted shall not be grounds for relief. 
112.  Waters. As defined in G.L. 1956, § 46-12-1(b). 
113.  Wetland, coastal. As defined in G.L. 1956, § 2-1-14. 
114.  Wetland, freshwater. As defined in G.L. 1956, § 2-1-20. 
115.  Yield plan . A plan of a conventional (as opposed to a conservation) subdivision or land development project that depicts the maximum number of building lots or dwelling units that could reasonably be built on a parcel of land under current zoning, taking into account physical constraints to development, such as wetlands, etc. No lot shall be considered buildable unless it can be shown to have a minimum of one acre (43,560 sq. ft.) of contiguous, accessible land that is free of biological wetlands, water bodies, street rights-of way, or electrical power line easements. 
116.  Zoning board of review. A group consisting of five regular and two alternate members, appointed by the town council, charged with the responsibility of interpreting and making certain decision[s] as specified in the Exeter zoning ordinance and Exeter zoning map. 
117.  Zoning certificate. A document signed by the zoning inspector, as required in the Exeter zoning ordinance, which acknowledges that a use, structure, building or lot either complies with or is legally nonconforming to the provisions of the Exeter zoning ordinance, or is an authorized variance or modification therefrom. 
118.  Zoning inspector. A person elected by the people of the Town of Exeter and charged with the responsibility of enforcing the provisions of the Exeter zoning ordinance and recording all amendments of the ordinance on the record copy of the Exeter zoning ordinance. 
119.  Zoning map. The map or maps which are a part of the Exeter zoning ordinance and which delineate the boundaries of all mapped zoning districts within the physical boundaries of the Town of Exeter. 
120.  Zoning ordinance. The Exeter zoning ordinance enacted by the town council of the Town of Exeter pursuant to Title 45, Chapter 24, and, in the manner providing for the adoption of 14 ordinances in the town's legislative or home rule charter, if any, which sets forth regulations and standards relating to the nature and extent of uses of land and structures, which is consistent with the Exeter comprehensive plan, as defined in G.L. 1956, § 45-22.2, which includes the Exeter zoning map, and which complies with the provisions of G.L. 1956, title 45, chapter 24. 
(Ord. of 5-25-00, § I; Ord. of 1-6-03(2), § 4; Amd. of 3-3-03; Amd. of 10-5-04; Amd. of 3-6-06, § 1; Ord. of 8-7-06, § 1; Amd. of 5-7-07; Amd. of 6-4-07; Ord. of 9-4-07, § 1; Amd. of 4-7-08; Amd. of 4-6-09; Ord. of 9-27-12, Exh. 1; Amd. of 10-6-14, § 1) 
Sec. 1.3. - General provisions. 
    After the effective date of this ordinance, no land shall be used and no building, structure or part thereof shall be used or erected unless in conformity with all of the regulations specified for the district in which it is located. Uses and structures, legally existing as of the effective date of this ordinance will be permitted to continue under the provisions of article III of this ordinance. 
    3.A. General provisions; divisions into districts. In order to carry out the purposes of this ordinance, the Town of Exeter divides the town into the following zoning use districts: 
Residential district (RE-2) 
Rural district (RU-3) 
Rural district (RU-4) 
Conservation - Recreation (CR-5) 
Business district (B) 
Light business/residential (LB/R) 
Light industrial (LI) 
Open space and public lands (OS/PL) 
Groundwater protection overlay district (GWOL) 
Planned districts (PD) 
Planned village overlay district (PVOD) 
    3.B. General provisions; substandard lots of record. Any legal single substandard lot of record or contiguous lots of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the Exeter zoning ordinance, notwithstanding the failure of that lot or those lots to meet the dimensional and/or quantitative requirements, and/or road frontage or other access requirements, applicable in the districts as set forth in the ordinance, and lot merger, where applicable, has been completed, shall be considered a legal substandard lot or lots of record. 
    The merger of contiguous unimproved, or improved and unimproved, substandard lots of record in the same ownership to create dimensionally conforming lots or to reduce the extent of the dimensional nonconformance shall take place at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the Exeter zoning ordinance. This merger provision shall be effective in all districts. These mergers are based on the intent to retain the character of the neighborhoods of the Town of Exeter, and to ensure consistency with the Exeter comprehensive plan. 
    3.C. General provisions; nonconforming development. 
A.  The Town of Exeter shall allow the continuation of nonconforming use, activity, structure, building or sign or other improvement, lawfully existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of the Exeter zoning ordinance. This includes nonconforming by dimension. 
B.  The Exeter zoning ordinance shall permit the continuation of nonconforming development. However, this shall not prohibit the regulation of nuisances, including, but not limited to those in the noise ordinance of the Town of Exeter. 
C.  The Exeter zoning ordinance specifies that if a nonconforming use is abandoned, it may not be reestablished. Abandonment of a nonconforming use shall consist of some overt act, or failure to act, which would lead one to believe that the owner of the nonconforming use neither claims nor retained any interest in continuing the nonconforming use unless the owner can demonstrate an intent not to abandon the use. An involuntary interruption of nonconforming use, such as by fire and natural catastrophe, does not establish the intent to abandon the nonconforming use. However, if any nonconforming use is halted for a period of one year, the owner of the nonconforming use will be presumed to have abandoned the nonconforming use, unless that presumption is rebutting by the presentation of sufficient evidence of intent not to abandon the use. 
D.  Any trailer or mobile home which lawfully exists and has been established for occupancy at the time of passage of this ordinance shall be allowed to continue as a legal nonconforming use. If a trailer or mobile home is demolished, abandoned, or to be replaced, zoning board of review or building inspector approval shall be required. 
    3.D. General provisions; alteration of nonconforming development. 
A.  A nonconforming development may be altered under the following conditions: 
1.  By special use permit, authorizing the alteration, addition, enlargement, intensification or change of use, which must be approved by the Exeter zoning board of review following the procedure established in this ordinance for special use permits. 
B.  Such alteration, addition, enlargement, expansion, intensification or change of use shall more closely adhere to the intent and purposes of the Exeter zoning ordinance. 
C.  A use established by variance or special use permit shall not acquire the rights of this section. 
    3.E. General provisions; variances. 
A.  An application for relief from the literal requirements of the Exeter zoning ordinance because of hardship may be made by an owner, as defined herein, by filing with the zoning board clerk, an application describing the request and supported by such data and evidence as may be required by the Exeter zoning board of review. The zoning board clerk shall immediately transmit each application received to the zoning inspector and shall transmit a copy of each application to the Exeter planning board. 
B.  The Exeter zoning board of review, immediately upon receipt of an application for a variance in the application of the literal terms of the zoning ordinance, shall request that the planning board shall report its findings and recommendations, including statement on the general consistency of the application with the goals and purposes of the Exeter comprehensive plan, in writing to the zoning board of review within 45 days of receipt of the application from the board. The zoning board shall hold a public hearing on any application for variance in an expeditious manner, after receipt, in proper form, of an application, and shall give public notice thereof at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town of Exeter. Notice of hearing shall be sent by certified mail to the applicant, and to at least all those who would require notice under [the] section "Adoption-Notice and Hearing Requirements." The notice shall also include the street address of the subject property. The cost of notification shall be borne by the applicant. 
C.  In granting a variance, the Exeter zoning board of review shall require that evidence to the satisfaction of the following standards be entered into the record of the proceedings: 
1.  That the hardship from which the applicant seeks relief is due to the unique characteristics of the subject land or structure and not to the general characteristics of the surrounding area; and is not due to a physical or economic disability of the applicant; 
2.  That said hardship is not the result of any prior action of the applicant and does not result primarily from the desire of the applicant to realize greater financial gain; 
3.  That the granting of the requested variance will not alter the general character of the surrounding area or impair the intent of purpose of the Exeter zoning ordinance or the Exeter comprehensive plan, upon which this ordinance is based; and 
4.  That the relief to be granted is the least relief necessary. 
D.  The Exeter zoning board of review shall, in addition to the above standards, require that evidence be entered into the record of the proceedings showing that: 
1.  In granting a use variance the subject land or structure cannot yield any beneficial use if it is required to conform to the provisions of the Exeter zoning ordinance. Nonconforming use of neighboring land or structures in the same district and permitted use of lands or structures in an adjacent district shall not be considered in granting a use variance; and 
2.  In granting a dimensional variance, that the hardship that will be suffered by the owner of the subject property if the dimensional variance is not granted shall amount to more than a mere inconvenience. The fact that a use may be more profitable or that a structure may be more valuable after the relief is granted shall not be grounds for relief. 
E.  An applicant may apply for, and be issued, a dimensional variance in conjunction with a special use. 
    3.F. General provisions; special use permits. Special use permits. An application for the issuance of special use permits may be made by an owner, as defined herein, by filing with [the] zoning board clerk an application describing the request and supported by such data and evidence as may be required by the Exeter zoning board of review, and which shall be approved by the Exeter zoning board of review. 
A.  The zone use table, as presented in article II, specifies the uses requiring special use permits in each district. Only such uses as specified in the above-referred table shall be eligible to receive [a] special use permit in each respective district; any use not listed is specifically prohibited. 
B.  The following describes the conditions and procedures under which special use permits, of each of the various categories of special use permits established in the Exeter zoning ordinance, may be issued: 
1.  An application for a special use permit may be made by an owner, as defined herein, by filing with the zoning board clerk an application describing the request and supported by such data and evidence as may be required by the Exeter zoning board of review. The zoning board clerk shall immediately transmit each application received to the Exeter zoning board of review and shall transmit a copy of each application to the planning board. 
2.  The Exeter zoning board of review, immediately upon receipt of an application for a special use permit shall request that the planning board report its findings and recommendations, including a statement on the general consistency of the application with the goals and purposes of the Exeter comprehensive plan, in writing to the Exeter zoning board of review within 45 days of receipt of the application from that board. 
C.  The following criteria will be utilized by the Exeter zoning board of review for issuance of a special use permit. These criteria are in conformance with the purposes and intent of the Exeter comprehensive plan and the Exeter zoning ordinance. An applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the zoning board by presenting competent evidence that the proposed use and/or structure: 
1.  Will be compatible with the neighboring uses and will not adversely affect the surrounding neighbor's use and enjoyment of their property; 
2.  Will be environmentally compatible with neighboring properties and the protection of property values; 
3.  Will be compatible with the orderly growth and development of the Town of Exeter, and will not be environmentally detrimental therewith; 
4.  That the best practices and procedures to minimize the possibility of any adverse effects on neighboring property, the Town of Exeter, and the environment have been considered and will be employed where applicable including, but not limited to, considerations of soil erosion, water supply protection, stormwater runoff, wastewater disposal, wetland protection, traffic limitation, safety and circulation; and 
5.  That the purposes of this ordinance, and as set forth in the Exeter comprehensive plan, shall be served by said special use permit. 
D.  That the Exeter zoning board shall hold a public hearing on any application for a special use permit in an expeditious manner, after receipt, in proper form, of an application, and will require the notification of the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing to interested parties. Public notice shall be given thereof at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation. Notice of hearing shall be sent by certified mail to the applicant, and to all those who would require notice under [the] section "Adoption," section 5.D of this ordinance. The notice shall also include the street address of the subject property. The cost of notification shall be borne by the applicant. 
E.  All recording of findings of fact and written decisions of the Exeter zoning board of review shall be in conformance with section 6.H, "Administration decisions and records of the zoning board of review"; and 
F.  Any appeals may be taken pursuant to section 1.7, "Appeals" of this ordinance. 
G.  The Exeter zoning board has the power to grant dimensional variances where the use is permitted by special use permit. 
    3.G. General provisions; special conditions. In granting a variance or special use permit, or in making any determination upon which it is required to pass after a public hearing under the zoning ordinance, the Exeter zoning board of review may apply such special conditions that may, in the opinion of the board, be required to promote the intent and purposes of the Exeter comprehensive plan and the Exeter zoning ordinance. Failure to abide by any special conditions attached to a grant shall constitute a zoning violation. Those special conditions shall be based on competent credible evidence on the record, be incorporated into the decision, and may include, but are not limited to, provisions for: 
A.  Minimizing adverse impact of the development upon other land, including the type, intensity, design, density and performance of activities; 
B.  Controlling the sequence of development, including when it must be commenced and completed; 
C.  Controlling the duration of use or development and the time within which any temporary structure must be removed; 
D.  Ensuring satisfactory installation and maintenance of required public improvements; 
E.  Designating the exact location and nature of development; and 
F.  Establishing detailed records by submission of drawings, maps, plats or specifications. 
    3.H. General provisions; creation of vested rights. Applications for development that are substantially complete and have been submitted for approval to the appropriate review agency in the Town of Exeter prior to enactment of the new zoning ordinance or any amendment to the Exeter zoning ordinance shall be considered vested. The Exeter zoning ordinance, as well as other land development ordinances or regulations, shall specify the minimum requirements for a development application to be substantially complete. For the purposes of this section, any application considered by the Town of Exeter shall be reviewed according to the regulations applicable in the Exeter zoning ordinance in force at the time the application was submitted. A complete application supported by such data and as may be required by the Exeter zoning board of review, shall constitute a "complete application" and be considered vested. If an application for development under the provisions of this section is approved, a time limit of six months shall be set within which development of the property must begin and 12 months within which development must be substantially completed. 
    3.I. General provisions; publication and availability of the Exeter zoning ordinance. 
A.  Printed copies of the Exeter zoning ordinance and zoning map(s) shall be available to the general public and shall be revised to include all amendments. A reasonable charge shall be made for copies to reflect printing and distribution costs. 
B.  Upon publication of the Exeter zoning ordinance and zoning map(s), and any amendments thereto, the Exeter town clerk shall send a copy, without charge, to the Associate Director of the Division of Planning of the Department of Administration of the State of Rhode Island, and the state law library. 
(Amd. of 3-3-03, §§ 2, 3, 5; Ord. of 9-27-12, Exh. 1) 
Sec. 1.4. - Special provisions. 
    4.A. Special provisions; modification. 
A.  The Exeter zoning ordinance permits the issuance of modifications or variances from the literal dimensional requirements of the Exeter zoning ordinance in the instance of the construction, alteration or structural modification of a structure or legal lot of record. The Exeter zoning inspector shall be authorized to grant modification permits. The maximum percent requirements specified allowed for a modification shall not exceed those specified in the zoning ordinance. A modification shall not permit moving of lot lines. The table below specifies which dimensional requirements or combinations thereof are allowable under a modification and the maximum percent allowed: 
Criteria/zone LB/R RE-2 RU-3 RU-4 CR-5 B LI OS/PL %MOD 1. Frontage 150' 200' 250' 300' 350' 150' 400' 200' 0/0 2. Front yard setback 100'  60' 100' 100' 150'  10' 200' 200' 15% 3. Side yard setback  30'  30'  60'  80' 100'  30'  50'  50' 15% 4. Rear yard setback  75'  50'  50'  50' 150'  75' 100' 150' 15% 5. Height  40'  40'  40'  40'  40'  40'  40'  40' 0/0 6. Area (acres) 2 2 3 4 5 - 2 - 0/0 7. Building capacity 250 250 250 250 250 - - - 0/0  
B.  Within ten days of receipt of a request for a modification, the zoning inspector shall make a decision as to the suitability of the requested modification based on the following determinations: 
1.  The modification requested is reasonably necessary for the full enjoyment of the permitted use; 
2.  If the modification is granted, neighboring property will neither be substantially injured nor its appropriate use substantially impaired; or 
3.  The modification requested is in harmony with the purposes and intent of the zoning ordinance; and 
4.  The modification requested does not require a variance of flood hazard requirement. 
C.  Upon an affirmative determination, the zoning inspector shall notify, by certified mail, all property owners abutting the property which is the subject of the modification request, and shall indicate the street address of the subject property in the notice, and shall publish in a newspaper of general circulation within the Town of Exeter that the modification will be granted unless written objection is received within 30 days of the public notice. If written objection is received within 30 days, the request for a modification shall be denied. In that case the changes requested will be considered a request for a variance and may only be issued by the Exeter zoning board of review following the standard procedures for variances. If no written objections are received within 30 days, the zoning inspector shall grant the modification. The zoning inspector may apply such special conditions to the permit as may, in the opinion of the officer, be required to conform to the intent and purposes of the Exeter zoning ordinance. The zoning inspector shall keep public records of all requests for modifications, and of findings, determinations, special conditions and any objections received. Cost of any notice required under this subsection shall be borne by the applicant requesting the modifications. 
    4.B. Special provisions; land development projects. 
A.  Land development projects which are projects in which one or more lots, tracts or parcels of land are to be developed or redeveloped as a coordinated site for a complex of uses, units or structures including, but not limited to, planned development for residential, commercial, institutional, industrial, recreational, open space and/or mixed uses as may be provided for in the zoning ordinance. 
B.  All open land provided by land development projects for public or common use, shall either (1) be conveyed to the town and accepted by it for park, open space, agricultural or other specified use or uses, or (2) be conveyed to a nonprofit organization, the principal purpose of which is the conservation of open space or resource protection; or (3) be conveyed to a corporation or trust owned or to be owned by the owners of lots or units within the development, or owners of shares within a cooperative development. If such a corporation or trust is used, ownership shall pass with conveyances of the lots or units; or (4) remain in private (non-common) ownership if the use is limited to agriculture, habitat or forestry, and, in accordance with the comprehensive plan and zoning ordinance, that private ownership is necessary for the preservation and management of the agriculture, habitat or forest resources. In any case, where the land is not conveyed to the town, a restriction or conservation easement enforceable by the town shall be recorded, providing that the land shall be kept in the authorized conditions(s) and not be built upon or developed for accessory uses such as parking or roadway without prior town approval. 
The planning board may limit or restrict the amount of open space that may remain in private ownership where necessary to contribute to a connecting greenway system or to provide public access to open space, as provided in the comprehensive plan. 
C.  Rural residential compounds. 
1.  Objectives and applicability. The objective of the rural residential compound is to provide for flexibility of design for residential development and to allow a better relationship between residential development and the natural, historic and rural characteristics of the land. Lots may contain less than the frontage and provide flexibility in the front, side, and rear yard setback requirements as prescribed by this ordinance for the underlying district provided that the requirements of this section are met. See section 2.4.3 
2.  Purpose and review process. 
a)  Residential compounds are intended to preserve the rural character of the town by permitting low-density residential development on large parcels of land while relieving the applicant from compliance with the design and improvement standards applicable to conventional land development and subdivisions. 
b)  Residential compounds will be subject to the review and approval by the planning board under the provision of the town land development and subdivision regulations. Any proposed rural residential compound of six lots or more shall require a public hearing in accordance with the public hearing and notice requirements section of the subdivision and land development regulations. 
3.  Permitted uses. The permitted uses applicable to residential compounds shall be only those residential uses listed as permitted in the applicable zoning district in which the residential compound is located, as set forth in section 2.4 of the zoning ordinance. 
4.  Density calculation and dimensional regulations. 
a)  The maximum number of building lots allowable in a residential compound shall not exceed one lot per ten acres of land, and no fewer than two building lots. 
b)  The planning board may allow flexible lot width or frontage requirements for lots within a rural residential compound, provided however, that no building lots shall be reduced in area to less than one acre. The planning board may reduce those areas or portions of lots within the minimum prescribed front-rear-side yard setbacks, known as building envelopes, to designate an appropriate area for the siting of a house. 
Editor's note- Subsection 1.4.C.4.b) was amended in 2004 by the conservation development ordinance. 
5.  General requirements. 
a)  A parcel proposed for development as a residential compound shall have frontage on a town-accepted street. Such frontage shall be a minimum of 50 contiguous feet. 
b)  Each proposed lot must contain a minimum of one acre of land exclusive of land unsuitable for development as defined in section 1.2 herein. 
c)  No lot, which has been reduced in size or acreage after the adoption of this ordinance, shall be developed as a rural residential compound. No lot or parcel that has been developed as a residential compound shall be further subdivided or reduced in size. This provision shall not prevent the development in incremental stages of a parcel as a residential compound as long as each component lot shall not be changed after having received final approval from the planning board. 
6.  Open space. At least 50 percent of the total land area of the parcel proposed for development shall be designated as permanent open space in accordance with the provisions of the town land development and subdivision regulations. To the extent possible, the proposed open space shall be contiguous. Any land within a rural residential compound not designated as a building lot shall be protected against future development and environmental damage in perpetuity by conveying to the town or other appropriate legal entity, an open space conservation easement restricting the future use and alteration of the area as provided below. 
Ownership of the open space shall be set forth in one or more of the following ways subject to planning board approval and authorization: 
  Conveyance to the town for specific open space or recreational purposes provided the need for such is documented in the comprehensive plan; 
  Conveyance to an appropriate nonprofit legal entity, the principal purpose of which is the conservation of natural resources and open space; 
  Conveyance to a corporation or trust owned or to be owned by the owner(s) of one or more of the lots within the development. There are two options for the ownership of the open space. 
Option 1: Each owner will have an undivided interest in and to those open space lots and ownership shall pass with conveyances of the lots or units. 
Option 2: One landowner may own all the permanent preserved open space for agricultural or other town accepted uses. 
1)  The open space lot created shall be protected against future development and unauthorized alterations in perpetuity by appropriate deed restrictions and conservation easements. In any case where the land is not conveyed to the town, a restriction enforceable by the town shall be recorded providing that the land shall be kept in the authorized condition(s) and not be built upon or developed for accessory uses such as parking or roadway. The planning board shall approve the form and content of any such restrictions and easements at the time of final approval of the residential compound. 
2)  Any buildings, structures, parking areas or impervious improvements associated with open space use may be located on the open space lot, or lots, provided however, that any structure is within keeping the lot, or lots, as part of the open space. The planning board shall approve the facility and location of all such facilities and their design in terms of massing, scale and materials. 
3)  The owner(s) of the open space lot, or lots, shall guarantee perpetual maintenance by appropriate deed restrictions and easements and the planning board shall approve the form and content of any such restrictions at the time of final approval of the subdivision. The restrictions shall contain the following provisions: 
a.  If the building lot owners and/or their open space lot owners, and/or their successors or assigns fail to maintain the open space lot, or lots, the Town of Exeter may, at its option and its sole discretion, perform any necessary maintenance and enforce the payment for such costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, by an action of law or in equity against the building lot owners and/or their open space lot owners or their successors or assigns. 
4)  Any rural residential compound approved under this regulation shall be exempt from the subdivision land dedication requirements for open space and/or a fee in lieu of open space. 
7.  Design and improvement standards. 
a)  Private roads and drainage improvements within the parcel to be developed as a residential compound shall be privately owned and maintained in common by the residents of the residential compound. At the time of final approval, the planning board shall approve the form and content of the following legal document to be recorded contemporaneously with the final plat: 
1)  A covenant by the owner of the parcel, binding on his successors and assigns, that the town shall not be asked or required to accept or maintain the private roads within the parcel that do not meet the engineering and design requirements for town-accepted roads, for a minimum of 99 years from the date of recording; or, if only a lesser period is legally enforceable, for that period with as may automatic renewals as are necessary to total 99 years. Such restrictions shall state that all expenses for improvements to private roads to meet town requirements including a town road, shall be born by the owners of the property, including such improvements which may be deemed necessary for public use should the property owners wish a private roadway be made a town-accepted road. 
2)  A document or documents establishing the method of ownership and providing for the maintenance of the private roads and drainage improvements. 
b)  Private roads and appropriate drainage facilities within a residential compound shall be designed, constructed and inspected in compliance with the town land development and subdivision regulations as specified for residential compounds. The planning board shall have the authority to require additional improvements in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, if warranted by the characteristics of the land, or if the private road will be used by persons other than the residents of the compound. 
c)  If the planning board determines that an existing private road, which is proposed to be used as access from the compound to a town-accepted road, is not adequate for public health, safety and welfare purposes, the planning board shall have the authority to require improvements to the private road, provided that the applicant shall demonstrate to the boards satisfaction that he/she has legal authority to construct such improvements. Such improvements may include improved pavement surface, increased pavement width, increase in depth below finished grade for removal of boulders or ledge, improvements in the grade of ascent or descent, surface water run-off control, natural water flow protection or drainage improvements. Any such professional engineer and such plan shall be included in the submission requirements for final plan approval and recorded with the endorsed plat. No final approved plat shall be endorsed or recorded and building permits issued for any property in rural residential compounds until such required improvements are completed. 
d)  Private roads, drainage, and other improvements within a residential compound may be bonded pursuant to the town land development and subdivision regulations. 
8.  Approval process. The planning board shall review residential compounds as land development projects, as provided in section 5.2 of the land development and subdivision regulations. 
Approval of a rural residential compound shall be granted only upon the planning board's determination that the plan preserves open space; utilizes the natural features of the land, allows for more efficient provision of access, provides for stability and appropriate long term safety and capacity of the road system including both internal and external roads of the residential compound, be they private roads, shared driveways, public ways, or town-accepted roads; and preserves the aquifer overlay district and the rural character of the land. 
Rural residential compounds are to be allowed by the planning board only when a subdivider can demonstrate to the board that such development would be a better use of the land than a conventional subdivision and is in the best interests of the residents of the town. To this end, the planning board may require the subdivider to provide an alternate plan or plans for developing the land as a conventional subdivision. 
The final plan approved by the planning board and recorded in the land evidence records of the town shall contain the following statement: "These premises are subject to the restrictions and conditions that are contained in instruments recorded contemporaneously with this plan and are incorporated herein by reference." 
D.  Conservation developments. 
1.  Purpose. The purposes of this section, conservation developments, are: 
A.  To conserve open land, including those areas containing unique and sensitive natural features such as woodlands, steep slopes, streams, floodplains, wetlands, aquifers and their recharge areas, and agricultural lands, by setting them aside from development; 
B.  To preserve historical and archaeological resources; 
C.  To provide greater design flexibility and efficiency in the siting of services and infrastructure, including the opportunity to reduce length of roads, utility runs, and the amount of paving required for residential development; 
D.  To provide for a diversity of lot sizes, building densities, and housing choices to accommodate a variety of age and income groups, and residential preferences, so that the population diversity of the community may be maintained; 
E.  To implement adopted municipal policies to conserve a variety of irreplaceable and environmentally important resources as set forth in the comprehensive plan, 
F.  To provide reasonable incentives for the creation of a greenway system within the town; 
G.  To implement adopted land use, transportation and community service policies, as set forth in the comprehensive plan, 
H.  To protect areas of the town with productive agricultural soils for continued or future agricultural use by conserving blocks of land large enough to allow for efficient farm operations; 
I.  To create neighborhoods with direct visual and/or physical access to open land, with amenities in the form of neighborhood open space, and with a strong neighborhood identity; 
J.  To provide for the maintenance of open land set aside for active or passive recreational use, storm water drainage or conservation lands; 
K.  To conserve and create scenic views and preserve the rural character of the town; 
L.  To provide a buffer between new development and existing streets and neighborhoods. 
2.  Approval procedure. The planning board may approve, as a land development project, a conservation development in all residential zoning districts. Application for all conservation development land development projects shall be made in accordance with the procedures of the town's land development and subdivision regulations, whether a subdivision or not. 
3.  Permitted uses. Permitted uses in a conservation development include: 
A.  Residential dwelling units as herein provided and accessory uses customarily incidental and subordinate thereto; and 
B.  Open space, which is set aside for recreation, conservation, agricultural use or for preservation of valuable or sensitive features or structures. 
The following residential uses are permitted (Y) in a conservation development: 
Use Category as provided in section 2.4 zoning use table 
1.  Single-family structures 
2.  Home occupations 
3.  Signs permitted in article VI, accessory to primary use 
4.  Parking as required in article V, accessory to primary use 
5.  Accessory use as defined in article IV, section 1 
In addition, two-family dwelling structures are allowed by special use permit in a conservation development. 
4.  Maximum density for conservation development. The maximum density for a conservation development shall not exceed the number of lots (or dwellings) which could reasonably be expected to be developed upon the conservation development site under a yield plan as defined in section 2.0 of the land development and subdivision regulations, and as further described in section 5.8 (the basic maximum number of dwelling units), plus any incentive dwelling units. Provided, however, that the maximum number of permitted dwelling units in the conservation development site shall not be increased by a factor of more than 1.3 above the basic maximum number where granted a zoning incentive as provided in subsection 5, below. 
5.  Zoning incentives. No zoning incentives pursuant to this section shall be permitted in aquifer overlay zoning districts. In all other districts where permitted, the planning board may approve a conservation development with the following zoning incentive: 
A.  Where the planning board determines that the amount of open space area provided in the entire conservation development exceeds the minimum required amount as required in the subdivision and land development regulations, the basic maximum number of permitted dwelling units in the development may be increased by a factor in accordance with the following table: 
Amount of Open Space Provided Permitted Increase in Density 5 to 10 percent more than minimum Factor of 1.05 More than 10 to 20 percent more than minimum Factor of 1.1 More than 20 to 50 percent more than minimum Factor of 1.2 More than 50 percent above minimum Factor of 1.3  
The planning board may determine that an existing dwelling which is currently located on the property being developed should be preserved for any of the following purposes: maintenance of historic or traditional development patterns; preservation of streetscape features; maintenance of building placement, setback and alignment on the site; preservation of historic structures that contribute to the character of an area; design of public or common open space; or other design or site planning issues identified in the comprehensive plan. In such cases, the planning board may allow the applicant to exceed the basic maximum number of permitted dwelling units in the development by one. Any dwelling granted a zoning incentive under the provisions of this section shall be subject to deed restrictions prohibiting the removal or alteration of the dwelling except as may be approved by the planning board as a condition of approval. This dwelling may contain more than two bedrooms. 
In computing the number of incentive dwelling units, all figures shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number. Incentives shall be granted in accordance with section 5.17 of the land development and subdivision regulations. 
6.  Modification of lot requirements. Applicants are encouraged to modify lot area, shape, and other dimensional characteristics within a conservation development. A conservation development may be developed with dwelling units on separate lots, a single lot, or a combination thereof. Where dwellings are proposed to be located on individual lots, the following minimum dimensional regulations shall be applicable to dwellings within a conservation development. 
Use Lot Area 
(sq. ft.) Lot Frontage and Width (ft.) 
(See Note) Front Yard Depth (ft.) Rear Yard Depth (ft.) Side Yard 
(each side) 
(ft.) Single-household dwelling 43,560 150 40 40 20 Two-household dwelling (duplex) 65,340 150 40 40 20  
Note: The planning board may authorize, through a request for waiver, modifications to the above lot frontage and width as provided in section 2.4.3 of the zoning ordinance. 
7.  Uses permitted within open space areas. The open space in a conservation development shall be devoted only to conservation purposes or for park, recreation, forest management, and agricultural purposes. Stormwater drainage areas may also be allowed if permitted by the planning board in accordance with sections 5.12-5.13 of the land development and subdivision regulations. 
    4.C. Special provisions; preapplication conference. A preapplication conference shall be held at the request of either the zoning board or zoning inspector, or the applicant to: 
A.  Acquaint the applicant with the Exeter comprehensive plan and any specific plans that apply to the parcel, as well as the zoning and other ordinances that affect the proposed development; 
B.  Suggest improvements to the proposed design on the basis of a review of the sketch plan; 
C.  Advise the applicant to consult appropriate authorities on the character and placement of public utility services; and 
D.  Help the applicant to understand the steps to be taken to receive approval. 
    4.D. Special provisions; development plan review. 
A.  Development plan review of applications for uses requiring a special use permit, a variance, a zoning ordinance amendment and/or a zoning map change shall be conducted by the Exeter planning board and shall be advisory to the permitting authority. 
B.  Development plan review of applications for uses that are permitted by right under the Exeter zoning ordinance shall be held in accordance with article II, section 5. The review body shall be the Exeter planning board. A rejection of the application shall be considered an appealable decision pursuant to section 1.7, "Appeals." 
C.  Nothing herein shall be construed to permit waivers of any regulations unless approved by the permitting authority pursuant to the Town of Exeter zoning ordinance and the Zoning Enabling Act. 
    4.E Low And moderate income housing comprehensive permit procedures. 
1.  Authority to grant a comprehensive permit. In accordance with Title 45, Chapter 53 of the Rhode Island General Laws, the R.I. Low and Moderate Income Housing Act, as amended (the "act"), the Exeter Code of Ordinances, and the zoning ordinance, the planning commission has been designated as the local review board and shall have the authority to issue a comprehensive permit to build a qualifying low or moderate income housing project, which relief shall include all approvals or permits from any local board or town official having supervision of the construction of buildings or the power of enforcing land use regulations, but not limited to, the power to attach to the approval or permit, any conditions and requirement with respect to setbacks, height, site plan, size, shape, building materials, landscaping, and parking consistent with the terms of the act. All definitions and terms contained in the act are incorporated into these regulations by reference. The regulations contained herein are intended to be complementary and to be used in unison with the Exeter Code of Ordinances, zoning, low and moderate income housing. 
2.  Application procedure. Any applicant proposing to build low or moderate income housing may submit to the local review board a single application for a comprehensive permit to build that housing in lieu of separate applications to the applicable local boards. This procedure is only available for proposals in which at least 25 percent of the housing is low or moderate-income housing, and in which at least 50 percent of the units of said low or moderate income housing are restricted to persons of income at or below 80 percent of the area median income. The application and review process for a comprehensive permit shall be as follows: 
(a)  Form of application. Applications for a comprehensive permit shall be made on the form(s) provided by the administrative officer to the local review board. 
(b)  General submission requirements. All applications shall include the following submission requirements: 
(i)  A letter of eligibility issued by the Rhode Island Housing Mortgage Finance Corporation, or in the case of projects primarily funded by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development or other state or federal agencies, an award letter indicating the subsidy, or application in such form as may be prescribed for a municipal government subsidy; and, 
(ii)  A written request to the local review board to submit a single application to build or rehabilitate low or moderate-income housing in lieu of separate applications to the applicable local boards. The written request shall identify specific sections and provisions of applicable local ordinances and regulations from which the applicant is seeking relief; and, 
(iii)  A proposed timetable for the commencement of construction and completion of the project; and, 
(iv)  A sample land lease or deed restriction with affordability liens that will restrict use as low and moderate income housing in conformance with the guidelines of the agency providing the subsidy for the low and moderate income housing, but for a period of not less than 99 years; and, 
(v)  Identification of an approved entity that will monitor the long-term affordability of the low and moderate income units; and, 
(vi)  A financial pro-forma for the proposed development; and 
(vii)  For comprehensive permit applications: (a) not involving major land developments or major subdivisions including, but not limited to, applications seeking relief from specific provisions of a local zoning ordinance, or involving administrative subdivisions, minor land developments or minor subdivisions, or other local ordinances and regulations: those items required by local regulations promulgated pursuant to applicable state law, with the exception of evidence of state or federal permits; and for comprehensive permit applications; and (b) involving major land developments and major subdivisions, unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant and the town; those items included in the checklist for the master plan in the local regulations promulgated pursuant to G.L. § 45-23-40. Subsequent to master plan approval, the applicant must submit those items included in the checklist for a preliminary plan for a major land development or major subdivision project in the local regulations promulgated pursuant to G.L. § 45-23-41, with the exception of evidence of state or federal permits. All required state and federal permits must be obtained prior to the final plan approval or the issuance of a building permit; and 
(viii)  The requisite application fee(s) for the application based on its classification, as set forth herein, provided, however, that the imposition of such fees shall not preclude a showing by a nonprofit applicant that the fees make the project financially infeasible; and 
(ix)  Notwithstanding the submission requirements set forth above, the local review board may request additional, reasonable documentation throughout the public hearing, including, but not limited to, opinions of experts, credible evidence of application for necessary federal and/or state permits, statements and advice from other local boards and officials. 
(c)  Certification of completeness. The application must be certified complete or incomplete by the administrative officer according to the provisions of § 45-23-36; provided, however, that for a major land development or major subdivision, the certificate for a master plan shall be granted within 30 days and for a preliminary plan shall be granted within 45 days. The running of the time period set forth herein will be deemed stopped upon the issuance of a certificate of incompleteness of the application by the administrative officer and will recommence upon the resubmission of a corrected application by the applicant. However, in no event will the administrative officer be required to certify a corrected submission as complete or incomplete less than 14 days after its resubmission. If the administrative officer certifies the application as incomplete, the officer shall set forth in writing with specificity the missing or incomplete items. 
(d)  Application fees. The fee for an application shall be based on its classification. 
(i)  For an application seeking relief from provisions of the zoning ordinance or other ordinances and regulations and/or classified as an administrative subdivision, the application fee shall be the same as for the zoning ordinance relief sought and/or an administrative subdivision. 
(ii)  For an application classified as a minor land development or minor subdivision, the preliminary plan application and final plan application fees shall be the same as for such minor land development or minor subdivision as set forth in the subdivision regulations. 
(iii)  For a major land development or major subdivision the master plan, preliminary plan and final plan application fees shall be the same as for such major land development or major subdivision as set forth in the subdivision regulations. 
(iv)  All cost to process a comprehensive permit application, such as, but not limited to, advertising, notices and stenographic fees shall be borne by the applicant. 
(e)  Project review fees. Consistent with current practice and consistent with section 3.3.C of the land development and subdivision regulations, a project review fee shall apply to all comprehensive permit applications, and the project review fee shall be determined by the local review board, which amount will depend on the type of application proposed and need for outside assistance to process, review and consider an application. In no case shall a project review fee exceed the actual costs incurred by the local review board in reviewing any comprehensive permit application. 
3.  Review procedures. An application for a comprehensive permit shall be reviewed by the local review board in accordance with the following provisions: 
(a)  Notification. Upon issuance of a certificate of completeness for a comprehensive permit, the local review board shall immediately notify each local board, as applicable, of the filing of the application, by sending a copy to the local boards and to other parties entitled to notice of hearings on applications under the zoning ordinance and/or land development and subdivision regulations as applicable. 
(b)  Pre-application conference. Where the comprehensive permit application includes a major land development project or a major subdivision pursuant to G.L. chapter 23 of title 45 an applicant shall schedule with the administrative officer a pre-application conference before the local review board. All other applicants are also encouraged to schedule a pre-application conference before the local review board, but such a conference is not mandatory under these regulations. The purpose of the pre-application conference shall be to review the concept plan of the proposed development and facilitate the subsequent stages of review. 
To request a pre-application conference, the applicant shall submit a short written description of the project including the present and proposed use of the property, the number of units, type of housing, proposed subsidy, and a location, together with a concept plan. Upon receipt of a request by an applicant for a pre-application conference, the municipality has 30 days to schedule and hold the pre-application conference. If 30 days have elapsed from the filing of the pre-application submission and no pre-application conference has taken place, nothing shall be deemed to preclude an applicant from thereafter filing and proceeding with an application for a comprehensive permit. 
(c)  Public notice. Public notice for all public hearings will be the same notice required under local regulations for a public hearing for a preliminary plan promulgated in accordance with § 45-23-42. The cost of the notice shall be paid by the applicant. 
(d)  Review of minor projects. The review of a comprehensive permit application involving only minor land developments or minor subdivisions or requesting zoning ordinance relief or relief from other local regulations or ordinances not otherwise addressed in this subsection, shall be conducted following the procedures in the applicable local regulations, with the exception that all minor land developments or minor subdivisions under this section are required to hold a public hearing on the application, and within 95 days of issuance of the certificate of completeness, or within such further time as is agreed to by the applicant and the local review board, render a decision. 
(e)  Review of major projects. In the review of a comprehensive permit application involving a major land development and/or major subdivision, the local review board shall hold a public hearing on the master plan and shall, within 120 days of issuance of the certification of completeness, or within such further amount of time as may be agreed to by the local review board and the applicant, render a decision. Preliminary and final plan review shall be conducted according to local regulations promulgated pursuant to RIGL tit. 45, ch. 23 except as otherwise specified in this section. 
(f)  Authority. The local review board has the same power to issue permits or approvals that any local board or official who would otherwise act with respect to the application, including, but not limited to, the power to attach to the permit or approval, conditions, and requirements with respect to height, site plan, size, or shape, or building materials, as are consistent with the terms of this section. The local review board may, from time to time, adopt rules and procedures to assist them in their efforts to administer these regulations. 
Provided that the town has an approved affordable housing plan and is meeting local housing needs, the local review board shall limit the annual total number of dwelling units in comprehensive permit applications from for-profit developers to an aggregate of one percent of the total number of year-round housing units in the town, as recognized in the affordable housing plan. The local review board shall also have the authority to consider comprehensive permit applications from for-profit developers, which are made pursuant to this paragraph, sequentially in the in which they are submitted. 
(g)  Decision. In reviewing a comprehensive permit request, the local review board may deny the request for any of the following reasons: 
(i)  If city or town has an approved affordable housing plan and is meeting housing needs, and the proposal is inconsistent with the affordable housing plan; 
(ii)  The proposal is not consistent with local needs, including, but not limited to, the needs identified in an approved comprehensive plan, and/or local zoning ordinances and procedures promulgated in conformance with the comprehensive plan; 
(iii)  The proposal is not in conformance with the comprehensive plan; 
(iv)  The community has met or has plans to meet the goal of ten percent of the year-round units or, in the case of an urban town or city, 15 percent of the occupied rental housing units as defined in § 45-53-3(2)(i) being low and moderate income housing; or 
(v)  Concerns for the environment and the health and safety of current residents have not been adequately addressed. 
(h)  Voting. All local review board decisions on comprehensive permits shall be by majority vote of the membership of the board and may be appealed by the applicant to the state housing appeals board. 
4.  Criteria for approval or denial. In approving an application for a comprehensive permit, the local review board shall make positive findings, supported by legally competent evidence on the record which discloses the nature and character of the observations upon which the fact finders acted, on each of the following standard provisions, where applicable: 
(a)  The proposed development is consistent with local needs as identified in the local comprehensive community plan with particular emphasis on the community's affordable housing plan and/or has satisfactorily addressed the issues where there may be inconsistencies. 
(b)  The proposed development is in compliance with the standards and provisions of the municipality's zoning ordinance and subdivision regulations, and/or where expressly varied or waived local concerns that have been affected by the relief granted do not outweigh the state and local need for low and moderate-income housing. 
(c)  All low and moderate income housing units proposed are integrated throughout the development; are compatible in scale and architectural style to the market rate units within the project; and will be built and occupied prior to, or simultaneous with the construction and 
(d)  There will be no significant negative environmental impacts from the proposed development as shown on the final plan, with all required conditions for approval. 
(e)  There will be no significant negative impacts on the health and safety of current or future residents of the community, in areas including, but not limited to, safe circulation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, provision of emergency services, sewerage disposal, availability of potable water, adequate surface water run-off, and the preservation of natural, historical or cultural features that contribute to the attractiveness of the community. 
(f)  All proposed land developments and all subdivisions lots will have adequate and permanent physical access to a public street in accordance with the requirements of § 45-23-60(5). 
(g)  The proposed development will not result in the creation of individual lots with any physical constraints to development that building on those lots according to pertinent regulations and building standards would be impracticable, unless created only as permanent open space or permanently reserved for a public purpose on the approved, recorded plans. 
5.  Appeal. All decisions on comprehensive permits may be appealed by the applicant to the state housing appeals board. Any person aggrieved by the issuance of an approval may appeal to the state supreme court. 
6.  Expiration of approval and construction. A comprehensive permit shall expire unless construction is started within 12 months and completed within 60 months of final plan approval unless a longer and/or phased period for development is agreed to by the local review board and the applicant. Low and moderate income housing units shall be built and occupied prior to, or simultaneous with, the construction and occupancy of market rate units. 
7.  Definitions. The following words, wherever used in this chapter, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context, have the following meanings: 
(1)  Comprehensive plan means a comprehensive plan adopted and approved by a city or town pursuant to chapter 22.2 and 22.3 of this title. 
(2)  Consistent with local needs means reasonable in view of the state need for low and moderate income housing, considered with the number of low income persons in the city or town affected and the need to protect the health and safety of the occupants of the proposed housing or of the residence of the city or town, to promote better site and building design in relation to the surroundings, or to preserve open spaces, and if the local zoning or land use ordinances, requirements, and regulations are applied as equally as possible to both subsidized and unsubsidized housing. Local zoning and land use ordinances, requirements, or regulations are consistent with local needs when imposed by a city or town council after comprehensive hearing in a city or town where: 
(i)  Low or moderate income housing exists which is: 
(A)  In the case of an urban city or town which has at least 5,000 occupied year-round rental units and the units, as reported in the latest decennial census of the city or town, comprise 25 percent or more of the year-round housing units, is in excess of 15 percent of the total occupied year-round rental units; or 
(B)  In the case of all other cities or towns, is in excess of ten percent of the year-round housing units reported in the census. 
(ii)  The city or town has promulgated zoning or land use ordinances, requirements, and regulations to implement a comprehensive plan which has been adopted and approved pursuant to chapters 22.2 and 22.3 of this title, and the housing element of the comprehensive plan provides for low and moderate income housing in excess of either ten percent of the year-round housing units or 15 percent of the occupied year-round rental housing units as provided in subdivision (2)(i). 
(3)  Infeasible means any condition brought about by any single factor or combination of factors, as a result of limitations imposed on the development by conditions attached to the approval of the comprehensive permit, to the extent that it makes it impossible for a public agency, nonprofit organization, or limited equity housing cooperative to proceed in building or operating low or moderate income housing without financial loss, within the limitations set by the subsidizing agency of government, on the size or character of the development, on the amount or nature of the subsidy, or on the tenants, rentals, and income permissible, and without substantially changing the rent levels and unit sizes proposed by the public agency, nonprofit organization, or limited equity housing cooperative. 
(4)  Local board means any town or city official, zoning board of review, planning board or commission, board of appeal or zoning enforcement officer, local conservation commission, historic district commission, or other municipal board having supervision of the construction of buildings or the power of enforcing land use regulations, such as subdivision, or zoning laws. 
(5)  Low or moderate income housing means any housing whether built or operated by any public agency or any nonprofit organization or by any limited equity housing cooperative or any private developer, that is subsidized by a federal, state, or municipal government subsidy under any program to assist the construction or rehabilitation of housing affordable to low or moderate income households, as defined in the applicable federal or state statute, or local ordinance and that will remain affordable through a land lease and/or deed restriction for 99 years from initial occupancy. 
(6)  Affordable housing plan means a component of a housing element, as defined in G.L. § 45-22.2-4(33), to meet housing needs in a city or town that is prepared in accordance with guidelines adopted by the state planning council, and/or to meet the provisions of G.L. § 45-53-4(b)(1) and (c). 
(7)  Approved affordable housing plan means an affordable housing plan that has been approved by the director of administration as meeting the guidelines for the local comprehensive plan as promulgated by the state planning council; provided, however, that state review and approval, for plans submitted by December 31, 2004, shall not be contingent on the city or town having completed, adopted, or amended its comprehensive plan as provided for in G.L. § 45-22.2-8, 45-22.2-9, or 45-22.2-12. 
(8)  Letter of eligibility means a letter issued by the Rhode Island Housing and Mortgage Finance Corporation in accordance with G.L. § 42-55-5.3(a). 
(9)  Local review board means the planning board as defined by G.L. § 45-22.2-4(24), or if designated by ordinance as the board to act on comprehensive permits for the town, the zoning board of review established pursuant to G.L. § 45-24-56. 
(10)  Meeting housing needs means adoption of the implementation program of an approved affordable housing plan and the absence of unreasonable denial of applications that are made pursuant to an approved affordable housing plan in order to accomplish the purposes and expectations of the approved affordable housing plan. 
(11)  Municipal government subsidy means assistance that is made available through a city or town program sufficient to make housing affordable, as affordable housing is defined in G.L. § 42-128-8.1(d)(1); such assistance may include, but is not limited to, direct financial support, abatement of taxes, waiver of fees and charges, and approval of density bonuses and/or internal subsidies, and any combination of forms of assistance. 
(Ord. of 5-25-00, § II; Ord. of 1-6-03(2), §§ 1-3, 5, 6; Amd. of 1-6-03(3); Amd. of 1-6-03(4); Amd. of 10-5-04; Amd. of 3-6-06, § 3; Ord. of 9-5-06; Amd. of 5-7-07; Amd. of 6-4-07) 
Sec. 1.5. - Adoption. 
    5.A. Adoption; power of council to adopt; consistency with comprehensive plan. For the purpose of promoting public health, safety, morals and general welfare, the Exeter town council shall have the power, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, to adopt, amend or repeal, and to provide for the administration, interpretation and enforcement of the Exeter zoning ordinance. 
5.B.  Adoption; procedure for adoption or amendment. 
A.  Procedure. 
    The town council shall designate the planning board to receive an application as described in Section 5.B.B for adoption, amendment or repeal of a zoning ordinance and zoning map(s). The planning board shall have 15 days from receipt of an application (including the applicable application fee) to determine if the application is complete. The planning board shall issue a certificate of completion to the applicant indicating the application is complete, or shall issue a certificate of incompletion indicating that the said application is incomplete with the specific incomplete items specified. Once the application is determined by the planning board to be complete and a certificate of completeness is issued to the applicant, the planning board shall have 45 days to submit its findings and recommendations as described in 5.C to the town council. 
    Where a proposal for adoption, amendment or repeal of a zoning ordinance or zoning map(s) is made by the Exeter planning board, the requirements for study by the board may be waived, provided that the proposal by the planning board include its findings and recommendations as required by section 5.C of this article. The town council shall hold a public hearing within 65 days of receipt of a complete application giving proper notice as prescribed in section 5.D. The town council shall render a decision on any proposal within 45 days after the date of completion of the public hearing. The provisions of this section pertaining to deadlines shall not be construed to apply to any extension consented to by the applicant. 
B.  Application requirements. 
    The following information is required to be submitted. The planning board may recommend to the town council that some application requirements be waived if determined by the board to be not applicable to the proposal. In addition the waiver of any requirement must be consistent with the comprehensive plan and good planning practices. 
    The applicant shall submit to the planning board at least seven blueline or photocopies of master plan map(s) required below. The scale of all plans shall be sufficient to clearly show all of the information required and shall be subject to the approval of the planning board. Plans shall include a certification that all plans and improvements conform to all existing and amended standards of the State of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations, Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Board of Registration of Land Surveyors. At a minimum, the following information shall be provided: 
1.  Master plan drawing(s). A map or plan of the development parcel showing the following information: 
1.  Name and address of the proposed development. 
2.  Name and address of property owner and applicant. 
3.  Name, address and telephone number of person or firm preparing application plan. 
4.  Date of plan preparation, with revision date(s) (if any). 
5.  Graphic scale and true north arrow. 
6.  Plat and lot number(s) of the land being subdivided. 
7.  Zoning district(s) of the subject property and the zoning requested. If more than one district, zoning boundary lines must be shown. 
8.  Perimeter boundary line of the development, drawn so as to distinguish them from other property lines. 
9.  Area of the development parcel and proposed number of buildable lots, dwellings structures or other proposed improvements. 
10.  Location and dimension of existing property lines within or abutting the development parcel, easements and rights-of-way. 
11.  Location, width and names of existing streets within and immediately abutting the development parcel. 
12.  Names of abutting property owners and property owners immediately across any adjacent streets. 
13.  Location of wooded areas and notation of existing ground cover. 
14.  A map showing the existing and proposed boundaries, zoning districts/boundaries and existing streets and roads, their names and town boundaries where appropriate. This map will be advertised in a newspaper, it should be clear and reproducible. 
15.  Location of wetlands, watercourses or coastal features present on and/or within 200 feet of the property being rezoned. 
16.  Areas of agricultural use. 
17.  Location and approximate size of existing buildings or significant aboveground structures on or immediately adjacent to the development. 
18.  Proposed locations of wells and ISDS systems. 
19.  Site suitability for collecting and discharging stormwater. 
20.  Location of historic cemeteries on or immediately adjacent to the development (if any). 
21.  Location of any unique natural and/or historic features, including stone walls. 
22.  Notation on plan if the development parcel(s) are located within any of the following areas: 
Natural heritage area (RIDEM); letter from DEM required for verification. 
Groundwater protection overly district (town). 
23.  Base flood elevation data. 
24.  Identify wellhead protection area(s) within 500 feet of the development site. 
25.  A summary and description of the proposed amendment or repeal including intended use(s) of the property. 
26.  Any other information that the planning board deems necessary to evaluate the unique conditions of the proposed use or site. 
2.  Supporting materials. The applicant shall submit to the planning board 15 copies of a project description and impact statement providing a general description of the existing physical environment and existing use(s) of the property, along with a general description of the uses and type of development proposed by the applicant. 
1.  An aerial photograph of a blueline copy of an existing aerial photograph of the proposed development parcel and surrounding area. 
2.  A copy of the soils map of the development parcel and surrounding area. Use soil groupings from Exeter comprehensive plan, and a general analysis of soil types and suitability for the development proposed. If any prime agricultural soils are within the development parcel(s) and soils map shall be marked to show the location of said prime agricultural soils. 
3.  An estimate of the approximate population of the proposed development. 
4.  An estimate of the number of school-aged children to be housed in the proposed development. 
5.  Proposed impact to town services including, but not limited to, roads, fire, police, [and] schools. 
6.  Proposed phasing, if any. 
7.  A vicinity (locus) map, drawn to scale of one inch equals 400 feet, or as necessary to show the area within one-half mile of the development parcel showing the locations of all streets, existing lot lines, and zoning district boundaries. Significant public facilities shall be identified. 
8.  An area context map to show the proposed developed site and the 500 feet immediately surrounding the site. The map shall contain information on all significant topographic, natural and build features. 
9.  An estimate of existing and potential traffic volumes related to the proposal. 
10.  Water supply from development of plan review. 
11.  Any other information that the planning board deems necessary to evaluate the unique conditions of the proposed use or site. 
12.  Local agencies comments: 
A. Town engineer _____  Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ B. Highway supervisor _____  Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ C. Conservation commission _____  Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ D. Fire districts _____  Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ E. 911 supervisor _____  Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ F. Other (specify) _____  Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________  
13.  Adjacent communities. If applicable (specify): 
A. _____  Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ B. _____  Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ C. _____  Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ D. _____  Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ E. _____  Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________  
14.  Fees: 
1.  Planning board has authority to charge the application fee commensurate with technical review costs; take from development plan review. 
2.  Application fee (to cover public hearing expences, including stenographer; planning board review and legal costs). 
    In the event the application is denied by the town council, the petitioner/owner shall be allowed to reapply in one year. 
    The planning board may recommend to the town council that some application requirements be waived if determined by the board to be not applicable to the proposal. In addition, the waiver of any requirement must be consistent with the comprehensive plan and good planning practices. 
    5.C. Adoption; review by Exeter planning board. Among its findings and recommendations to the town council with respect to a proposal for adoption, amendment or repeal of a zoning ordinance or zoning map(s), the planning board shall determine if the proposal is consistent with the land use map in the Exeter comprehensive plan and: 
A.  Include a statement on the general consistency of the proposal with the Exeter comprehensive plan, including the goals and policies statement, the implementation program, and all other applicable elements of the comprehensive plan; and 
B.  Include a demonstration of recognition and consideration of each of the applicable purposes of zoning as presented in G.L. 1956, § 45-24-30 of the Zoning Enabling Act. 
C.  In the event the proposal is determined to be inconsistent with the Exeter comprehensive plan, the planning board shall recommend to the council that a public hearing be held to consider reviewing the comprehensive plan prior to any consideration of the proposed zone change. 
D.  Include a written report on the potential effects of the proposal as determined from the issues addressed in the application. 
    5.D. Adoption; notice and hearing requirements. 
A.  The Exeter zoning ordinance shall not be adopted, repealed or amended until after a public hearing has been held upon the question before the town council. The town council shall first give notice of the public hearing by publication of notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the town at least once each week for three successive weeks prior to the date of the hearing, which may include the week in which the hearing is to be held, at which hearing opportunity shall be given to all persons interested to be heard upon the matter of the proposed ordinance. Written notice, which may be a copy of the newspaper notice, shall be mailed to the Associate Director of the Division of Planning, Rhode Island Department of Administration, and where applicable, to the parties specified in subsections (B), (C), (D) and (E) of this section, at least two weeks prior to the hearing. The newspaper notice shall be published as a display advertisement, using a type size at least as large as the normal type size used by the newspaper in its news articles, and shall: 
1.  Specify the place of the hearing and the date and time of its commencement; 
2.  Indicate the adoption, amendment or repeal of the zoning ordinance is under consideration; 
3.  Contain a statement of the proposed amendments to the ordinance that may be printed once in its entirety, or summarize and describe the matter under consideration; 
4.  Advise those interested where and when a copy of the matter under consideration may be obtained or examined and copies; and 
5.  State that the proposals shown thereon may be altered or amended prior to the close of the public hearing without further advertising, as a result of further study or because of the views expressed at the public hearing. Any alteration or amendment must be presented for comment in the course of the hearing. 
B.  Where a proposed general amendment to the existing zoning ordinance includes changes in an existing zoning map, public notice shall be given as required by subsection (A) of this section. 
C.  Where a proposed amendment to an existing ordinance includes a specific change in a zoning district map, but does not affect districts generally, public notice shall be given as required by subsection (A) of this section, with the additional requirements that: 
1.  Notice shall include a map showing the existing and proposed boundaries, zoning district boundaries, and existing streets and roads and their names, and town boundaries, where appropriate; and 
2.  Written notice of the date, time and place of the public hearing and the nature and purpose thereof shall be sent to all owners of real property whose property is located in or within not less than 200 feet of the perimeter of the area proposed for change, whether within the town or within an adjacent town. The notice shall be sent by certified mail to the last known address of the owners, as shown on the current real estate tax assessment records of the town in which the property is located. 
D.  Notice of a public hearing shall be sent by certified mail to the town council of any town to which one or more of the following pertain: 
1.  Which is located in or within not less than 200 feet of the boundary of the area proposed for change; or 
2.  Where there is a public or quasipublic water source, or private water source that is used or is suitable for use as a public water source, within 2,000 feet of any real property that is the subject of a proposed zoning change, regardless of municipal boundaries. 
E.  Notice of a public hearing shall be sent to the governing body of any state or municipal water department or agency, special water district or private water company that has riparian rights to a surface water resource and/or surface watershed that is used or is suitable for use as a public water source and that is within 2,000 feet of any real property which is the subject of a proposed zoning change; provided, however, that the governing body of any state or municipal water department or agency, special water district or private water company has filed with the building inspector a map survey, which shall be kept as a public record, showing areas of surface water resources and/or watersheds and parcels of land within 2,000 feet thereof. 
F.  No defect in the form of any notice under this section shall render any ordinance or amendment invalid, unless the defect is found to be intentional or misleading. 
G.  Costs of any notice required under this section shall be borne by the applicant. 
H.  In granting a zoning ordinance amendment, notwithstanding the provisions of section 3, the town council may limit the change to one of the permitted uses in the zone to which the subject land is rezoned, and impose such limitations, conditions and restrictions including, without limitation: 
1.  Requiring the petitioner to obtain a permit or approval from any and all state or local governmental agencies or instrumentalities having jurisdiction over the land and use which are the subject of the zoning change; 
2.  Those relating to the effectiveness or continued effectiveness of the zoning change; and/or 
3.  Those relating to the use of the land, as it deems necessary. 
    The zoning inspector shall cause the limitations and conditions so imposed to be clearly noted on the zoning map and recorded in the land evidence records; provided, however, in the case of a conditional zone change, the limitations, restrictions and conditions shall not be noted on the zoning map until the zone change has become effective. If the permitted use for which the land has been rezoned is abandoned or if the land is not used for the requested purpose for a period of two years or more after the zone change becomes effective, the town council may, after a public hearing as hereinbefore set forth, change the land to its original zoning use before the petition was filed. If any limitation, condition or restriction in an ordinance is held to be invalid by a court in any action, that holding shall not cause the remainder of the ordinance to be invalid. 
1.  The above requirements are to be construed as minimum requirements. 
2.  Following the end of the appeal period, the town council shall publish either a summary or the complete text of the adopted amendment to the zoning ordinance, if altered or revised at the public hearing. 
(Ord. of 11-2-98(1)) 
Sec. 1.6. - Administration. 
    6.A. Administration; administration and enforcement of zoning ordinance. The local official responsible for administration and enforcement shall be the zoning inspector. The zoning inspector is an elected official, elected by the town during a general election for a two-year term. The minimum responsibilities of the zoning inspector shall include: 
1.  The issuing of any required permits or certificates; 
2.  Collection of required fees; 
3.  Keeping of records showing the compliance of uses of land; 
4.  Authorizing commencement of uses or development under the provisions of the zoning ordinance; 
5.  Inspection of suspected violations; 
6.  Issuance of violation notices with required correction action; 
7.  Collection of fines for violations; and 
8.  Performing such other duties and taking such actions as may be assigned in the ordinance. 
    No building or structure shall hereafter be erected, enlarged or relocated, and no nonstructural use shall be initiated until a zoning certificate has been issued by the zoning inspector indicating that the proposed use and the structure conforms to the provisions of this ordinance. The zoning inspector may require that information necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this ordinance be filed with the application for such permit. Any building permit issued and outstanding on the date of the adoption of this ordinance shall be valid for a period of 12 months from the date of its issuance. 
    No zoning certificate may be issued by the zoning inspector for any use not specifically permitted in this ordinance, except where the inspector receives a statement in writing from the zoning board of review indicating the granting of a special exception or variance or a written statement from the town council specifically referencing an amendment to the ordinance. 
    The zoning inspector shall retain a copy of each zoning certificate issued and one copy each shall be forwarded to the town clerk, the building inspector and the tax assessor(s). Where the inspector denied the issuance of a zoning certificate, within 15 days, a written statement shall be given to the applicant, the zoning board of review, and the president of the town council, indicating the reason(s) for such refusal. 
    In order to provide guidance or clarification, the zoning inspector shall, upon written request, issue a zoning certificate or provide information to the requesting party as to the determination by the inspector within 15 days of the written request. In the event that no written response is provided within that time, the requesting party shall have the right to appeal to the zoning board of review for the determination. 
    6.B. Administration; maintenance of zoning ordinance. The town clerk shall be the custodian of the zoning ordinance and zoning map(s) created hereunder. 
A.  The zoning inspector shall be responsible for the maintenance and update of the text and zoning map comprising the zoning ordinance. Changes which impact the zoning map shall be depicted on the map within 90 days of the authorized change(s); 
B.  The planning board will review the zoning ordinance whenever changes are made to the comprehensive plan of the town and at least once every three calendar years, for the identification of any changes necessary and for the forwarding of these changes to the town council. 
Charter reference- Planning board, § 901. 
    6.C. Administration; Exeter zoning board of review; establishment and procedures. 
A.  The Exeter zoning ordinance shall provide for the creation of a zoning board of review and for the appointment of members, including alternate members, and for the organization of the board, as specified in the zoning ordinance. The Exeter zoning board of review may engage legal, technical or clerical assistance to aid in the discharge of its duties. The board shall establish written rules of procedure, a mailing address to which appeals and correspondence to the zoning board of review shall be sent, and all records and decisions shall be filed in the town hall. 
B.  The zoning board of review shall consist of five members, each to hold office for the term of five years; provided, however, that the original appointments shall be made for terms of one, two, three, four and five years, respectively. The zoning board of review shall also include two alternates to be designated as the first and second alternate members. Their terms shall be initially one year for the first alternate member and two years for the second alternate member, and thereafter, terms shall be two years. These alternate members shall sit and may actively participate in hearings. The first alternate shall vote if a member of the board is unable to serve at a hearing, and the second shall vote if two members of the board are unable to serve at a hearing. In the absence of the first alternate member, the second alternate member shall serve in the position of the first alternate. No member or alternate may vote on any matter before the board unless they have attended all hearings concerning that matter. Each member shall serve until reappointed or a new member be appointed by the council. Appointments to the zoning board of review shall be made in the month of July. 
C.  Members of zoning board of review serving on the effective date of adoption of this zoning ordinance under this chapter shall be exempt from provisions of this chapter respecting terms of originally appointed members until the expiration of their current terms. 
D.  The chairperson, or in his or her absence, the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by the issuance of subpoenas. 
E.  The board shall appoint a clerk to keep the records of the board and all other duties as prescribed by law. 
F.  If a vacancy occurs in the board, the town council shall appoint a new member for the unexpired term. A vacancy shall be deemed to exist in the event any one or more member is absent from the board's meeting for three consecutive months or all board meetings held within a time period of 90 days, whichever is longer. All members of the board shall be legal residents and real estate owners of the Town of Exeter, and no member shall be an elected official or salaried employee of the Town of Exeter. The term "elected official" referenced herein shall not include elections to an Exeter charter commission. 
Charter reference- Zoning board of review, § 903. 
    6.D. Administration; powers and duties of the zoning board of review. 
A.  The zoning board of review shall have the following powers and duties: 
1.  To hear and decide appeals in a timely fashion where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the zoning inspector in the enforcement or interpretation of this chapter, or of any ordinance adopted pursuant hereto; 
2.  To hear and decide appeals from a party aggrieved by a decision of an historic district commission, pursuant to G.L. 1956, §§ 45-24.1-7.1 and 45-24.1-7.2; 
3.  To authorize, upon application, in specific cases of hardship, variances in the application of the terms of the zoning ordinance, pursuant to section 3.E, "Variances"; 
4.  To authorize, upon application, in specific cases, special use permits, pursuant to section 3.F, "Special use permits," where the zoning board of review is designated as a permitted authority for special use permits; 
5.  To refer matters to the planning board or to other boards or agencies of the town as the zoning board of review may deem appropriate, for findings and recommendations; 
6.  To approve a proposed application with conditions that one or more state or federal agency approvals, which are necessary, are pending. A conditional zoning approval shall be revoked in the instance where any necessary state or federal agency approvals have not been deemed satisfied; and 
B.  Be required to vote as follows: 
1.  Five active members shall be necessary to conduct a hearing. As soon as a conflict occurs for a member, that member shall recuse himself or herself, shall not sit as an active member, and take no part in the conduct of the hearing. Only five active members shall be entitled to vote on any issue; 
2.  The concurring vote of three of the five members of the zoning board of review sitting at a hearing shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the zoning inspector from whom an appeal was taken; and the concurring vote of four of the five members of the zoning board of review sitting at a hearing shall be required to decide in favor of an applicant on any matter within the discretion of the board upon which it is required to pass under the ordinance, including variances and special use permits. 
    6.E. Administration; application procedure. The application procedures for the filing of appeals, requests for variance, special use permits; and such other applications as may be specified in the zoning ordinance, with the zoning board of review, consistent with the provisions of G.L. 1956, § 45-24-58, shall be those adopted and presented in the Town of Exeter application guidelines and procedures. These guidelines and procedures specify the submission and resubmission requirements, for each type of application required. A time period of one year shall be required to pass before a successive similar application may be filed. 
    6.F. Administration; fees. Fees, in an amount not to exceed actual costs incurred, for mailing, legal advertising and professional services shall be paid by the appellant or applicant for the adequate review and hearing of applications, and for the recording of the decisions thereon. 
    6.G. Administration; violations. 
A.  The penalty for any violation of the Exeter zoning ordinance, or for a violation of any terms or conditions of any action imposed by the zoning board of review or of the zoning enforcement officer charged in the ordinance with enforcement of any of its provisions shall reasonably relate to the seriousness of the offense, and shall not exceed $500.00 for each violation, and each day of the existence of any violation shall be deemed to be a separate offense. Any fine shall inure to the Town of Exeter. 
B.  The town may also cause suit to be brought in the supreme or superior court, or any municipal court, including a municipal housing court having jurisdiction, in the name of the town, to restrain the violation of, or to compel compliance with the provisions of its zoning ordinance. The town may consolidate an action for injunctive relief and/or fines under the ordinance in the superior court of the county in which the subject property is located. 
(C)  Violations susceptible to the imposition of cumulative fines and penalties may include, but not be limited to the following examples; construction without a permit, after the fact permits, construction in noncompliance with the terms of a permit, construction beyond the restrictions or permission of the enforcement officer's or zoning board's decision. 
(D)  In addition to the cumulative fines and penalties stated in subsections (A), (B) and (C), the enforcement officer or zoning board may order removal of the entirety or any offending portion of a violating structure and the town may recover its costs and attorneys' fees from any such violator which were incurred while seeking to compel compliance with any lawful order. 
    6.H. Administration; decisions and records of the zoning board of review. 
A.  Following a public hearing, the zoning board of review shall render a decision within a reasonable period of time. The zoning board of review shall include in its decision all findings of fact and conditions, showing the vote of each member participating thereon, and the absence of a member or his or her failure to vote. Decisions shall be recorded and filed in the office of the zoning board of review within 30 working days from the date when the decision was rendered, and shall be a public record. The zoning board of review shall keep written minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations, findings of fact and other official actions, all of which shall be recorded and filed in the office of the zoning board of review in an expeditious manner upon completion of the proceeding. For any proceeding in which the right of appeal lies to the superior or supreme court, the zoning board of review shall have the minutes taken either by a competent stenographer or recorded by a sound-recording device. 
B.  Any decision by the zoning board of review, including any special conditions attached thereto, shall be mailed to the applicant, to the zoning inspector, and to the Associate Director of the Division of Planning, Rhode Island Department of Administration. Any decision evidencing the granting of a variance, modification or special use shall also be recorded in the land evidence records of the town. 
    6.I. Administration; judicial aid in enforcement. The supreme court and the superior court, within their respective jurisdictions, or any justice of either of those courts in vacation, shall, upon due proceedings in the name of the town, instituted by its town solicitor, have power to issue an extraordinary writ or to proceed according to the course of law or equity, or both: 
A.  To restrain the erection, alteration or use of any building, structure, sign or land erected, altered or used in violation of the provisions of any zoning ordinance enacted under the authority of this chapter, and to order its removal or abatement as a nuisance; 
B.  To compel compliance with the provisions of the Exeter zoning ordinance; 
C.  To order the removal by the property owner of any building, structure, sign or improvement existing in violation of the Exeter zoning ordinance and to authorize the zoning inspector of the town, in the default of the removal by the owner, to remove it at the expense of the owners; 
D.  To order the reimbursement for any work or materials which shall have been done or furnished by or at the cost of the town; 
E.  To order restoration by the owner, where practicable; and/or 
F.  To issue fines and other penalties. 
(Amd. of 6-7-04, § 1) 
Sec. 1.7. - Appeals. 
    7.A. Appeals; right of appeal. 
A.  An appeal from any decision of an administrative officer or zoning inspector charged in the Exeter zoning ordinance with the enforcement of any of its provisions may be taken to the zoning board of review by an aggrieved party. 
B.  An appeal from a decision of the zoning board of review may be taken by an aggrieved party to the superior court for the county in which the town is situated within 20 days of the date on the written decision. 
C.  If the decision of the zoning board of review is overturned by the court, a copy of that decision shall be sent to the abutting owners of the subject premises. 
    7.B. Appeals; appeals to zoning board of review. An appeal to the zoning board of review from a decision of any other zoning enforcement agency or officer may be taken by an aggrieved party. The appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, not to exceed 15 days, of the date of the recording of the decision by the zoning inspector or agency by filing with the officer or agency from whom the appeal is taken and with the zoning board of review a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officer or agency from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the zoning board of review all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. Written notice of the appeal shall also be transmitted to the Exeter planning board. 
    7.C. Appeals; stay of proceedings. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the zoning inspector or agency from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the zoning board of review, after an appeal shall have been duly filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would in the officer's or agency's opinion cause imminent peril to life or property. In that case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order, which may be granted by a court of competent jurisdiction on application thereof and upon notice to the officer or agency from who the appeal is taken on due cause shown. 
    7.D. Appeals; public hearing by zoning board of review. The zoning board of review shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties of interest, and decide the matter within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. The cost of any notice required for the hearing shall be borne by the appellant. 
    7.E. Appeals; participation in zoning hearing. Participation in a zoning hearing or other proceeding by a party shall not be a cause for civil action or liability except for acts not in good faith, intentional misconduct, a knowing violation of law, transactions where there is an improper personal benefit or malicious, wanton or willful misconduct. 
    7.F. Appeals; decisions and records of zoning board of review. In exercising its powers the zoning board of review may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm wholly or part and may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such orders, requirements, decisions or determinations as ought to be made, and to that end shall have the powers of the officer from whom the appeal was taken. All decisions and records of the zoning board of review respecting appeals shall conform to the provisions of section 6.H. 
    7.G. Appeals; appeals to superior court. 
A.  An aggrieved party may appeal a decision of the zoning board of review to the superior court for the county in which the town is situated by filing a complaint setting forth the reasons of appeal within 20 days after the decision has been recorded and posted in the office of the town clerk, and have a subpoena issued to the chairman of the board through the town clerk. The decision shall be posted in a location visible to the public in the town hall for a period of 20 days following the recording of the decision. The zoning board of review will file the original documents acted upon by it and constituting the record of the case appealed from, or certified copies thereof, together with such other facts as may be pertinent, with the clerk of the court within 30 days after being served with a copy of the complaint. When the complaint is filed by someone other than the original applicant or appellant, the original applicant or appellant and the members of the zoning board shall be made parties to the proceedings. The appeal shall not stay proceedings upon the decision appealed from, but the court may, in its discretion, grant a stay on appropriate terms and make such other orders as it deems necessary for an equitable disposition of the appeal. 
B.  If, before the date set for hearing in the superior court, an application is made to the court for leave to present additional evidence before the zoning board of review and it is shown to the satisfaction of the court that the additional evidence is material and that there were good reasons for the failure to present it at the hearing before the zoning board of review, the court may order that the additional evidence be taken before the zoning board of review upon conditions determined by the court. The zoning board of review may modify its findings and decision by reason of the additional evidence and shall file that evidence and any new findings or decisions with the superior court. 
C.  The review shall be conducted by the superior court without a jury. The court shall consider the record of the hearing before the zoning board of review and, if it shall appear to the court that additional evidence is necessary for the proper disposition of the matter, it may allow any party to the appeal to present that evidence in open court, which evidence, along with the report, shall constitute the record upon which the determination of the court shall be made. 
D.  The court shall not substitute its judgement for that of the zoning board of review as to the weight of the evidence on questions of fact. The court may affirm the decision of the zoning board of review or remand the case for further proceedings, or may reverse or modify the decision if substantial rights of the appellant have been prejudiced because of findings, inferences, conclusions or decisions which are: 
1.  In violation of constitutional, statutory or ordinance provisions; 
2.  In excess of the authority granted to the zoning board of review by statute or ordinance; 
3.  Made upon unlawful procedure; 
4.  Affected by other error of law; 
5.  Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable, probative and substantial evidence of the whole record; or 
6.  Arbitrary or capricious or characterized by abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise of discretion. 
    7.H. Appeals; priority in judicial proceedings. Upon the entry of any case or proceeding brought under the provisions of this zoning ordinance, including pending appeals and appeals hereinafter taken to the court, the court shall, at the request of either party, advance the case, so that the matter shall be afforded precedence on the calendar and shall thereupon be heard and determined with as little delay as possible. 
    7.I. Appeals; appeal of enactment of or amendment to zoning ordinance. 
A.  An appeal of an enactment of or an amendment to a zoning ordinance may be taken to the superior court for the county in which the municipality is situated by filing a complaint, as set forth herein, within 30 days after the enactment or amendment has become effective. The appeal may be taken by an aggrieved party, or by any legal resident or landowner of the municipality, or by an association of residents or landowners of the municipality. The appeal shall not stay the enforcement of the zoning ordinance, as enacted or amended, but the court may, in its discretion, grant a stay on appropriate terms, which may include the filing of a bond, and make such other orders as it deems necessary for an equitable disposition of the appeal. 
B.  The complaint shall set forth with specificity the area or areas in which the enactment or amendment does not conform with the comprehensive plan and/or the manner in which it constitutes a taking of private property without just compensation. 
C.  The review shall be conducted by the court without a jury. The court shall first consider whether the enactment or amendment of the zoning ordinance is in conformance with the comprehensive plan. If the enactment or amendment is not in conformance with the comprehensive plan, then the court shall invalidate the enactment or the amendment, or those parts of the enactment or amendment which are not in conformance with the amendment which are not in conformance with the comprehensive plan. The court shall not revise the zoning ordinance to conform with the comprehensive plan, but may suggest appropriate language as part of the court decision. 
D.  In the case of an aggrieved party, where the court has found that the enactment or amendment of the zoning ordinance is in conformance with the comprehensive plan, then the court shall next determine whether the enactment or amendment works as a taking of property from the aggrieved party. If the court determines that there has been a taking, the court shall remand the case to the legislative body of the municipality, with its findings that a taking has occurred, and order the municipality to either provide just compensation or rescind such enactment or amendment within 30 days. 
E.  The superior court shall retain jurisdiction, in the event that the aggrieved party and the municipality do not agree on the amount of compensation, in which case the superior court shall hold further hearings to determine and to award compensation. Furthermore, the superior court shall retain jurisdiction to determine the amount of an award of compensation for any temporary taking, if that taking shall exist. 
F.  The court may, in its discretion, upon motion of the parties or on its own motion, award reasonable attorney's fees to any party to an appeal, as set forth herein, including a municipality. 
Sec. 1.8. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this article or of any rule, regulation or determination made thereunder, or the application thereof to any person, agency or circumstance is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the article, rule, regulation or determination and the application of the provisions to other persons, agencies or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. The invalidity of any section or sections of this article shall not affect the validity of the remainder of the article. 
ARTICLE II. - ZONING DISTRICT USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 2.1. - Zoning districts. 
    The districts, their abbreviations and common names as used herein shall be designated as follows: 
    2.1.1. Residential district, RE-2. The purpose of this [RE-2] zone is to provide adequate land suitable for residential development. More importantly, the density permitted in this [RE-2] district would maintain an adequate water supply and suitable soil for individual septic disposal systems. 
    2.1.2. Rural district, RU-3. The purpose of this [RU-3] zone is to provide adequate land suitable for low density residential rural development blended with forestry, farming and recreational activities. 
    2.1.3. Rural district, RU-4. The purpose of this [RU-4] zone is to protect land now used for forestry, farming and related activities and the natural habitat and wildlife and to preserve the area's rural character. This [RU-4] zone provides land suitable for low density residential development and reserves land for future farming, forestry, conservation practices and recreational uses. 
    2.1.4 Conservation/recreation, CR-5. This [CR-5] zone is established as a separate district to preserve and protect an area abundant with natural resources, landscapes and sensitive soils having severe limitations, and to provide for a natural mixture of residential and recreational uses. 
    2.1.5. Business district, B. The purpose of this [B] zone is to provide areas for business which would serve the day-to-day needs of the residential population of the community. Also, its purpose is to provide areas for commercial activities to serve the needs of the entire community and the contiguous regions. Any use not specifically listed as a permitted use is prohibited. Each business must contain, within its own lot, the wellhead protection for the well supplying all its water. 
    2.1.6. Light business/residential district, LB/R. The purpose of this [LB/R] zone is to allow the development of low density commercial uses including residences, home occupations and light business uses, and to provide a buffer to the existing general business uses that exist. All uses are subject to development plan review requirements. 
    2.1.7. Light industrial district, LI. The purpose of this [LI] zone is to provide areas for the future development of light industrial and allied uses and to provide for existing uses of this nature. Areas so designated are considered to be geographically and topographically suitable for the future economic growth of the community. All uses shall strictly comply with the established maximum building capacity of 250 persons. Each industry must contain, within its own lot, the wellhead protection for the well supplying all its water. 
    2.1.8. Open space and public land, OSPL. The purpose of this [OSPL] zone is to identify state lands and other lands held for recreation, conservation and public access purposes and to afford future protection against the conversion of these lands to another use inconsistent with that now in existence. Other lands that are purchased or controlled in the town in the future may be added to this category. 
    2.1.9. Groundwater protection overlay district, GWOL. The purpose of this [GWOL] zone is to preserve, protect and maintain the quality and quantity of groundwater supply and groundwater recharge areas of the Town of Exeter. This groundwater is the primary existing and future water supply source for the town. The groundwater reservoirs that underlie Exeter are unique and valuable resources that are vulnerable to contamination due to their unconfined condition, closeness to the ground surface, and the permeability of the overlying soils. It is the intent of this [GWOL] district to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
    2.1.10 Planned districts. The purpose of this [planned districts] zone is to provide control for the future business and industry, and special sites including the Ladd Center and Dorset Mill. Included in this [planned districts] zone are village center districts, planned business and light industrial development districts. An additional purpose of this [planned districts] zone is to foster development given the unique nature of these zones as sites for future mixed use development and sensitive environmental constraints. Any proposed use in this [planned districts] zone shall require a special use permit and be subject to development plan review requirements. 
    2.1.11 Planned village overlay district. The purpose of this [PVOD] district is to implement the vision for Exeter by allowing for planned village development (PVD) in designated areas. PVD shall be designed and built in a manner that is compact, pedestrian friendly, and consistent with the rural setting of Exeter. Development within these districts may include a mix of uses conducive to a vibrant traditional New England village setting and architectural techniques shall reflect the historic patterns that help to define Exeter's community character. These districts shall allow for densities in commercial and residential development that are allowed in no other district and shall therefore require the transfer of development rights to leverage an increased density. The town may also allow increased density as part of its own municipal subsidy toward the provision of deed restricted affordable housing. 
(Ord. of 9-27-12, Exh. 1) 
Sec. 2.2. - District boundaries. 
    The boundaries of said zoning districts, including all overlay districts, are hereby established as shown on those zoning map(s) filed in the office of the town clerk, titled "Zoning Map for the Town of Exeter," dated December 12, 1995, and "Groundwater Protection Overlay District Map," dated December 12, 1995. Said maps are hereby adopted and made part of this ordinance. 
    2.2.1. [Copies of zoning ordinance available.] In addition, current copies of the zoning ordinance shall be available at all times for review in the office of the town clerk and for distribution at the cost of printing the ordinance. Amendments to said map(s) shall be clearly shown with reference to the corresponding town council record documentation, as amended. 
    2.2.2. Boundaries that split lots. Whenever a district boundary splits a lot into two or more separate zoning districts, the proposed use shall be permitted only if it is allowed in the district in question. The dimensional requirements for such permitted use shall be determined by the district in which it is located. Where a proposed use is permitted in two or more districts on the same lot, the dimensional requirements, other than density, shall be determined by the district's dimensional regulations which represent 50 percent or more of the lot or contains the most lot area. For density requirements, all portions of the lot shall be calculated proportionately. 
    2.2.3. Interpretation of boundaries. Where necessary, due to the scale, lack of detail or illegibility of the zoning map(s) of the Town of Exeter, it shall be determined that the boundary lines of districts are lot lines and centerlines of streets or the centerlines of watercourses. Questions concerning the text of this ordinance and the exact location of district boundary lines, as shown on the zoning plats, shall be decided by the zoning inspector. Any person aggrieved by such interpretation of the zoning inspector may appeal such interpretation to the zoning board of review. 
    2.2.4. Determination of boundaries. The boundaries between districts as shown on the zoning map(s) shall be determined according to the following criteria unless otherwise indicated: 
A.  Where a boundary is shown as following a street or other right-of-way, the boundary shall be the centerline of said street or other right-of-way, unless indicated otherwise. 
B.  Where a boundary is shown outside of a street or other right-of-way and approximately parallel thereto, the boundary shall be deemed parallel to the nearest line thereof, and the figure placed on the zoning map(s) shall be the distance of feet between them as measured at a right angle from such line, unless indicated otherwise. 
C.  Where the boundary of a district follows a river, stream, pond or other watercourse, the boundary line shall be deemed to be the limit of the mean high-water mark, unless indicated otherwise. 
D.  Where the boundary line of a district follows an individual property line, it shall be deemed along that property line as it legally existed at the time of adopting such district division line. Any subsequent revision, alteration, replatting or relocating of a property line shall not affect the location of a zoning district divisional line. 
E.  Where the location of the district boundary line is otherwise uncertain, the zoning inspector shall determine its position in accordance with the distance in feet from other lines as given or as measured from the scale of the map(s). 
F.  Where a lot is divided by a zone boundary line, the site of the building with the zone will determine the use. If the structure is divided by a zone boundary line, the most restrictive zone will apply. 
Sec. 2.3. - Zoning use table terms. 
    2.3.1. The abbreviated terms used in the following table of uses, table 2.4, shall have the following meanings: 
A.  Y (Yes). The use is permitted by right within the district so designated. 
B.  N (No). The use is not permitted and is specifically prohibited within the district so designated. 
C.  S (special permit required). The use is allowed by special use permit only if approved by the zoning board of review. 
D.  Zoning districts are as defined above. 
    2.3.2. Any use not listed is specifically prohibited. 
    2.3.3. Any use requiring a special use permit shall be subject to development plan review requirements. 
Sec. 2.4. - Zoning use table follows. 
TABLE 2.4. ZONING USE TABLE 
District 2.4.1. Use Category RE-2 RU-3 RU-4 CR-5 B LB-R LI OS/PL GWOL Planned 
District PVOD 1. Single-family structures Y Y Y Y S S S S Y Y 2. Home occupations (as per article IV, section 2) Y Y Y Y N S Y S S S 3. Raising of animals or fowl by a resident of the premises not to exceed USDA animal unit equivalent without a management plan by SRICD Y Y Y Y N S Y S S S 4. Public telephone booths Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 5. Signs permitted in article VI, accessory to primary use Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 6. Parking as required in article V, accessory to primary use Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 7. Accessory use as defined in article IV, section 1 Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 8. Farming; nurseries; forestry activities, which includes cutting, buying and selling of firewood; excluding wood processing which is listed as a special use. Buying, selling, breeding and boarding of animals, except dogs, but not including the raising of pigs primarily for the consumption and disposal of garbage Y Y Y Y S S N S S S 9. Landscaping businesses a. Home occupation Y Y Y Y S S Y S S Y b. Non-home occupation N N S S S S Y S S S 10. Kennel business a. Kennel Class 1 (over ten dogs) N N S S Y Y Y S S S N b. Kennel Class 2 (four-ten dogs) S S S S Y Y Y S S S S 11. Erection of a roadside stand, not to exceed 200 square feet for the sale of agricultural products as an accessory use Y Y Y Y Y S S S Y 12. Single-family mobile homes will be allowed as temporary living structures for a period of one year under the following conditions; i.e. fire- and storm-related damage. The license will be reviewed by the zoning board of review after one year Y Y Y Y Y Y N N S Y 13. Pharmacies or drugstores N N N N Y S S S S Y 14. Grocery, delicatessen, bakery or other retail foodstores N N N N Y Y S S S Y 15. Commercial lunchrooms, ice cream parlors. Fast food not permitted N N N N Y Y S S S Y 16. Variety stores, family or independent N N N N Y Y S S S Y 17. Arts and crafts shops N N N N Y Y S S S Y 18. Personal service shops such as tailor, dressmaking, barber, beauty, shoe repair, laundry pickup, dry cleaning pickup and watch repair N N N N Y Y S S S Y 19. Antique, art, book, stationery or gift shops S S S S Y Y S S S Y 20. Florists, greenhouses and nurseries N N S S Y Y S S S Y 21. Funeral homes or mortuaries N N N N Y S N N N S 22. Restaurants, taverns or catering establishments. Fast food service restaurants not permitted in any district N N N N Y Y S N N Y 23. Package liquor stores N N N N Y Y N N N Y 24. Sale of lumber, building materials, hardware, grain or feed N N N N Y Y Y N N Y 25. Woodworking and furniture refinishing shops N N N N Y Y Y N N S 26. General merchandise, department, furniture or other household goods stores, and food stores N N N N Y Y N N N Y 27. Photography, photocopying, blue-printing or printing establishments N N N N Y Y Y N N Y 28. Recreational equipment sales such as travel trailers, snowmobiles, swimming pools, tents N N N N Y Y Y N N Y 29. Manufacture of wood products excluding manufacture of raw paper products or recycling of paper N N N N N N Y N N N 30. Scientific and research laboratories N N N N S N Y N N S 31. Manufacture of food products, other than from meat, vinegar and yeast. Fish, shellfish and rendering or refining of fats and oil products not permitted N N N N N N Y N N Y 32. Lumber, coal, building materials, grain and feed storage yards, wholesale and warehouse faciliities, including cold storage N N N N S S Y N N N 33. Freight or trucking terminals N N N N N N Y N N N 34. Manufacture of electronic products N N N N S N Y N N N 35. Public utility structures S S S S S S Y S S S 36. Private neighborhood halls and other uses incidental to the promotion and development of neighborhood cooperation and activities. Communal uses including grange halls, and other public or private recreation uses incidental to and for the community S S S S N N N N N Y 37. Educational or religious institutions, including churches, schools and nursery schools. Size restrictions apply S S S S S S N N S Y 38. Two-family dwelling structures S S S S N N N N N Y 39. Mixed use commercial development S S Y 40. Government buildings and uses including libraries, town halls and public works garages, but excluding sanitary landfills, sewage treatment plants and incinerators S S S S S S Y S S Y 41. Wood processing S S S S S S S N N N 42. Bed and breakfast S S S S S S N N N Y 43. Family day care, homes Y Y Y Y Y S Y Y Y Y 44. Day care centers S S S S S S N N S Y 45. Single-family mobile homes will be allowed as temporary living structures for a period of one year for new construction. Applicants must obtain a building permit before applying for a special-use permit. The license will be reviewed by the zoning board after a period of one year S S S S N N N N N N 46. Medical uses, including rest homes, convalescent homes, animal hospitals and clinics N S S S S S N N S S 47. Cemeteries, provided that the total area to be devoted to such use shall not be less than 25 acres N S S S N N N N N N 48. Structures to accommodate business and professional offices. Towers prohibited N S S S S S N S S Y 49. Swimming areas, country clubs, golf courses, skiing and commercial horseback riding facilities. Private and public fishing and hunting areas, sports clubs (excluding shooting ranges). Private or commercial campgrounds or recreation, including sports clubs N N S S N N N N N Y 50. Motels or hotels with not more than ten rooms per acre of gross site area, and with state-approved water supply well and ISDS systems N N N N S S N N N S 51. Gasoline filling stations N N N N S S N N N S 52. New and used automobile dealer-ships, provided that all repair is performed within a structure and that there is no outdoor storage of derelict or junk automobiles or parts N N N N S S S N N N 53. Shopping centers, meaning a cluster of two or more stores with communal parking facilities, planned and built as an entity or subdivision of an area within a business district N N N N S S N N N Y 54. Occupational schools conducted as a business such as dance, music [or] welding automobiles N N N N S S N N N S 55. Extractive industries, including gravel and sandbanks, provided they are screened by an opaque fence, hedge or other natural barrier not less than six feet in height, and provided they conform to the Earth Removal Ordinance N N N N N N S N N N 56. Manufacture of food products from meat, vinegar or yeast N N N N N N S N N S 57. Metal fabrication N N N N S N S N N N 58. Manufacture of machine tools, precision instruments, musical instruments, toys and novelties N N N N S N S N N S 59. Industrial parks, meaning a cluster of two or more industrial businesses with communal parking facilities, planned and built as an entity or subdivision of an area within an individual district N N N N N N S N N N 60. Breweries or distilleries N N N N N N S N N S 60A. Farm Breweries Y Y Y Y 61. Junk or salvage yards, including the outdoor storage of used materials, provided they are screened by an opaque fence, hedge or other natural barrier not less than six feet in height N N N N N N S N N N 62. Manufacture, processing and packaging of cosmetics and toiletries N N N N N N S N N S 63. Private cellular communications antenna on existing nonresidential principal or accessory structure S S S S S S Y N S S 64. Private cellular communications antenna on existing residential principal or accessory structure N N N N N N S S N S 65. Public cellular communications antenna on existing non-residential structure S S S S S S Y N S S 66. Other communications tower, including broadcast TV or radio N N N N N N S N N N 67. Public cellular communications tower N N N N N N S N N S 68. Private cellular communications tower N N N N N N S N N S 69. Utility scale solar photovoltaic facility N N S S Y Y Y N Y S Y 70. Residential/smallscale solar photovoltaic facility- Ground mounted Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y S Y 71. Residential/smallscale solar photovoltaic facility- Roof mounted Y Y Y Y Y Y N N Y N Y 72. Medical Marijuana a. Compassion center N N N N Y S Y N S Y S b. Medical marijuana cultivation center N N S S Y Y Y N S Y Y c. Non-residential cooperative cultivation N N N N Y Y Y N S Y S d. Residential cooperative cultivation S S Y Y N N N N S N N e. Patient cultivation Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 73. Reserved - Marijuana Cultivation Center 74. Reserved - Marijuana Store All uses not listed above are specifically prohibited  
2.4.2. Dimensional Regulations District RE-2 RU-3 RU-4 CR-5 B LB-R LI OS/PL PVOD 1. Minimum lot size, acres 2 3 4 5 2 2 See note (8) 2. Minimum street frontage, feet 200 250 300 350 150 150 400 200 40 3. Maximum lot coverage by all structures, percent. Refer to article VI, section 2 for number of structures (building coverage) 15 15 15 10 25 25 25 10 See note (8) 4. Minimum front depth (setback), feet 60 100 100 150 100 100 200 200 See note (9) 5. Minimum front depth (setback) on arterial roads, feet 100 100 150 100 100 200 200 10 6. Minimum side depth (setback), feet 30 60 80 100 30 30 50 50 0 7. Minimum rear depth (setback), feet 50 50 50 150 75 75 100 150 0 8. Maximum structure height, feet (excluding farm structures), measured from highest grade 40 
75 40 40 40 40 40 40 40 45 9. Maximum building capacity, persons 250 250 250 250 250 10. Maximum gross retail footprint (see note #7 below), square feet 40,000 40,000 40,000 40,000 40,000 40,000 N/A 40,000 Section 10.3.3 11. Number of structures shall be in accordance with 2.6  
NOTES: 
1.  Any industrial structure or activity or outdoor storage shall be set at least 200 feet from the RE-2, RU-3, RU-4 and CR-5 district boundaries, and at least 100 feet from any B or LB/R district boundaries. A setback for structures and parking lots of 200 feet from all roads and suitable landscape screening shall be provided. 
2.  No certificate of occupancy for any use shall be issued until the planning board has certified in writing that all development plan review requirements have been met. 
3.  Each business or industry must contain within its own lot the wellhead protection for the well supplying all its water. 
4.  For all setback requirements; setbacks shall be measured from the lot line to any building projection and not necessarily the foundation. 
5.  On corner lots, the rear setback shall conform to the side setback requirements that there shall be no rear yard; only a front and two side yards. 
6.  For the purposes of calculating minimum lot dimensions, area, density, maximum percent coverage, and the maximum number of lots or dwelling units permitted in a conservation development in any zoning district where permitted, the provisions of the land development and subdivision regulations shall apply. 
7.  The maximum gross building footprint per retail structure shall be 40,000 square feet in all zones except the LI zone which will not have a maximum. This maximum footprint shall not apply to agricultural structures. 
8.  To be determined as part of the PVD review process by the planning board in conformance with all other provisions of PVD. The planning board shall condition approval upon the future maintenance of these standards for lot coverage. Where a future application may show a deviation from these lot coverage standards, said application shall require major land development review. 
9.  To be determined as part of the PVD review process by the planning board in conformance with all other provisions of PVD including but not limited to those standards within the land development and subdivision regulations specifically requiring site design techniques that facilitate a safe, pedestrian friendly, compact village development. The planning board shall condition approval upon the future maintenance of these setbacks. Where a future application may show a deviation from these lot coverage standards, said application shall require major land development review. 
    2.4.3. Flexible lot frontage and width. Upon approval of the planning board as part of a conservation development as provided in the land development and subdivision regulations, the lot frontage and lot width variations listed below may be permitted by the planning board, through a request for a waiver. 
A.  In residential CR-5, RU-4, RU-3 and RE-2 zoning districts, the planning board is authorized to reduce the lot frontage and lot width of newly created lots in a subdivision or land development project on any public or approved private street to a minimum of 20 feet. 
B.  Open space lots, within an approved conservation development, may have zero-frontage on a street, as long as the planning board approves access to the open space by easement or other means. 
(Amd. of 6-22-00; Amd. of 3-3-03, § 8; Amd. of 4-8-03; Amd. of 11-3-03; Amd. of 10-5-04; Amd. of 11-1-04; Amd. of 3-3-05; Amd. of 3-6-06; § 2; Ord. of 8-7-06, § 2; Amd. of 5-7-07; Amd. of 6-4-07; Amd. of 4-7-08; Amd. of 4-6-09; Ord. of 9-27-12, Exh. 1; Amd. of 10-6-14, § 2; Ord. of 12-7-15; Amend. of 10-2-17) 
Sec. 2.5. - Development plan review. 
2.5.1.  Purpose; when required. 
A.  Development plan review is required for all permitted uses other than one- or two-family dwellings or accessory buildings. Uses located within a conservation development shall not be required to obtain development plan review approval. 
B.  No building permit may be issued for any building within the purview of this section except in conformance with an approved development plan review. No certificate of occupancy may be issued for any building or use of land within the purview of this section unless the building is constructed or used, or the land is developed or used in conformity with an approved development plan review. 
C.  As part of the development plan review process, the planning board may request opinions and technical reviews by federal and state agencies or representatives as it deems appropriate. Advisory opinions shall be requested of the department of public works, conservation commission, fire chief of the appropriate fire district, zoning inspector, and other local agencies, as needed. 
D.  Development plan review approval by the planning board: 
1.  Development plan review approval for the erection, enlargement or change of use of any building or other structure other than one- or two-family dwellings and their accessory uses, or uses requiring a special use permit, a variance, a zoning ordinance amendment, and/or a zoning map change, may be required by the zoning board of review or the town council. The review conducted by the planning board shall be advisory to the permitting authority. 
2.  Development plan review approval for uses that are permitted by right under the zoning ordinance shall be required for any permitted use other than one- or two-family residential and their accessory uses. The review body shall be the planning board. A rejection of the application shall be considered an appealable decision. 
3.  Development plan review approval for all uses of open land for which a certificate of occupancy is required; and 
4.  Development plan review approval for any amendment of a previously approved development plan review. 
5.  Applications for uses in planned districts, special use districts, groundwater protection overlay districts, except for single-family residential use. 
    2.5.2. Performance and design standards; standards of review. The following criteria and standards shall be used by the planning board in reviewing applications for site plan approval. They are intended to provide a framework within which the designer of the site development is free to exercise creativity, invention and innovation. The planning board shall not specify or favor any particular architectural style or design or assist in the design of any of the buildings submitted for approval. Participation by the board shall be restricted to a reasonable, professional review and, except as otherwise provided in the following subsections, full responsibility for design shall be retained by the applicant. In all instances, the burden of proof shall be on the applicant and such burden of proof shall include the production of evidence necessary to complete the application. 
2.5.2.1. Landscaping. The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state insofar as practicable by minimizing tree removal, disturbance of the soil and retaining existing vegetation during and after construction. After construction is completed, landscaping shall be installed according to the landscaping design shown on the site plan that will define, soften, or screen the appearance of the off-road parking areas from the public right-of-way and abutting properties and/or structures in order to enhance the design or building(s) or site, and to minimize the encroachment of the proposed use on neighboring land uses. 
A.  Existing trees and vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. 
B.  Buffering elements in the form of architectural design and landscape design that provide a logical transition to adjoining existing or permitted uses shall be provided. 
C.  Scenic views and historically significant landscape features shall be preserved whenever possible as determined by the planning board and/or the scenic highway commission. 
D.  The planting of large deciduous street trees, no smaller than two-inch caliper, along principal road corridors to help shade and enclose the highway shall be encouraged. 
E.  New landscaping shall use native plant material of species hardy to the area. 
F.  [The] Applicant shall submit a landscape plan subject to planning board approval, including a plant species list with sizes, common and scientific names, and quantities. 
2.5.2.2. Visual relationship of buildings and their design. 
A.  The architectural design of the project, buildings, structures and site layout shall be visually compatible with the character the Town of Exeter seeks to retain within the area and the surrounding district, including building materials, massing of structures, small scale, and pitched building roof line, and shall be compatible with any special area master plan concepts as adopted by the town planning board and town council. 
B.  A diversity of roof heights, gable orientations and volumes in new buildings should be considered. Mansard, flat and shallow-pitched roofs are not permitted. Instead new buildings shall be designed with traditional roof forms that are compatible with the character of the town, including gambrel and gable roofs commonly found in Exeter. 
C.  Architectural elements such as dormers should be in proportion with the overall building and should also be in keeping with the surrounding building context. Exaggerated or excessively large (or tiny) architectural elements should be avoided. If used properly, traditional and contemporary architectural detailing can create variety, interest and texture on new buildings and additions, which is compatible with the character of the area. 
D.  Building materials. The following building materials for use on the exterior of all structures may be acceptable: 
Wood or wood products 
Brick 
Masonry products 
Stone 
Vinyl products which resemble the above 
Such other materials as may be approved by the planning board 
E.  Buildings that are three-dimensional expressions of chain architectural logotypes which are incongruous with the character of the town shall not be allowed. 
F.  Development projects shall reuse existing buildings of historical character whenever possible. Reuse may take the form of additions to older buildings rather than demolition of listed historic buildings (Rhode Island Historical Preservation and Heritage Commission town survey) shall be discouraged. 
G.  Large-scale development shall take the form of village-like groupings, rather than a large individual structure set back on a large expanse of asphalt parking. Large box buildings are discouraged, however if proposed, their architectural incongruity shall be corrected by the articulation of building facades into an appearance of smaller-scaled multiple building fronts expressed in a variety of heights and materials to create a pedestrian scale. 
2.5.2.3. Vehicular access. The proposed site layout shall provide for safe access and egress from public and private roads by providing adequate location, numbers, and control of access points including site distances, turning lanes, and traffic signalization when required by existing and projected flow on the municipal road systems. Provisions shall be made providing and maintaining safe and convenient emergency vehicle access to all buildings and structures on the site at all times. The development shall not impose unreasonable burdens on the circulation system of the town. Town roads inadequate to handle the volume of traffic generated by the development shall be improved by the applicant to provide safe passage. The developer shall be required to provide a traffic impact report prepared by a certified traffic engineer including, but not limited to, present and future traffic volumes, present and future traffic flows, traffic safety, and impact to level of service. 
2.5.2.4. Parking and circulation. The layout and design of all means of vehicular and pedestrian circulation, including walkways, interior drives and parking areas shall provide for safe general interior circulation, separation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, service traffic, loading areas, and arrangement and use of parking areas. Adequate off-street parking and loading shall be provided to prevent on-street traffic congestion. All parking spaces, maneuvering areas, entrances and exits shall be identified on the site plan. The interior circulation system shall be designed to provide safe and convenient access to all structures, uses, and/or parking spaces. Parking areas shall be protected with suitable guards, rails, islands, crosswalks, speed bumps, and similar devices deemed necessary by the planning board. 
A.  Parking lots shall be located to one side or behind commercial buildings, particularly within the Route 102 and Route 2 corridors and along arterial highways. 
B.  Whenever possible, parking lots on adjoining commercial lots shall be connected internally to each other to allow for through traffic between and reducing the need for multiple curb cuts, particularly within major arterial road corridors. 
C.  Parking lot units shall be designed with ample landscaping and shall be limited in size to accommodate no more than 30 to 40 cars per units. Parking for large complexes shall be broken up into units of this size with each lot connected with the other but buffered from the other with landscaping including trees and shrubs. The following parking lot landscaping standards may be required by the planning board: 
1.  Parking lots containing ten or more spaces shall be planted with at least one tree per five spaces, no smaller than two-inch caliper, each tree being surrounded by no less than 40 square feet of permeable unpaved area. 
2.  The planning board may require placement of trees along the perimeter of parking areas and within parking areas. 
D.  Native trees required by these provisions shall be at least five feet in height at the time of planting and shall be of a species characterized by hardiness within the area. 
E.  To the extent practicable, existing trees shall be retained and used to satisfy the provisions of this section. 
F.  Where reasonable and practical, the planning board may require new roads and interconnected parking to be located behind existing commercial buildings scheduled for rehabilitation or reuse to reduce traffic along arterial highways. 
G.  The planning board may require the consolidation of existing curb cuts into a smaller number of clearly defined entrances in projects involving the reuse of existing buildings and parking areas. If such buildings are within major road corridors or along an arterial highway and set back from the highway, the planning board may require a reconfiguration of the parking to accommodate these standards. In such cases where new additions or new structures are part of the application, the planning board may encourage such new construction to be located along the highway or interior roads to create a traditional commercial main street appearance and to create a visual setback line to create a visual screen to existing or proposed interior parking areas. 
H.  No development shall be allowed where there is unrestricted access to public streets or roads (with an unlimited curb cut) or where the public street must be utilized to maneuver in and out of a parking space unless such development is located on an interior street and is subject to the design guidelines of a special area master plan adopted by the town planning board or town council. 
I.  Glare from the installation of outdoor lights and signs and from the movement of vehicles on the site shall be shielded from the view of adjacent residential properties. 
J.  Buildings and the grounds adjoining them shall permit easy access and operation of fire, police, and other emergency vehicles. 
K.  The design of the project's circulation systems shall relate to planned improvements in the area, including future street widening, realignments, paving programs, and street width requirements determined by the planning board relating to traffic use which have been planned and/or scheduled for construction. The design should be congruent with any proposed area master plan, commercial master plan, village-type plan, or mixed-use area plan adopted by the town. 
2.5.2.5. Stormwater runoff and erosion control. Adequate provisions shall be made for the treatment and control of soil erosion and stormwater runoff so that runoff will not adversely affect neighboring properties, surface [water] or groundwater quality, aquifers, wetlands, any storm drainage system or road. Whenever possible, on-site absorption of runoff waters shall be utilized to minimize discharges from the site. Provisions shall be made to control erosion during and after construction. All stormwater runoff and erosion control shall meet the guidelines set forth in the Rhode Island Stormwater Runoff and Rhode Island Erosion and Sediment Control Handbooks. 
A.  Erosion and sedimentation shall be controlled during and after construction and shall not adversely affect adjacent or neighboring property or public facilities or services either during or after construction. 
B.  The design of stormwater control systems shall be for a zero net increase from present undeveloped drainage patterns compared to future site development conditions. 
C.  Direct discharge of untreated stormwater runoff to a wetland or watercourse from impervious surfaces including, but not limited to, roadways, parking lots, driveways, basement drainage systems, and roofs shall not be allowed. 
D.  All development stormwater control shall meet the standards of the Rhode Island Stormwater Design and Installation Standards Manual and be of nonstructural character to the extent possible. Such stormwater control shall be designed to be integral to the designed landscape of the project. 
2.5.2.6. Existing utilities. The development shall not impose unreasonable burdens on sewers, sanitary and storm drains, water lines, or other public utilities. 
2.5.2.7. Advertising features. The size, location, design, lighting and materials of all exterior signs and outdoor advertising structures shall be compatible with the design of the proposed building(s) and structure(s) and surrounding properties and conform with article VI of the Exeter zoning ordinance. A uniform signage design for projects is recommended. The planning board shall require conformance with any standards adopted with a town special area master plan for signs and signage design. 
2.5.2.8. Special features of the development. Exposed storage areas, exposed machinery installation, service areas, truck loading areas, utility buildings, and similar structures shall have sufficient setbacks and screening to provide an audiovisual buffer sufficient to minimize their adverse impact on other land uses within the development area and surrounding properties. 
2.5.2.9. Exterior lighting. All exterior lighting shall be designed to minimize impact on neighboring properties. Lighting shall be directed away from any residential zoned properties. 
2.5.2.10. Municipal services. The development will not have an unreasonable impact on the municipal road system, fire department, police department, solid waste program, schools, open spaces recreational programs and facilities, and other municipal services and facilities. 
2.5.2.11. Water pollution. The project shall be designed to prevent the pollution of surface [water] or groundwater resources. In making this determination, the planning board will review the project area including, but not limited to, the elevation of the land above sea level and its relation to the floodplains, the nature of soils and subsoils and their ability to adequately support wastewater disposal and other DEM approved discharge; the slope of the land and its effect on effluents; the aquifer and aquifer recharge areas; the availability of streams for surface runoff; and the applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances, codes and regulations. The planning board may require specific site designs, best management practices, and/or applicable management measures to protect surface [water] and groundwater quality. 
2.5.2.12. Air pollution. The use of the site shall not reduce the ambient quality of the air. In making this determination, the applicant shall consult federal and state authorities to determine air quality laws and regulations. 
2.5.2.13. Water supply. Sufficient water must be available for reasonably foreseeable needs of the development and not cause any unreasonable burden on the existing water supply if this supply is utilized. [The] Applicant must demonstrate by clear, convincing, and documented evidence, that an adequate drinking water supply is available for the reasonable, foreseeable needs of the proposed development and that water use by the proposed development will not have an adverse impact on the water needs of adjacent properties. 
2.5.2.14. Wastewater disposal. The planning board shall require a total nitrogen removal of 50 percent at the treatment unit before discharge to the wastewater disposal system that is located within the groundwater protection zone as described in section 7.3 of the zoning ordinance. This same requirement may apply for sewage disposal systems located within a wellhead protection area. The applicant shall also determine any potential impacts from a proposed wastewater disposal system to surface [water] and groundwater. In addition, the potential impacts to adjacent public or private wells shall be assessed. An operation and maintenance plan shall be developed to ensure a regular inspection and maintenance of the wastewater disposal system. The Rhode Island Handbook for Inspection of Operating Septic Systems shall be used as guidance for operation and maintenance. 
2.5.2.15. Unique areas. There must not be any undue adverse effect on the scenic or natural beauty of the project area, aesthetics, historic sites, or rare and irreplaceable natural areas. 
2.5.2.16. Water bodies. Whenever situated in the whole or in part, within 300 feet of any pond, lake, river or other freshwater wetland (as defined by RIDEM), the proposed project shall not adversely effect the quality of such body of water or unreasonably affect the shoreline of such body of water. There will be no disturbance of soil within 100 feet of the outer edge of a wetland (as defined by RIDEM). 
2.5.2.17. Wellhead protection. The proposed project must own the entire wellhead protection area in either fee simple or a conservation easement. No structures that require wastewater disposal, the storage of hazardous materials or any land use that may contaminate the water supply shall be permitted within the wellhead protection area other than a wastewater disposal system to serve the proposed development project. 
2.5.2.18. Town service needs and costs. The applicant shall determine the estimated need for town services including, but not limited to, police, fire, rescue, road improvements, education and public works. 
2.5.3.  Submission fees and procedures. 
A.  Fees. All submissions for site plan approvals shall be accompanied by a fee to pay for the costs of the technical planning and consultants review. The development plan review fee shall be equal to the actual amount expended by the town to hire the professional resources necessary to complete the review. The said fees shall be payable by the applicant prior to the issuance of a building permit, zoning permit or both, and after final approval has been granted by the planning board. All reasonable and necessary costs, fees and expenses, without limitation, incurred pursuant to the inspection of a development project approved by the planning board, shall be charged as an inspection fee, separate from the review fee, by the planning board to the applicant or developer. 
B.  Required submissions. At least 14 days in advance of the planning board meeting at which a development plan is to be presented for review, the information enumerated below, including the review fee, must be submitted as required to the secretary of the planning board. The information to be submitted for site plan approval with the planning board: eight copies of the proposed site plan, 24-inch by 36-inch in size at a scale no smaller than one inch equals 40 feet, unless approved by the planning board, and eight copies of reduced plans no smaller than 11 inches by 17 inches, and which in total constitutes a development plan, is as follows: 
1.  Preapplication plan. 
a.  Legal data. 
i.  The names of all owners of record of all adjacent properties, and the plat and lot of the subject property, all as shown on the town's official tax assessment maps; 
ii.  Existing zoning and boundaries; 
iii.  Boundaries of the property, building or setback lines and lines of existing streets and adjoining lots, as shown on the town's official tax assessment maps. Reservations, easements and areas dedicated to public use, if known, shall be shown; 
iv.  Previous subdivision history of the property. 
b.  General project site description. The following information will be shown either on a single map or a series of maps: 
i.  Map showing the applicant's entire property and adjacent properties and streets, at an approved scale, including the approximate location and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures, utility lines, wells, septic systems, and major natural features on the proposed development site and on adjacent properties and within 500 feet of the site boundary; 
ii.  All existing and proposed paved areas; 
iii.  Existing topography at five-foot contour intervals, soil types, vegetation pattern, including major stands of trees and large specimen trees, watercourses and bodies of water, wetlands, rock outcrops, and other prominent physical features; 
iv.  Cross sections of the existing site including one north-south section, one east-west section and cross sections where the existing site grade exceeds eight percent; 
v.  Areas to be left undisturbed; 
vi.  Existing pedestrian and vehicular circulation plan for the site and within 500 feet of the site boundary; 
vii.  The names and addresses of the applicant, and other planners, engineers, architects, surveyors and/or other professionals engaged to work on the project shall be shown. Where the applicant or owner is a corporation, the planning board may require the names and addresses of all officers, directors and principal stockholders of said corporation. 
[2.]  Preliminary plan. 
a.  Legal data. As set forth in the preapplication plan. 
b.  Existing conditions. As set forth in the preapplication plan. 
c.  Development data. 
i.  Title of development, date, north arrow, scale, name and address of record owner and of the engineer, architect, land planner, or surveyor preparing the site development plan; 
ii.  All means of vehicular access and egress to and from the site onto public streets; 
iii.  Three sets of preliminary plans, elevations and sections of proposed structures and roads, showing the proposed location, use and design of all buildings and structures, including any proposed division of buildings into units of separate occupancy and location of drives thereto, and showing the proposed location of all roads, pedestrian walkways and fire lanes; 
iv.  The location and layout of any off-street parking or loading areas; 
v.  The location of all proposed water lines, valves, and hydrants and sewer lines, or of alternative means of water supply and sewage disposal and treatment as well as the proposed easements for these utilities; 
vi.  The proposed location, direction, power and timing of proposed outdoor lighting; 
vii.  Preliminary grading and landscaping plan; 
viii.  Extent and amount of cut and fill for all disturbed areas, including before-and-after profiles of typical development areas, parking lots and roads; 
ix.  Proposed stormwater drainage system; 
x.  The proposed location, size, color and illumination of proposed signs; 
xi.  Location of all existing and proposed site improvements, including drains, culverts, retaining walls and fences; 
xii.  Location of any outdoor storage; 
xiii.  Detailed breakdowns of all proposed floor space by type of use; 
xiv.  In all business and industrial districts, specific uses proposed, number of employees for whom buildings are designed, type of power to be used for any manufacturing process, type of wastes or byproducts to be produced by any manufacturing process, and the proposed method of disposal of such wastes or byproducts shall also be shown; 
xv.  Copies of all permit applications from all appropriate federal, state and local regulatory agencies. 
3.  Final plan. 
a.  Legal data. As set forth in the preapplication and preliminary plan. 
b.  Existing conditions. As set forth in the preapplication and preliminary plan. 
c.  Development data. 
i.  Three sets (one of which is recordable mylar) of final plans, including site plan, floor plans, elevations and sections of proposed structures; 
ii.  Final grading and landscaping plan. 
[C.]  Additional submissions. Where, due to special conditions peculiar to a site, or the size, nature or complexity of the proposed use or development of land or buildings, the planning board finds that additional information is necessary for proper review of the site plan, the board may request additional pertinent information, including: 
A.  A class II survey by a registered land surveyor of the subject property; 
B.  A copy of any covenants or deed restrictions that are intended to cover all or any part of the tract; 
C.  Existing contours with intervals of two feet or less referred to town datum, and showing at least one benchmark; 
D.  All proposed lots, easements, and public and community areas. All proposed streets with: 
(a)  Profiles indicating grading; and 
(b)  Cross sections showing width of roadway, location and width of sidewalk, and location and size of utility lines, according to the standards and specifications established or approved by the town. 
E.  Reports of any environmental analyses performed on the development site which relate to the existence of hazardous substances or identify other potential negative impacts of the proposed development. 
[D.]  Exceptions. The board may waive, by majority vote, development plan approval requirements or any specific provision(s) thereof for any change in use, and construction of an addition or accessory building to any other principal building, provided that the use is subordinate and customarily incidental to the principal use, and provided that either of the following are met: Such building area does not exceed 25 percent of the existing building(s) or 1,500 square feet, whichever is less and no site improvements are intended, required, or will result from such building; including, but not limited to, the development of additional parking spaces, or the change of actual use does not affect existing circulation, drainage, landscaping, buffering, lighting, or other considerations of site plan review. 
2.5.4.  Duties of planning board. The planning board shall review the final site development plan and act on the application within 45 days from and after the time the final plan is deemed complete and is accepted as such by the planning board. Failure on the part of the planning board to act shall be deemed to constitute approval, unless the time limit is extended by stipulation with the applicant. In reviewing the site plan, the planning board shall take into consideration the public health, safety and general welfare, the comfort and convenience of the public in general and of the residents of the immediate neighborhood in particular, and shall set any appropriate conditions and safeguards in harmony with the general purpose and intent of these regulations, and according to the general criteria and standards set forth herein. 
2.5.5.  Planning board initiative. The planning board may, on its own initiative, propose a general or specific site plan for a particular area where development plan approval may be required in the future, using as a guide the requirements of this section. 
2.5.6.  Performance bonds. The applicant may be required to post acceptable performance bonds, letters of credit, cash or acceptable equivalents in sufficient amounts and duration to ensure that all streets or other public places shown on the site plan shall be suitably graded and paved, and that street signs, sidewalks, street lighting standards, curbs, gutters, street trees and all landscaping materials, water mains, fire alarm signal devices including necessary ducts and cables or other connecting facilities, sanitary sewers and storm drains shall all be installed in accordance with standards, specifications and procedures acceptable to the planning board. 
2.5.7.  Expiration. An approved site plan shall be void if constructon is not started within one year and completed within two years of the date of the final site plan approval, except that such site plan approval may be continued or renewed by the planning board for additional one-year periods. 
(Ord. of 11-2-98(2); Amd. of 1-6-03(3); Amd. of 10-5-04) 
Sec. 2.6. - Other general provisions. 
1.  Zoning affects every structure and use. No structure shall be constructed, erected, placed, moved or maintained, nor shall the exterior be altered, and no land use shall be commenced or continued within the town unless in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located, except as provided for in article I, section 3.C (nonconforming). 
2.  Reduction of lot and areas prohibited. No lot, yard, required open space or off-street parking area shall be so reduced, diminished or maintained that the yards, other open space, total lot area, or off-street parking area shall be smaller than prescribed by this ordinance. 
3.  Required yards cannot be used by another use or building. No part of a yard, parking space or other open space required for any building or use for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this ordinance shall be included as part of a yard, parking space or other open space required under this ordinance for another use or building, except as provided in article V (parking section). 
4.  Only one dwelling structure on any lot. In no case shall there be more than one residential building and its accessory buildings on one lot. 
5.  More than one nonresidential use or building on a lot. More than one nonresidential structure may be allowed on a single lot within appropriately zoned nonresidential districts if devoted to the same actual use. Upon application to the zoning board of review, a special use permit may be granted in accordance with article 1.3.F (special use permits) of this ordinance, where more than one actual use on a lot may be requested; provided, however that such uses shall be only those that are permitted within the district in question. In both instances, principal front and rear walls of a building shall be at least 40 feet from any wall or another building. Any side wall of a building may not be less than 25 feet from any side wall of another building. 
6.  Public street access. No structure shall be erected on or moved onto a lot which does not have frontage on a public street equal to or greater than the required minimum frontage in table 2.4, or elsewhere as required in this ordinance. 
7.  Visibility at corners. At any corner lot and at street intersections in all districts, no wall, fence, structure, sign or building shall be erected or placed, and no hedge, tree, shrub or other vegetation shall be maintained between the heights of three feet, and ten feet, above street level within the triangle formed by the two street lines and a third line joining points on the street lines 20 feet from the intersection of the street lines. 
8.  Temporary uses permitted. A temporary building for construction materials and/or equipment for a permitted use on a construction site, a temporary office for the sale or rental of real property, if in connection with and incidental and necessary to real estate development, and [a] temporary trailer, used for residential occupancy necessitated by any loss or damage of a principal structure by fire, hurricane or other natural disaster, shall be permitted in any district, subject to approval of both the building inspector and zoning inspector, provided that any building permit for any such temporary use shall be valid for not more six months unless such time period is extended by the building inspector and zoning inspector may be permitted as an accessory use, but in no event shall continue for more than 30 days following the completion of such construction or sale or rental of such property. 
    Temporary storage containers may be permitted as an accessory use in LB/R, B, LI and OS/PL zones, provided that there shall be suitable screening. 
    All other temporary and/or mobile facilities for residential, commercial or industrial use are prohibited in all districts; provided, however, that this prohibition shall not apply to temporary and/or mobile facilities which are owned and/or operated by federal, state or municipal agencies. 
9.  Use regulations. No building, structure or land shall be used except for those purposes noted in the table 2.4. Any use not listed shall be construed to be prohibited. 
10.  Setback from water bodies. Sewage disposal facilities which are designed to leach wastes into the soil shall be located in accordance with RIDEM regulations. 
11.  Fresh water wetlands. No fresh water wetland, as defined by chapter 213 of the RIGL of 1970 relating to fresh water wetlands, shall be excavated, drained or filled, nor shall any extraneous materials be placed in these wetlands or water flow diverted out of or any other change be made to the natural condition of any fresh water wetland without prior approval of the Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management (RIDEM) and the Exeter town council in accordance with the provisions of said chapter. 
ARTICLE III. - CONFORMING AND NONCONFORMING LOTS AND USES 

Sec. 3.1. - General application/definitions. 
    A nonconformance is a building, structure, sign or parcel of land, or use thereof, which was lawfully existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of this zoning ordinance, and not in conformity with the provisions of such ordinance or amendment. 
1.  Lawfully existing or established. A building, structure, sign or parcel of land, or use thereof, was lawfully existing or lawfully established if it was lawfully in existence prior to December 12, 1995 and was established in conformance with the zoning ordinance in effect at the time the use was first established. For the purpose of this ordinance, a lot was lawfully existing or lawfully established if it was of record or shown on a recorded plat prior to December 12, 1995, or was separately owned. 
2.  Prior illegal establishment. Any use or structure illegally established prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any amendment thereto shall not be granted nonconformance status, nor shall it become legally established subsequent to the effective date of this ordinance or any amendment thereto. Proof of use or structure shall be the burden of the owner of such property. 
3.  Nonconforming by use. A lawfully established use of land, building or structure which is not a permitted use in the zoning district in which it is located, as set forth in article II, is nonconforming by use. 
4.  Nonconforming by dimension. A lawfully established building, structure or parcel of land not in compliance with the dimensional regulations of this ordinance is nonconforming by dimension. Dimensional regulations include all regulations of this ordinance, other than those pertaining to the permitted uses. A lawfully established building, structure, parcel of land or use thereof, not in compliance with the parking regulations of this ordinance, as set forth in article V (parking and loading), also nonconforming by dimension. A lawfully existing or lawfully established lot that is not in compliance with the dimensional regulations of the zoning ordinance including, but not limited to, those regulations for minimum lot size, lot width and lot frontage, (also known as a substandard lot of record) is also nonconforming by dimension. 
5.  Nonconforming by dwelling unit. A building or structure containing more dwelling units than are permitted by the use regulations of this ordinance shall be nonconforming by use. A building or structure containing a permitted number of dwelling units by the use regulations of the zoning ordinance, but not meeting the lot area per dwelling unit regulations, shall be nonconforming by dimension. 
6.  Most restrictive regulations to apply. A building, structure or parcel of land nonconforming by more than one factor, such as by use, dimension, area or parking, shall comply with all regulations of this section. Where the regulations conflict, the most restrictive regulations shall apply. 
7.  Existence by variance or special use permit. A nonconforming building, structure, sign or parcel of land, or the use thereof, which exists by virtue of a variance or a special use permit (or a special exception) granted by the board, shall not be considered a nonconformance for the purposes of this section, and shall not acquire the rights of this section. Rather, such building, structure, sign, parcel of land, or use thereof, shall be considered a use by variance or a use by special use permit and any moving, addition, enlargement, expansion, intensification or change of such building, structure, sign, parcel of land or use thereof, to any use other than a permitted use or other than in complete conformance with this ordinance, shall require a further variance or special use permit from the board. 
(Amd. of 3-3-03, § 6) 
Sec. 3.2. - Building or structure nonconforming by use. 
    Nonconforming uses are incompatible with and detrimental to permitted uses in the zoning districts in which they are located. Nonconforming uses cause disruption of the comprehensive land use pattern of the town, inhibit present and future development of nearby properties, and confer upon their owners a position of unfair advantage. It is intended that existing nonconforming uses shall not justify further departures from this ordinance for themselves, or for any other properties. 
1.  Treatment in residential zones (RE-2, RU-3, RU-4, CR-5.) Nonconforming uses in residential zones are to be treated in a stricter fashion than nonconforming uses located in nonresidential zones. Due to the disruption which nonconforming uses cause to the peace and tranquility of a residential zoning, nonconforming uses therein should be eventually abolished or reduced to total conformity over time. 
2.  Continuance of use. Nothing in this ordinance shall prevent or be construed to prevent the continuance of a nonconforming use of any building or structure for any purpose to which such building or structure was lawfully established. 
3.  Maintenance and repair. A building or structure containing a nonconforming use may be maintained and repaired except as otherwise provided in this section. 
4.  Moving. A building or structure containing a nonconforming use shall not be moved, in whole or in part, either on or off the lot on which it is located unless the use contained within such building or structure is made to conform to the use regulations of the zone in which it is relocated. 
5.  Addition and enlargement. A building or structure containing a nonconforming use shall not be added to or enlarged in any manner, including any addition or enlargement of floor area or volume, unless the use contained within such building or structure, including such addition and enlargement, is made to conform to the use regulations of the zone in which it is located. 
6.  Expansion. A nonconforming use of a building or structure shall not be expanded into any other portion of the building or structure which contains a conforming use or which is unoccupied or unused. 
7.  Intensification. A nonconforming use of a building, structure or land shall not be intensified in any manner. Intensification shall include, but not be limited to, increasing hours of operation, increasing the number of dwelling units or increasing the seating capacity of a place of assembly. However, this section shall not prohibit the reconfiguration of existing dwelling units within a building or structure so long as reconfiguration complies with the requirements of subsection 6 and section II. 
A.  The above paragraph[s] 5, 6 and 7 would be allowed under a special use permit as designated in article I, section 3-F. 
8.  Change of use: 
A.  Residential zones (RE-2, RU-3, RU-4 and CR-5). Within any residential zone, a nonconforming use shall only be changed to a permitted use or to the same actual use. A nonconforming use, if changed to a permitted use, may not be changed back to a nonconforming use. 
B.  Nonresidential zones. Within any nonresidential zone, a nonconforming use may be changed to a permitted use, or to the same use code listed under article II. A nonconforming use, if changed to a permitted use, may not be changed back to a nonconforming use. 
9.  Abandonment. If a nonconforming use is abandoned, it may not be reestablished. Abandonment of a nonconforming use shall consist of some overt act, or failure to act, which would lead one to believe that the owner of the nonconforming use neither claims nor retains any interest in continuing the nonconforming use, unless the owner can demonstrate an intent not to abandon the use. An involuntary interruption of nonconforming use, such as by fire and natural catastrophe, does not establish the intent to abandon the nonconforming use. However, if any nonconforming use is halted for a period of one year or more, the owner of the nonconforming use will be presumed to have abandoned the nonconforming use, unless that presumption is rebutted by the presentation of sufficient evidence or intent not to abandon the use. 
Sec. 3.3. - Building or structure nonconforming by dimension. 
    Buildings or structures that are nonconforming by dimension are likely to cause overcrowding and congestion in the neighborhoods, contribute to unhealthy conditions and are contrary to the purposes of this ordinance. Building or structures that are nonconforming by dimension cause disruption of the comprehensive land use pattern of the town, inhibit present and future development of nearby properties and confer upon their owners a position of unfair advantage. It is intended that existing buildings or structures that are nonconforming by dimension shall not justify further departures from this ordinance for themselves or for any other property. 
1.  Continuance. Nothing in this ordinance shall prevent or be construed to prevent the continuance of the use of any building or structure nonconforming by dimension for any purpose to which such building or structure was lawfully established. 
2.  Maintenance and repair. A building or structure nonconforming by dimension may be maintained and repaired except as otherwise provided in this section. 
3.  Moving. A building or structure which is nonconforming by dimension shall not be moved, in whole or in part, to any other location on the lot in which it is located, unless every portion of such building or structure is made to conform to all of the dimensional requirements of the zone in which it is located. 
4.  Addition and enlargement. A building or structure nonconforming by dimension shall not be added to or enlarged in any manner, unless such addition or enlargement conforms to all the dimensional regulations of the zone in which the building or structure is located. 
5.  Expansion. A conforming use within a building or structure which is nonconforming by dimension (other than by lot area per dwelling unit) may be expanded into any other portion of the building or structure which is unoccupied or unused. 
6.  Intensification. A conforming use within a building or structure which is nonconforming by dimension may be intensified, provided that such intensification is in conformance with the use and lot area per dwelling unit regulations, if applicable, for the zone in which it is located. 
7.  Change in use. A conforming use within a building or structure which is nonconforming by dimension may be changed to any other conforming use. 
8.  Demolition. A building or structure nonconforming by dimension, if voluntarily demolished, shall not be reconstructed, unless it conforms with the dimensional regulations of the zone in which it is located. Such voluntary demolition shall be considered an abandonment of the use. If such building or structure is involuntarily demolished, destroyed or damaged, it may be repaired or rebuilt to the same size and dimension as previously existed. 
Sec. 3.4. - Land nonconforming by use. 
1.  Continuance. The lawfully established nonconforming use of land, where no building is involved, may be continued, provided that no such nonconforming use of land shall in any way be expanded or intensified either on the same or adjoining property. 
2.  Change of use. The nonconforming use of land shall not be changed to a different use, unless such use conforms to the use regulations of the zone in which it is located. 
Sec. 3.5. - Land nonconforming by area. 
1.  Enlargement of undersized lots. Lawfully established lots which have less than the minimum area requirements, may be maintained and may be changed by adding additional land to such lots without prejudice to the rights of the owner of such lots pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
2.  Merger of abutting nonconforming lots. If two or more abutting nonconforming lots are held in the same ownership at any time after May 2, 1977, such lots shall be combined for the purposes of this ordinance in order to conform or more nearly conform to any of the dimensional requirements of this ordinance for the district in which the lots are located, and such lots shall not be sold separately. 
3.  Subdivision of merged lots. A lot which has been created by the merger of two or more nonconforming lots, may be subdivided or combined with other lots and subdivided, provided that approval is given by the planning board, and provided that the following requirements are met: 
A.  In all zones, [in] which any portion of the lot is within the groundwater overlay protection district, all dimensional requirements for the zone including, without limitation, area, frontage and lot width, shall be met. 
B.  In the RE-2 zone, all dimensional requirements for the zone including, without limitation, area, frontage and lot width, shall be met. 
C.  In all other residential zoned districts all dimensional requirements for the zone including, without limitation, area, frontage and lot width, shall be met. 
4.  Residential use of nonconforming lots. In any district in which dwellings are permitted, a dwelling may be erected, enlarged or altered on a nonconforming lot or on two or more abutting nonconforming lots, subject to the following: 
A.  Where such lot or lots contain less than two acres of land, or have less than 150 feet of frontage, it shall be necessary for the owner thereof to receive from the zoning board of review a dimensional variance in order to construct a new dwelling thereon; and the zoning board of review shall designate the maximum size of the dwelling to be placed thereon and its location on said lot or lots and any other conditions it deems reasonably necessary to promote the purposes of this ordinance. 
B.  Where there is an existing dwelling on a nonconforming lot prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any amendment thereto, such dwelling may be enlarged or altered without approval from the zoning board of review being necessary, provided that such alteration or enlargement complies with front and corner side yard, side yard and rear yard requirements of article II, dimensional regulations for the district in which such lot is located. 
C.  Any vacant lot in a residence district or any existing dwelling on a lot in a residence district made nonconforming by the adoption of this ordinance or by the adoption of the predecessor to this ordinance on May 2, 1977, may be built upon, enlarged or altered after the effective date of such ordinance, provided that the construction, alteration or enlargement complies with the front and corner side yard, side yard and rear yard requirements of article II, dimensional regulations for the district in which such lot was formerly located, provided that the requirements of subsection V-2 (merger of abutting nonconforming lots) are met, if applicable. 
(Amd. of 3-3-03, § 7) 
Sec. 3.6. - Buildings and structure nonconforming by parking. 
    A building or structure is considered nonconforming by parking if the lawfully established use of the building or structure does not meet the parking requirements of article V (off-street parking and loading). 
1.  Addition enlargement; expansion and intensification. Any building or structure, nonconforming by parking, may not be added to, enlarged, expanded or intensified, unless brought into full compliance with the parking requirements of article V (off-street parking and loading), such that sufficient parking is provided for the entire structure including the original portion and the addition, enlargement, expansion or intensification. 
2.  Change of use. A building or structure, nonconforming by parking, may be enlarged to a different use other than residential use, pursuant to all other provisions of this ordinance, provided that such new use meets the following parking requirements. The number of additional parking spaces required shall be the difference between the number of spaces required for the proposed use and the number of spaces required for the previous use. In the event that the new use requires less parking spaces than the previous use, no additional parking spaces need be supplied. However, none of the existing parking spaces shall be eliminated unless the total number of spaces required by this ordinance for the new use are provided. 
ARTICLE IV. - SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS 

Sec. 4.1. - Accessory buildings and uses. 
    Accessory buildings and uses as defined in article I, section 1.2, (2) and (3) include, but are not limited to, home occupations, accessory dwelling units, private garages, barns, carports, vehicle storage, recreational vehicle storage, boat and RV storage, outbuildings, greenhouses, swimming pools or any other structure. Accessory buildings and uses are subject to all the requirements of this ordinance, except as specifically provided for by this subsection as follows: 
1.  Accessory buildings and uses, residential: accessory buildings and uses, including private garages, in a Residential District (RE-2, RU-3, RU-4 and CR-5) are permitted which: 
A.  Are clearly incidental to and customarily associated with the principal use. An accessory use shall not be permitted or continued without the principal use to which it is related. 
B.  Are operated and maintained under the same ownership and on the same lot as the principal use. 
C.  Do not exceed 20 feet in height for detached buildings except for barns. 
D.  Do not contain any dwelling units. 
2.  Location of accessory buildings and uses: A building or use accessory to a dwelling shall not be located within any required front, corner, side, or rear yard setback. 
3.  Drive-thru facility. Drive-thru facilities may be allowed by special permit as an accessory use, where customary for otherwise permitted uses in the B (business), LB/R (light business/residential), and light industrial (LI) zones, and provided the following requirements are met. 
A.  The minimum lot area for a building with a drive-thru shall be 40,000 square feet. 
B.  A special use permit is granted by the zoning board of review. 
C.  Development plan review is obtained from the planning board. 
D.  A minimum stacking before window of 12 cars, and stacking for three cars after window. All stacking area must be contained on private property. Stacking is defined as queuing space for vehicles that is dedicated for this purpose only, and does not conflict with any other traffic movements. 
E.  Limit to one lane for stacking (except for banks). A by-pass lane must also be provided on site. All drive-thru windows shall be located on the side or rear of buildings. They shall not be located on the front. 
F.  Drive-thru facilities must be designed so that they avoid creating traffic hazards for vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
G.  A menu board not to exceed 32 square feet in area and not more than eight feet in height (as measured from ground level) be allowed, provided the same is not located in the front yard. 
(Amd. of 9-6-05; Amd. of 5-1-06) 
Sec. 4.2. - Home occupations. 
    The Town of Exeter recognized the need for some citizens to use their place of residence for limited nonresidential activities. Recent studies have shown that most of the businesses in town are small, employing less than four people, and that many of these businesses are home-based occupations. While the town wishes to encourage minor home-based activities, it also recognizes that the need to protect the integrity of its residential areas is of paramount concern. Therefore, the following criteria have been established to allow for home occupations that are compatible with the neighborhood in which they are located. 
    Criteria. Providing that all the following conditions are met, no permit is required for home occupations and a license is automatically granted by the Town of Exeter. However, all such commercial or business activities are required to register with the town. 
1.  No employment or help other than the residents of the dwelling and two assisting nonresident employees. Anything greater should be a special use. 
2.  Shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling unit and in no way shall the appearance of the structure be altered or the occupation within the residence be conducted in a manner which would cause the premises to differ from its residential character either by the use of colors, materials, construction, lighting, signs, or the emission of sounds, noises or vibrations. 
3.  Shall not utilize more than 25 percent of the gross floor area in the dwelling unit or not more than 500 square feet. 
4.  No outdoor use of material or equipment not recognized as being part of the normal practices in the residential district. 
5.  No storage or display of materials, goods, supplies or equipment related to the operation of a home occupation shall be visible from outside the premises. 
6.  No material, equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which is hazardous to public health, safety, morals or welfare, or which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the premises, if the occupation is conducted in a single-family residence, or outside the dwelling unit in other than a single-family residence. In case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises. 
7.  There shall be no use of utilities or community facilities beyond that normal to the use of the premises for residential purposes. 
8.  Customers visits or deliveries of products, merchandise or materials to or from the premises shall not exceed that normally and reasonably occurring for a residence. 
9.  The use shall not generate pedestrian or vehicular traffic beyond what is normal to the residential area. 
10.  With zoning board approval: 
a.  Barber shop, beauty salon, massage parlor. 
b.  Boarding, lodge or bed and breakfast or more than five rooms. 
c.  Health care provider, medical, dental, animal grooming facilities. 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18. 
Sec. 4.3. - Accessory dwelling unit. 
1.  In a light business/residential (LB/R) and business (B) district, one accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted on a lot in a commercial building which is permitted by right or special use permit in article 2, zoning use table, provided that any such accessory dwelling unit: 
A.  Shall be maintained entirely within a structure containing the principal use. 
B.  Shall be occupied only by the owner or employee of the principal business use. 
C.  Shall utilize not more than 1,000 square feet. 
D.  Shall not permit boarders. 
E.  Has no more than two bedrooms. 
2.  In any residential (RE-2, RU-3, RU-4, CR-5) districts, one accessory family dwelling unit, as defined in article I, section 1.2(2), shall be permitted on a lot in a principal residential structure only provided that any such accessory family dwelling unit: 
A.  Shall only be located on a lot that complies with the plat area regulations of the district in which it is located. 
B.  Shall not have a separate entrance to the structure servicing only the accessory family dwelling unit. 
C.  Shall not be larger than 600 square feet, or 30 percent of the gross floor area of the entire building, whichever is smaller. 
D.  Shall only be occupied by a family member, including by birth, adoption or marriage, of the principal occupant of the structure. 
E.  Shall not have separate utility connections and service. 
F.  Shall require a certificate of occupancy to be issued, by the building official, who may require adequate supporting documentation to prove that all of the conditions herein have been satisfied. The certificate of occupancy shall state on its face that its validity is limited to the named owner or occupant only, and that any subsequent owner or occupant will be required to apply for a new certificate. This permit shall be approved by the building inspector on a yearly basis. 
Sec. 4.4. - Swimming pools. 
    A swimming pool shall conform to the appropriate side, front and rear yard requirements of the particular residence district in which it is located. The installation or construction of any swimming pool shall require a building permit, except those pools that do not require pumps. Swimming pools are subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Swimming pools having a depth of 24 inches or more located in a residence district shall comply with the following conditions: 
A.  A plan of the lot indicating the allowable accessory use portions thereof within which the pool is to be located must be submitted with the application. 
B.  Pool dimensions, depth and volume in gallons must be submitted with the application. 
C.  When a filter system and motor is to be used, a site plan showing the location of the pool and filtering system shall be submitted. 
D.  Every outdoor swimming pool shall be completely surrounded by a fence or wall of not less than five feet in height, which shall be so constructed as not to have openings, holes or gaps larger than four inches in any dimension except for doors and gates; and if a picket fence is erected or maintained, the horizontal dimensions shall not exceed four inches. A dwelling, accessory building or the walls of an aboveground pool, may be used as part of such enclosure, provided that the required height of five feet [shall] be maintained. All gate and door openings through such enclosure shall be equipped with a self-latching device for keeping the gate or door securely closed at all times when not in actual use, except that the door of any dwelling or accessory building which forms a part of the enclosure need not be so equipped. Ladders or similar means of entry shall be detached or made inaccessible when the pool is not in actual use. 
E.  Whenever a light is installed for evening swimming, it shall be faced and directed away from abutting property and properly shielded. 
Sec. 4.5. - Operating standards for all uses. 
    All uses in all zoning districts shall be subject to the following operating standards. To ensure compliance, detailed plans may be required by the building official, at his/her discretion, before the issuance of a building permit. 
1.  Noise and vibration. All noise and vibration from machinery or other sources shall be muffled, insulated or screened in a manner which will minimize vibration or deflect sound waves from abutting lots. 
2.  Glare, light and heat. The emission of glare, light (interior or exterior) or heat shall be shielded in a manner which will minimize such emission beyond the lot where such use is located. 
3.  Odor, smoke, dust or other emission. The emission of odor, smoke, gas, dust or other emissions in concentrations or amounts that are noxious, toxic, corrosive or a nuisance shall not be permitted. 
4.  Waste. Individual sewage disposal systems shall be approved by the Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management before the issuance of a building permit. 
5.  Storm[water] and surface water drainage. All storm[water] and surface water drainage systems shall be approved by the Town of Exeter planning board, before the issuance of a building permit. All runoff shall be provided for on-site. In no instance shall there be any net increase in runoff, nor shall any additional runoff be discharged onto abutting lots or into any freshwater wetlands, as defined in article I, section 1.2 of this ordinance. Storm drainage systems shall be designed by a Rhode Island licensed engineer in accordance with the Rhode Island Stormwater Design and Installation Standards Manual, as amended. 
6.  Public safety. The location of all buildings, structures, parking, driveways, loading areas and the number, location, size and adequate supply of water shall be approved by the appropriate Town of Exeter fire department before the issuance of a building permit, and subject to the following requirements regarding internal streets, roadways and parking: 
A.  All corners shall provide a turning radius of 41 feet. 
B.  All fire access lanes shall provide a minimum of 24 feet of unobstructed width to allow for access by emergency vehicles. 
C.  The fire chiefs (Fire Company # 1 and Fire Company # 2) shall have the authority to require the posting of all fire lanes. 
D.  There shall be no architectural, landscaping or natural barriers to prevent adequate access to any building by an emergency vehicle. 
E.  The fire chiefs (Fire Company # 1 and Fire Company # 2) shall have the authority to require compliance with at least a 10,000 gallon underground water tank, as per the land development and subdivision regulations. 
F.  This section must be in keeping with G.L. 1956, chapter 23-28. 
Sec. 4.6. - Mixed use commercial development 
    In all business (B) districts, and light business/residential (LB/R) districts, multi-family residential uses shall be allowed only upon the issuance of a special use permit from the zoning board of review and development plan review approval by the planning board, and only under the conditions set forth herein. The purpose of allowing mixed use commercial developments is to create diverse housing opportunities in the town, and in particular, for the purpose of addressing the need for affordable housing as defined in the town affordable housing plan. Use of this regulation shall be considered a municipal subsidy for the purpose of creating affordable housing for low and moderate income persons in a manner and location otherwise prohibited by these regulations. Such residential units in mixed use commercial developments are proposed in locations in close proximity to essential services such as typically provided in commercial developments. 
1.  Residential units in mixed use commercial developments shall consist of studio, one- and two-bedroom apartments and should range in size between 600 and 1,250 square feet of gross floor area. 
2.  Residential units in mixed use commercial developments shall be constructed on the second or third floor of otherwise permitted first floor commercial uses. Ground floor units shall be allowed for persons of special needs, provided that these units do not constitute more than ten percent of the overall area of the residential units constructed. 
3.  Mixed use commercial developments containing residential units shall only be allowed in association with commercial structures of 3,000 square feet and greater. 
4.  Mixed use commercial developments must have at a minimum one acre of land per each residential unit proposed. 
5.  A minimum of 20 percent of the number of residential units, and a minimum of 20 percent of the floor area of the residential units, must be deed restricted for a minimum of 30 years for the occupancy of persons of low and moderate income (LMI) as defined in the town affordable housing plan. In no event shall a mixed use commercial development be permitted without a minimum of one LMI unit. While a mix of incomes is encouraged, in no case shall more than 50 percent of the LMI units created be for persons of income greater than 80 percent AMI. 
6.  In no event shall the floor area of the residential units exceed the floor area of the commercial space associated with the mixed use commercial development. 
7.  All mixed use commercial developments shall be subject to the requirements of section 2.5 of this ordinance, including the residential portion of the development. Parking shall be provided for the residential units as required in section 5.1 of this ordinance. 
8.  Applications for mixed use commercial developments must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the planning board that the site has the capacity (not limited to but including water, septic, parking, and circulation) to accommodate the proposed residential development. 
9.  All residential units of mixed use commercial developments shall be accessed from enclosed or interior walkways. All such walkways shall be provided with an enclosed main entranceway for the residential portion of the development. Such entranceways shall be at a minimum eight feet long and six feet wide and shall have two doors, an exterior door and an interior door. Between the two doors shall be common space for uses such as mailboxes, delivery of packages, etc. Elevators are encouraged. 
(Ord. of 8-7-06, § 3) 
[Sec. 4.7. - Reserved.] 
Sec. 4.8. - Exeter and North Kingstown transfer of development rights. 
A.  Purpose. The transfer of development rights program, TDR, is a tool for the preservation of farmland and/or open space. It allows a community to encourage development toward land that is appropriate for development, and away from land that should be preserved. The purpose of the TDR sending area is to further the preservation of open space and/or farmlands located in Exeter. As the Towns of Exeter and North Kingstown have already taken extraordinary steps to preserve the farm land now or formerly known as the Bald Hill Nursery, and as this property serves as a gateway, it is the intent of Exeter to secure the development rights of the so called "retained ten acre parcel" (see attached Appendix A) by the use of this ordinance. 
B.  Applicability. This section, 4.8, applies to any properties targeted for preservation in Exeter which are included in the Exeter Zoning Map Transfer of Development Rights Sending Area(s) Overlay zone. The intent and purpose of this ordinance is set forth in the memorandum of agreement (appendix B). 
C.  Process. The process identified and defined under this section allows for the transfer of development rights from the sending area in Exeter, to a receiving area in North Kingstown. As such, this process is also subject to the requirements of the North Kingstown Ordinance XXIII Transfer of Development Rights (TDR). The Town of Exeter may issue a letter of yield certification. 
D.  Definitions. 
1.  Sending area(s). This is the area identified on the TDR overlay of the Exeter Zoning Map as sending area(s). 
2.  Certificates of development rights. Upon the approval of a master plan by the Exeter Planning Board, the North Kingstown Planning Commission may authorize the issuance of a certificate of development rights from the director of planning provided that no appeal is filed during the appropriate appeal period. 
3.  Receiving area. This is the area(s) in North Kingstown identified by the North Kingstown Code of Ordinances Article XXIII, chapter 21-622(2) as the North Kingstown receiving area(s). 
4.  Receiving parcel. The parcel or parcels of land within the receiving area that development rights are being transferred to, except however, under this ordinance, no receiving parcel is to be located within 1,000 feet of the sending parcel. 
5.  Deed restrictions. Restrictions placed on the sending parcel deed as part of the transfer of development rights process. 
6.  Retained rights. These are the rights and/or the uses of the sending area parcel that are retained by the land owner after transferring the development rights of the parcel. These retained rights shall be defined in the deed restrictions submitted with the master plan application. 
7.  Sending parcel. The parcel of land within the sending area from which development rights are being transferred from. 
8.  Transfer of development rights. This is the process of selling or otherwise transferring the development rights of one parcel (sending parcel) to another parcel (receiving parcel) to allow for greater or more intense development of the receiving parcel and to provide for preservation of the open space/farmland at the sending parcel. As part of this process, the sending parcel agrees to restrict future development to the retained rights as defined in the deed restrictions. 
9.  Yield. The maximum number and size of buildings, building lots, or dwelling units that could reasonably be built on a parcel of land under current zoning, taking into account physical constraints to development such as wetlands. 
10.  Letter of yield certification. A letter from the Exeter Planning Board certifying the potential yield of a sending area parcel. 
E.  Procedure. 
1.  Application. An application for TDR under this section shall be received by the planning board in the Town of Exeter for confirmation of consistency to this section and procedural and substantive relevant sections of the land development and subdivision regulations. Said application shall contain a plan that meets the requirements for a master plan for the sending parcel as defined in the Town of Exeter Land Development and Subdivision Regulations for conventional major land developments. A pre-application meeting is required. 
2.  Deed restrictions. In addition to the other requirements spelled out in the Exeter Land Development and Subdivision Regulations, the master plan application shall include draft copies of the deed restrictions defining the retained rights and prohibitions for the sending parcel after the transfer of development rights. All deed restrictions shall, at a minimum, meet the requirements of the North Kingstown Ordinance XXIII Transfer of Development Rights (TDR). Approval of the deed restrictions shall be within the discretion of the Exeter Planning Board. 
3.  Yield. The Exeter Planning Board will review the master plan application and determine a practical yield plan based on current zoning, the requirements of the Exeter Land Development and Subdivision Regulations, and the Exeter Zoning Ordinance. Once the yield plan and the draft restrictive covenants are approved, the Exeter Planning Board will provide a letter of yield certification to the applicant. The letter of yield certification is valid for a period of one year, but can be extended due to good cause. 
4.  Certificate of development rights. The applicant shall submit the letter of yield certification from the Exeter Planning Board to the North Kingstown Planning Commission for review and possible approval, and for issuance of a certificate of development rights by the North Kingstown Planning Director. Approval of the certificate of development rights is at the discretion of the North Kingstown Planning Commission and the planning director. No certificates may be issued until and unless, deed restrictions approved by the Exeter Planning Board and the planning board solicitor, have been recorded in the North Kingstown and the Exeter Town Halls. 
5.  Sale and/or development. Sale of the development rights and/or development using the development rights shall follow all regulations and procedures specified for TDR in the North Kingstown ordinances and the North Kingstown Subdivisions and Land Development Regulations. 
6.  Appeals process. Appeal of any decision from the Exeter Planning Board with regard to this ordinance shall be done in the manner specified in the Land Development and Subdivision Regulations Section 10.0. 
(Ord. of 12-6-10) 
ARTICLE V. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Parking, stopping and standing generally, § 46-91 et seq. 

Sec. 5.1. - Off-street parking facilities. 
A.  No land shall be used or occupied and no structure shall be erected or used unless the off-street parking spaces required herein are provided. Such parking spaces are not required for any structure or use existing prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any amendment thereto this ordinance; provided, however, that parking spaces, as specified in this ordinance, shall be provided, subject to the requirements of article IV for any enlargement, alteration or change to any such existing structure or use. The following are the maximum number of parking spaces required: 
1.  Dwellings: Two spaces for each unit. 
2.  Hotels, motels and lodginghouses: Two parking spaces for each unit or room to be rented. (If [a] restaurant is included, see # [subsection] 5 of this section.) 
3.  Office uses: One parking space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area, plus one parking space for each employee. 
4.  Hospital, nursing homes or other institutions: One parking space for every two beds, plus one parking space for every employee. 
5.  Restaurant, theater, country clubs, golf courses, churches or other places of public assembly or use: One parking space for every four seats or for every four persons of capacity. One parking space for every employee. 
6.  Retail or personal service business: One parking space for every 300 square feet of floor area devoted to sales. 
7.  Manufacturing, industrial, storage or wholesale use: One parking space for every employee and one parking space for every truck operated by the company at maximum employment level. 
8.  Handicapped parking: Handicapped parking requirements shall conform to the Rhode Island State Building Code, section 14-16, as amended. 
9.  The planning board shall determine parking standards for any use not defined above. 
10.  Any use requiring in excess of 125 parking spaces shall apply to the zoning board of review for [a] special use permit. 
B.  Construction requirements exempting single-family dwellings: 
1.  In allocating area for off-street parking facilities, each parking space shall have a minimum width of nine feet, a minimum length of 18 feet, and shall be served by suitable aisles to permit access into all parking spaces. In no case shall the gross area per parking space be less than 300 square feet. 
2.  Such parking area shall be treated with impervious or pervious surfacing materials and shall have appropriate bumper or wheel guards, where needed. However, pervious materials or surfacing approved by the planning board is encouraged within 200 feet of any freshwater wetlands and within the groundwater protection district as regulated by the Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management (RIDEM). 
3.  The interior of parking areas shall be suitably landscaped and maintained with trees, shrubs, vegetation or other live vegetative ground cover. Standards shall be in accordance with the standards contained in the town's subdivision regulations. 
4.  No parking shall be within a front yard setback which will be left in a vegetative state. 
5.  All lights or lighting fixtures used to illuminate said parking area shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining premises and streets by means of shielding or similar manner. 
6.  Entrances and exit[s] for each parking area shall be signed with adequate off-street area[s] for approach, turning and exit without the need of ability to use any part of a street. All driveways shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width for each lane of traffic using such driveway. However, the width of any driveway shall not exceed 30 feet. No driveway shall be within 20 feet of another driveway. 
7.  No parking space or aisle shall be less than ten feet from any side or rear yard property line and no parking space or aisle shall be less than five feet from any building. Parking spaces less than ten feet from any building shall be separated from such building by raised curb, bumper or wheel guards. The equipment of this subsection shall not be applied to detached single-family dwellings. 
8.  Where a parking facility lies within or adjoins a residential district, an opaque fence or a double row compact evergreen screen not less than six feet in height shall be erected or planted and maintained between the parking facility and any adjoining residential district. 
C.  All parking plans for any structure other than a residential single-family dwelling must be presented to the planning board for approval. 
D.  There shall be no parking or storage of commercial registered vehicles containing the weight of over 20,000 GVW (gross vehicle weight) in any residential zone except for the storage of farm vehicles. The parking or storage of said commercial vehicles shall not be parked within any front yard setback. 
E.  The storage and parking of recreational vehicles in a residential district which is owned by an occupant, including travel trailers, pickup trucks, campers, tent trailers, motor homes, boats and boat trailers shall be governed by the following requirements: 
1.  No such recreational vehicle, while parked or stored in any district, shall be used for permanent living or housekeeping purposes for more than one week. 
2.  No such recreational vehicle shall be stored in required front yard area nor closer than 20 feet to a side or rear lot line. 
3.  No such recreational vehicle shall be stored outdoors unless in condition for its intended function or can be brought to functional condition within a six-month period. 
4.  Overnight parking of buses. Overnight parking of buses shall not be permitted in a residential (RE-2, RU-3, RU-4, CR-5) district. 
(Ord. of 1-6-03(2), §§ 1-3) 
Sec. 5.2. - Off-street loading requirements. 
A.  Off-street loading specifications: 
1.  For each nonresidential use of structure under 1,000 square feet of gross floor area or ground area in which commodities are sold, displayed, repaired, serviced, fabricated or altered as the principal use of the land or buildings; off-street loading space of no less than 300 square feet of area shall be provided. 
2.  For each use of over 1,000 square feet of gross floor area or land area devoted to such use, one off-street loading space at least 60 feet in length and 12 feet in width shall be provided with a minimum overhead clearance of no less than 14 feet. 
3.  Additional off-street loading space may be required by the planning board when deemed necessary to provide adequate off-street loading space to serve the intended use. 
B.  Location of off-street loading space: Required off-street loading space shall be on the site of the principal use or on a contiguous site and shall be designed to prevent intrusion of loading or unloading vehicles into any street or sidewalk during loading or unloading. In no case shall any of the required off-street loading space be part of the area used to fulfill the off-street parking requirement associated with the intended use of the land or structure. 
ARTICLE VI. - SIGNS 

Sec. 6.1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to promote and protect the public health, welfare and safety by regulating existing and proposed outdoor advertising, outdoor advertising signs and outdoor signs of all types. It is intended to protect property values, create a more attractive economic and business climate, enhance and protect the physical appearance of the community and preserve the scenic and natural beauty of designated areas. It is further intended to reduce sign or advertising distraction and obstructions that may contribute to traffic accidents, reduce hazards that may be caused by unsafe signs, provide more open space, curb the deterioration of the natural environment and enhance community development. 
Sec. 6.2. - Definitions. 
    As used in this section, unless otherwise expressly stated in this ordinance, the following definitions shall apply: 
A.  Sign. The term "sign" shall mean any permanent or temporary device, reproduction, material or structure which is: freestanding, attached to a building or structure or erected, painted, represented or reproduced inside or outside any building, structure or natural object, including window display areas, which displays, reproduces or includes any lettered or pictorial matter, which is used to identify the premises or occupant or owner of the premises; to advertise any product or item; to advertise the sale, rental or use of all or part of any premises or item, including that upon which it is displayed; to direct vehicular or pedestrian traffic other than public highway markers; and shall also include any announcement, demonstration, display, illustration or insignia used to advertise or promote the interests of any persons or business when the same is placed in view of the general public. In no event shall the word "sign" be construed to mean any sign in the interior of any structure, not visible from the outside, unless specifically set forth in this ordinance. Excluded from this definition also are pavement markings or driveway directional arrows painted on the ground, which contain no advertising. 
B.  Sign, illuminated. A sign designed to give forth artificial light from an artificial source in such a manner as to be an integral part of the construction of the sign, including neon signs and signs illuminated from within. 
C.  Sign, indirectly illuminated. A sign illuminated with an artificial light directed primarily toward such sign from an exterior source. 
D.  Sign, wall-mounted. A sign erected against, painted on or attached to the wall of any building or structure (except a freestanding sign support) including signs affixed to fences, screens and freestanding walls. 
E.  Sign, roof-mounted. A sign placed upon the roof of any building or portion thereof, or erected on a vertical framework supported by the roof of a building, except such signs which are an integral part of the construction or architecture of a building. 
F.  Sign, freestanding. A sign supported by a pole, uprights, braces or frame on the ground and not supported by any wall, building or similar structure. 
G.  Sign accessory. Any sign related to a business or profession conducted, or a commodity or service sold or offered upon the premises where such a sign is located. 
H.  Sign trailer. A sign which is mounted or designed for mounting on wheels, or which is mounted or designed for mounting on a self-propelled or towed vehicle. Such signs shall include, but not be limited to, mobile advertising signs attached to a truck, chassis, detachable vehicular trailer or other such mobile signs, but shall not include signs painted or otherwise inscribed on a self-propelled vehicle or towed vehicle which identify the product, service or any activity for which the vehicle is used, unless the principal use of such vehicle is for advertising purposes. 
I.  Sign, portable. Any sign not attached to a building or structure or attached to the ground and which is capable of being placed upon various locations on a lot. Such signs shall include, but are not limited to, A-frame signs, gasoline price per gallon signs, temporary announcement signs, trailers signs and the like. 
J.  Sign, projecting. A sign erected so as to project approximately perpendicular from the exterior of any building or wall. 
K.  Sign, off-site directional. Any sign giving directions to the location of any use or activity not located upon the property upon which the sign is erected, and which may contain only the name of the use and necessary information giving directions to the use; provided, however, that no advertising shall be contained in such sign. 
L.  Sign, off-premises. Any sign or advertising device, including a billboard, which advertises a use or activity not located on, or a product not sold nor manufactured on, the lot on which the sign or device is located. 
M.  Sign, plaza. A grouping of signs in a common location, having a uniform size and materials and regulated by the Town of Exeter in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
N.  Sign, temporary promotional. A display, banner or advertising device constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric, plywood or other light temporary material, with or without a structure frame, intended to promote special sales, free gifts, openings or campaigns. 
O.  Sign, area. Measured in square feet, the entire area within a square, rectangle, circle, triangle or any other polygon enclosing the extreme limits or graphic, writing or similar representation, emblem or any fixture of similar character, together with any frame or other material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the background against which it is placed, excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which such sign is placed. Where a sign has two or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in determining the area of the sign, except that the two such faces are placed back to back and are at no point more than two feet from one another, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area of the one face if the two faces are of equal area, or as the area of the larger face if the two faces are of unequal area. 
P.  Sign, height. Measured in feet, the overall height of a sign is measured from the grade directly below the sign to the highest point of the sign or any of its supports. 
Q.  Sign, setback. Measured in feet from the outermost edge of the sign to the public right-of-way. 
R.  Sign projection over public right-of-way. Measured in feet, perpendicular to the property line, from the property line to the outermost edge of the sign, over any public right-of-way. 
Sec. 6.3. - Signs permitted in zoning district. 
    The following signs are permitted and shall be counted when calculating the quantity of signs permitted and the total allowable sign area; provided, however, that such signs shall conform to all other applicable regulations, and further provided that such signs shall be neither illuminated nor indirectly illuminated, except as otherwise specified herein: 
A.  Name and address, not to include any commercial advertising. Such signs shall not exceed three square feet in area per side, and shall be limited to one such sign per resident, family or use. 
B.  No trespassing sign, or other such signs regulating the use of the property on which it is located, provided such signs do not exceed three square feet in area. 
C.  Bulletin boards, for public or religious institutions when located on the property thereof, provided such signs do not exceed 15 square feet per side and bear no commercial advertising. Such signs may be indirectly illuminated. 
D.  For sale signs, one sign which shall not exceed six square feet in area and which advertise the sale, lease or rental of the real property on which it is located, and which may not be maintained for more than six months. Such signs in place for more than six months shall require a temporary sign permit as specified in section 6.7, item C. 
E.  Instructional or directional signs, identifying on-premises traffic, parking or other functional activity, such as lavatory facilities, telephone sections of a building, entrances, offices, etc., bearing no commercial advertising. There shall be no more than one sign for each applicable activity, and each sign shall not exceed two square feet in area, if wall-mounted, and four square feet if freestanding. Such signs may be illuminated or indirectly illuminated. 
F.  Signs erected by the Town of Exeter, the State of Rhode Island or the United States of America, pursuant to and in discharge of any governmental function, or required by any law, ordinance or governmental regulation. Such signs may be illuminated or directly illuminated. 
G.  Memorial signs or tablets, and signs denoting the date of erection of buildings. Signs denoting the date of erection of building shall be wall-mounted and shall not exceed three square feet in area. 
H.  Signs identifying churches, and places of worship, or certified nonprofit educational institutions when located on the property thereof. Such signs may be indirectly illuminated, and may not exceed 15 square feet in area. 
I.  Election signs or political signs, permitted in all zoning districts, with [the] permission of the landowner. Election or political signs shall be removed within ten days after the election, with the candidate for office or his/her candidacy. Signs are not to exceed 32 square feet. No signs may be posted on trees, utility poles or traffic signs or similar public regulatory markers. 
J.  Accessory signs, incidental to a business or a profession conducted on the premises indicating hours of operation, credit cards, business affiliations, and the like, provided the total area of all such signs for a single business does not exceed two square feet per public entrance (noncumulative) and is wall-mounted at or immediately adjacent to the entrance to the building on the premises. 
K.  The following signs customary and necessary to the operation of gasoline filling stations, wall-mounted signs displayed over individual entrance doors consisting of the words "washing," "lubrication," "repairing," or words of similar import, provided that there shall be not more than one such sign over each entrance, and that the letters of such sign do not exceed ten inches in height; signs which consist of lettering or other insignia which are structural part of a gasoline pump, consisting only of a brand name, lead warning sign and other matter as required by law; one 2.5 square feet per side (maximum) sign indicating price per gallon of gasoline to be attached to the pump; also there may be one sign no larger than eight square feet per side using numbers no larger than 18 inches in height indicating price per gallon of gasoline along highways on which the legal speed limit is less than 35 mph, or one sign no larger than 12 square feet per side using numbers no larger than 18 inches in height indicating price per gallon along highways on which the legal speed limit is 35 mph or more, such sign shall be freestanding and shall have a clearance of at least seven feet from the ground. 
L.  Digital clocks, time temperature clocks, or other clocks which contain no advertising, and which may be illuminated or indirectly illuminated, and may not exceed 20 square feet in surface area. 
M.  Window signs, erected or maintained in the window of a building which are visible from any public or private street or highway, provided such sign shall not occupy more than 30 percent of the area of said window. 
N.  Temporary window signs, erected or maintained in the window of a building, which are visible from any public or private street or highway, provided such sign shall not occupy more than 30 percent of the area of said window, and shall not be in place more than 30 days. 
O.  Awning signs, less than ten square feet in area, not to exceed one such awning sign per use. 
P.  Sale of produce raised on land, signs shall be no larger than 12 square feet per side, or two signs no larger than six square feet each per side, and shall not be lighted in any manner. 
Q.  Signs notifying the public of an application pending before the planning board as provided in the land development and subdivision regulations. 
(Amd. of 10-5-04) 
Sec. 6.4. - Signs prohibited in all zoning districts. 
    The following signs shall not be permitted in any zoning district: 
A.  Signs which have visible moving parts, including signs which are designed to achieve movement by action of wind currents, or which have mobile or revolving parts or which have animated parts (except time or temperature devices); provided, however, that barber poles, ordinarily and customarily used in connection with the barber shop, are allowed if they comply with all provisions of this ordinance. 
B.  Signs which incorporate in any manner any flashing or moving illumination, animation or illumination which varies in color. 
C.  Any sign or sign support which constitutes a hazard to public safety or health, including signs which by reason of size, location, content, coloring or manner of illumination obstruct the vision of a driver, or obstruct or detract from the visibility or effectiveness of any traffic sign or control device on public streets and roads; or which obstruct free ingress to or egress from a fire escape, door, window or other required exitway; or which make use of words such as "stop", "look," "one-way," "danger," "yield," or any similar words, phrases, symbols, lights or characters, in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic. 
D.  String lights or strung light bulbs are prohibited. However, string lights as a part of decorations associated with recognized legal holidays are permitted for a period not to exceed 30 days. 
E.  Searchlights, pennants, spinners, banners and streamers are prohibited. However, pennants, spinners, banners and streamers associated with events of religious, public or charitable organizations are permitted for a period not to exceed ten days or for new business openings for a period not to exceed three days. 
F.  Projecting signs which are erected so as to project approximately perpendicular from the exterior of any building or wall and which exceed 12 square feet in area, or which project more than four feet from the exterior of said building or wall. Nothing herein shall be construed to permit the erection of any projecting sign over a public way, without the approval of the building inspector. 
G.  Roof-mounted signs, as defined by this ordinance. No allowable roof-mounted sign shall be erected in such a manner as to increase the maximum allowable building height, nor shall any sign project more than 15 feet above the roofline of any building. 
H.  Off-site directional signs, unless otherwise specified in this ordinance. 
I.  Trailer signs or portable signs. 
J.  Off-premises signs, unless otherwise specified in this ordinance. 
K.  Billboard signs as defined herein. 
L.  Illuminated signs as defined herein. 
Sec. 6.5. - Signs in residential zoning districts. 
    All signs in residential zoning districts are permitted at no closer than ten feet from any lot line, front side or rear lot line, and shall conform to the following regulations: 
A.  There shall be no more than one sign, other than a sign identifying the name and address of the occupant as specified in section 6.3(A), for such residential lot. Such signs may identify the premises and/or identify a permitted customary home occupation, including real estate and professional offices in the home, and shall not exceed six square feet per side in area. 
B.  Indirectly illuminated signs in a residential zoning district may be lighted only by a continuous white light, so oriented that it shall reflect the light away from the adjoining property and away from streets. 
C.  Permanent signs at major entrances to residential developments designed only to identify such developments shall be permitted, provided such signs bear no commercial advertising, and do not exceed 15 square feet in area, and shall be maintenance free. 
Sec. 6.6. - Signs in business and industrial district. 
    All signs in commercial and manufacturing districts shall conform to the following regulations: 
A.  Signs in commercial and industrial districts may be either wall-mounted, freestanding or projecting. There shall be no more than one sign for each principal property. 
B.  Signs in business and industrial districts. 
1.  Permitted uses: 
a.  Signs in connection with permitted or lawful nonconforming uses, provided that no sign shall exceed 32 square feet in area without approval of the zoning board of review as a special exception under article I. 
b.  No billboards or outdoor advertising structures, either mobile or stationary, shall be permitted, other than signs. 
2.  Location of signs: 
a.  The maximum height of a freestanding sign shall be 15 feet from ground level. 
b.  In the business and industrial districts no sign shall be placed within 100 feet of any rural, residential, conservation-recreation district, or within the corner triangle described in article II, section 6.7. 
c.  No sign shall be placed within ten feet to a front lot line or 15 feet to a side or rear lot line. 
3.  Lighting of signs: 
a.  Indirectly illuminated signs may be lighted only by a continuous white light. Signs may be lighted only by continuous white light. Floor lighting shall be directed away from adjacent properties and traffic arteries. 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18. 
Sec. 6.7. - Temporary signs. 
    The following temporary signs are allowed in any zoning district, provided that they conform to the following provisions; further provided that they are granted a temporary sign permit as required in section 6.12. Such temporary signs shall be neither illuminated nor indirectly illuminated. 
A.  Temporary signs, customary and necessary in connection with the erection of buildings or other significant construction work, shall be limited to one sign for each construction project, to include only the identification of the project, architect, sponsor or builder. Such signs shall not exceed six square feet in any residential district, 20 square feet in any commercial district, or 30 square feet in any manufacturing district, and shall be removed within ten days after the completion of construction. 
B.  Temporary signs, no larger than 20 square feet which advertise auctions and special events conducted by nonprofit organizations, provided such signs shall not be in place more than 30 days. No more than three signs advertising any such event shall be erected or maintained at any one time within the Town of Exeter. 
C.  Temporary for sale signs which are in place for more than six months, and which advertise in any way the sale, [for] which they are located, shall not exceed six square feet in any commercial district, or 32 square feet in any manufacturing district. No such temporary sign shall be maintained more than ten days after completion of the activity advertised. For subdivisions of ten lots or more, in lieu of individual lot for sale signs, there may be one common sign, not to exceed 32 square feet per side, advertising the property for sale and not to be in place for more than two years. 
Sec. 6.8. - Signs in shopping centers. 
A.  In shopping centers there may be one wall-mounted sign for each use not to exceed one square foot for each lineal foot of the wall or the portion of the building containing the use, and on which the sign is located not to exceed 32 square feet. 
B.  In addition to such wall-mounted signs, there shall be permitted in all business districts, light business/residential districts and light industrial zones as well as shopping centers one common freestanding sign identifying all uses and one menu board sign identifying products available at drive-thru facility. Such freestanding menu signs located in shopping centers shall conform to the following regulations: 
Zoning 
District GFA of 
Shopping 
Center 
(square feet) Maximum 
Area of 
Freestanding 
Sign 
(square feet) Maximum 
Area of 
Menu Baord 
Sign 
(square feet) Maximum 
Height of 
Freestranding and 
Menu Sign 
(feet) B & LI Less than 6,400 32 Freestanding-20 feet high 
Menu Board Sign-8 feet high B & LI 6,400 or more 5 square feet/1,000 GFA, maximum 50 Having a maximum of 32 square feet  
C.  Such signs may be indirectly illuminated in light industrial or business districts. 
D.  No such freestanding sign shall be erected in such a manner as to materially impede vision or obstruct access to or from any public street, sidewalk, driveway, off-street parking or loading facility, or any other access required by this ordinance. 
(Amd. of 5-1-06) 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18. 
Sec. 6.9. - Sign permits. 
    A sign permit shall be required for all signs thereafter erected, installed or replaced, unless specifically exempt by this ordinance. Such permits shall be issued by the zoning inspector and shall be in addition to any other permits required by this or any other ordinance in the town. 
Sec. 6.10. - Application for a sign permit. 
A.  Application for [a] sign permit shall be made in writing on forms prescribed and provided by the zoning inspector. 
B.  In addition to information required on the application form, the following information shall be provided: 
1.  The size of the proposed sign(s), area, height, width, thickness, illumination and material of which is to be constructed. 
2.  A detailed drawing showing the description of the construction details of the sign and showing the lettering and/or pictorial matter composing the sign, position of lighting or other extraneous devices, and support structures. 
3.  A plot plan showing the locations of the sign in relation to the building and all property lines and streets. 
C.  The zoning inspector may require any other such information as may be reasonably necessary to administer the provisions of this ordinance relating to signs. 
Sec. 6.11. - Issuance of permits. 
    If the zoning inspector finds the proposed sign to be in compliance with the ordinance, he shall issue such sign permit within ten days after the filing of the application. 
    If the erection or installation of the sign authorized under such permit has not been started within six months from the date of the issuance of such permit, and diligently pursued until completed, the permit shall become null and void. 
Sec. 6.12. - Temporary permits. 
    No temporary sign, as described in section 6.7, shall be erected, installed or maintained without first obtaining a permit thereof. Any such permit may be issued for a period not to exceed six months, and shall provide that any sign authorized by such permit shall be removed at the expiration of said six-month period, or within ten days after the completion of the activity advertised, whichever shall be sooner. 
    No permit for a temporary sign may be extended or renewed, and any temporary sign which remains in place for more than six months shall be deemed a permanent sign, and shall be so regulated, unless otherwise specified herein. 
    If the applicant shall fail to remove such sign, the zoning inspector, after ten days' written notice to the applicant to remove such sign, and after the failure of the applicant to do so, shall cause said sign to be removed and may impose a fine upon the applicant, as defined by the town council. 
Sec. 6.13. - Hazardous or obsolete signs. 
    No sign, whether new or existing, shall hereafter be erected or altered, except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. However, notwithstanding any provisions contained herein, the sign must be kept clean, neatly painted and free from all hazards such as, but not limited to, faulty wiring, loose fastenings, and must be maintained at all times in such safe condition so as not to be detrimental to the public health or safety. 
    No sign shall be erected or maintained which advertises a product, use or activity no longer available, for sale or in use, on the premises. Such obsolete signs shall be removed within 60 days after the date they become obsolete. In the event of a violation of any of the foregoing provisions of this section, the zoning inspector shall give written notice, specifying the violation to the named owner of the sign and to the named owner of the land upon which the sign is erected, sent to their last known addresses, as set forth in the records of the town, directing them to cause any such sign to conform to the provisions of this ordinance, or to remove any such sign within 60 days from the date of said notice. 
Sec. 6.14. - Abatement and removal of unlawful or unsafe signs. 
    Upon failure to comply with the provisions of said notice specified in section 6.13, the zoning inspector shall notify the town solicitor of such violation of the ordinance, and request appropriate legal action be taken to obtain conformance of removal of such sign. When any sign is in such condition as to be an immediate hazard and peril to the safety of the public or to property, the zoning inspector is hereby authorized to cause any sign to be removed summarily without notice. 
Sec. 6.15. - Removal of certain signs. 
    Within 60 days after the effective date of this ordinance, trailer signs, portable signs, pennants, spinners, banners and/or string lights shall be removed by the owner of the sign or the owner of the property upon which the sign is located. 
Sec. 6.16. - Off-premises signs. 
    In all zoning districts, two signs, not larger than four square feet in area, each advertising or indicating any local business located on a lot or parcel of land other than the premises, is permitted as a special use permit. 
A.  Location. No portion of any sign permitted in this section shall be located within any street right-of-way. 
B.  Lighting. There shall be no artificial lighting of any sign permitted in this section. 
C.  Landowner permission. Where such a sign is to be located on property other than that of the applicant, a statement in writing indicating that the property owner has granted the right to erect the sign, which is the subject of the application for a special use permit, shall be furnished to the zoning board of review. 
Sec. 6.17. - Removal of nonconforming signs. 
    Signs existing at the time of the enactment of this ordinance, notwithstanding section 6.15, and not conforming to its provisions, but which did conform to previous laws, shall be regarded as nonconforming signs, which may be continued. Nonconforming signs which are structurally altered, relocated or replaced shall comply immediately with the provisions of this ordinance. 
ARTICLE VII. - GROUNDWATER PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Natural resources, ch. 30. 

Sec. 7.1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to preserve, protect and maintain the quality and quantity of groundwater supply and groundwater recharge areas of the Town of Exeter. This groundwater is the primary existing and future water supply source for the town. The groundwater reservoirs that underlie Exeter are unique and valuable resources. These groundwater reservoirs are vulnerable to contamination due to their unconfined condition, closeness to the ground surface, and the permeability of the overlying soils. It is the intent of this section [article] to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
Sec. 7.2. - Definitions. 
A.  Aquifer. A saturated, permeable, geological formation that can yield significant quantifies of water to wells, springs or surface water bodies. 
B.  Primary protection zone. Those areas designated as the primary protection zone on the map entitled, "Groundwater Protection Plan, Town of Exeter, Washington County, Rhode Island." 
C.  Glacial deposits. The boulders, rocks, gravel, sand, silt and clay that overlie and generally conceal the bedrock. 
D.  Groundwater. Water found underground which completely fills the open spaces between particles of sand, gravel, clay, silt and consolidated rock fractures. 
E.  Groundwater Protection Act. G.L. 1956, § 46-13.1, passed in 1985 and heretofore amended. This law establishes a policy of maintaining and restoring groundwater quality in Rhode Island for potable water. 
F.  Groundwater classification. A program developed under the 1985 Groundwater Protection Act that authorizes the RIDEM to classify groundwater sources into four categories (GAA, GA, GB and GC): 
1.  Class GAA: Suitable for public drinking water supply without treatment, and delineated as the critical portion of the recharge area to the groundwater reservoirs, and the 2,000-foot radius circle around community water supply wells. 
2.  Class GA: Suitable for public or private drinking water supply without treatment, but does not meet GAA delineation criteria. 
3.  Class GB: Unsuitable for public or private drinking water supply without treatment, due to known or presumed degradation. 
G.  Groundwater recharge. A process through which precipitation on surface water infiltrates and drains to the zone of saturation. 
H.  Groundwater reservoir. Those stratified drift deposits having a saturated thickness greater than or equal to 40 feet and a transmissivity greater than or equal to 4,000 square feet per day and can yield significant amounts of groundwater. 
I.  Impervious. That area of a lot that is impenetrable by surface water because it is covered by pavement, principal and accessory buildings, etc. 
J.  Stratified drift. A glacial deposit consisting of interceded lenses of stratified and sorted gravel, sand and silt. 
K.  Till. A glacial deposit consisting of a poorly sorted mixture of boulders, gravel, sand, silt and some clay. 
L.  Water table. The upper surface [water] or groundwater in the zone of saturation. 
M.  Zone of saturation. That subsurface area below the water table where gravel, sand, silt or clay pore spaces are completely filled with water. 
N.  Transmissivity. A measure of the ability of an aquifer to transmit a fluid. 
O.  Hazardous materials. A product or waste, or combination of substances, that because of quantity, concentration or physical or chemical or infectious characteristics, poses, in the zoning board's judgement a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety or welfare, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, used or disposed of or otherwise managed. Any substance deemed a hazardous waste or material under applicable federal or state law shall also be deemed a hazardous material for this section. Toxic or hazardous materials include organic chemicals, petroleum products, heavy metals, radioactive or infectious wastes, acids and alkalies, and include products such as pesticides, herbicides, solvents, fuels and thinners. 
P.  Best management practices (BMP). Means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices designed to prevent or reduce the degradation of the town's groundwater to the maximum extent possible. 
Q.  Underground storage tank. Means any one or combination of tanks (including underground pipes connected thereto) which is used to contain an accumulation of petroleum product or hazardous material, and the volume of which (including the volume of the underground pipes connected thereto) is ten percent or more beneath the surface of the ground. 
Sec. 7.3. - Groundwater protection zone. 
A.  The primary protection zone is defined on the map entitled, "Groundwater Protection Overlay District Map, Town of Exeter, Washington County, Rhode Island, dated December 12, 1995," at a scale of one inch equals 2,000 feet. This map is filed with the town clerk of the Exeter town hall. 
B.  The line indicating the primary protection zone is shown on the map entitled, "Groundwater Protection Overlay District Map, Town of Exeter, Washington County, Rhode Island, dated December 12, 1995" at a scale of one inch equals 2,000 feet. This line is the outer boundary of the groundwater recharge area on the map entitled, "Town of Exeter Resources Mylar Overlay Mylar," dated February 9, 1989, at a scale of 1:24,000. 
C.  When the boundaries of the district are in doubt or in dispute, resolution of the dispute shall be through an application, accompanied by adequate documentation to the Exeter planning board. The burden of proof shall be upon the owner(s) of the land in question to verify the location of the boundary. At the request of the owner(s), the town may engage a professional civil engineer, hydrologist, geologist or soil scientist to more accurately determine the boundaries of the district with respect to individual parcels of land. The town shall charge the owner(s) for part or all of the costs associated with this study and investigation. 
Sec. 7.4. - Prohibited and special permitted uses. 
    Prohibited use and uses that require a special use permit are defined in the zoning use table in article II, section 2.4. 
Sec. 7.5. - Special use permits. 
A.  An applicant proposing a use specified in the zoning use matrix as requiring a special use permit must apply to the zoning board of review under the provisions of article I, section l.3.F. The applicant for a groundwater protection district special use permit must prove by clear, convincing and scientifically valid evidence that the proposed use will not result in concentrations of pollutants in the groundwater that will adversely affect the groundwater as a source of potable water. After reviewing the application for a groundwater protection district special use permit, the Exeter zoning board shall either: 
1.  Approve the application; 
2.  Deny the application; 
3.  Approve the application with conditions; [or] 
4.  Request additional information. 
B.  Before review of a special use permit application, the applicant must show evidence of applicable state approval for storage of hazardous materials and petroleum products and for the disposal of waste products. 
C.  The applicant for a special use permit shall, at [a] minimum, conform to the following performance and design standards, unless an alternative is proposed that meets the same objective as the standard[s] specified below. The town may specify additional design, construction and operation standards. 
D.  Performance and design standards: 
1.  Interior floor drains designed to allow fluid from any interior space to be discharged into or onto the ground shall be prohibited; provided, however, that such interior floor drains may be permitted if designed to empty into an aboveground storage tank capable of completely containing anticipated flows. Such tanks, if provided, shall also be subject to containment provisions of this section. 
2.  Storage of hazardous materials and petroleum products shall be located within a building unless it is decided that indoor storage will not meet fire safety standards. The indoor storage shall be within a containment structure that meets the following standards: 
a.  Constructed in a way that prevents the release of hazardous material and petroleum products and constructed of such materials that are impermeable and compatible to the materials being contained; 
b.  The containment structure shall, at a minimum be designed to contain the following volumes: 
i.  For aboveground storage tanks, 100 percent of the capacity of the largest tank; [and] 
ii.  For individual containers, e.g., drums, ten percent of the total volume of the containers or the volume of the largest container. 
3.  Exterior storage of petroleum products or hazardous materials shall be located in a containment structure that meets the following standards: 
a.  An impermeable base and surrounding dike. Such base and dike shall be constructed of material that is impermeable and compatible with the material being contained. 
b.  The containment structure shall, at minimum, be designed to contain the following volumes: 
i.  For aboveground storage tanks, 100 percent of the capacity of the largest tank; [and] 
ii.  For individual containers, e.g., drums, 100 percent of the total volume of the containers, or the volume of the largest container. 
c.  The containment structure shall be protected by a roof and adequate sides to prevent exposure to precipitation. 
4.  Drums and storage containers shall be fitted with secure lids to prevent spills or leaks; storage as full as possible to prevent vapors and the chance of an explosion; drip pans shall be placed under spigots. 
5.  Storage areas shall be inspected monthly, and records of such inspections shall be maintained on-site and available for review. 
6.  Containers and tanks shall be clearly labeled. 
7.  Hazardous materials generation and storage areas shall be clearly marked. 
8.  Venting systems for evaporation or other type of discharge to the atmosphere of hazardous materials shall be designed with a recovery system to prevent the release of contaminated condensate or drips. 
9.  Areas used for loading and transferring hazardous materials and petroleum products shall have an impermeable surface and a dike to contain accidental spills or leaks. 
10.  Dumpsters used to store solid wastes shall be covered or located within a roofed area and have drain plugs intact. 
E.  Submission requirements: 
1.  Submit a groundwater protection plan, including the following sections as applicable: 
a.  Hazardous materials and petroleum product management. The proper management and housekeeping of hazardous materials and petroleum products shall be clearly outlined in the plan as follows: 
i.  A complete list and the maximum quantity of all hazardous materials and petroleum products to be handled or stored on the premises at any time; 
ii.  Evidence of a qualified professional supervision in the design, installation, operation and maintenance of facilities or containers to be used for the handling or storage of hazardous materials and petroleum products; 
iii.  Measures proposed to protect all hazardous materials and petroleum product storage containers from vandalism, corrosion, leakage or spillage; 
iv.  Proposed measures to mitigate any potentially adverse impact from hazardous materials or petroleum products on the groundwater; 
v.  Description of the method by which state and local authorities will be notified in case of an accident or spill of a hazardous material or petroleum product that will have a potentially adverse impact on the environment; [and] 
vi.  A schedule whereby periodic proof will be submitted to the zoning inspector (additional copies submitted to the conservation commission) that hazardous materials and petroleum products are managed as stated in the groundwater protection plan. 
b.  Waste management. The groundwater protection plan shall address the following: 
i.  A description of the waste products generated and the projected average and maximum daily volumes that will be generated; 
ii.  A description of the system to collect, store, treat (if necessary) and dispose off-site all waste products other than sanitary sewage; 
iii.  A nutrient loading analysis is required for an individual sewage disposal system proposed to discharge more than 2,000 gallons per day of sanitary sewage; 
iv.  Evidence of qualified professional supervision in the design, installation, maintenance and operation of the waste management system; 
v.  Measure proposed to protect the waste management system from vandalism, leakage, spillage or malfunction; 
vi.  Proposed measures to mitigate any potential adverse impact resulting from the failure of the waste management system; 
vii.  Description of the method by which state and local authorities will be notified in case of a failure of the waste management system that will potentially have an adverse impact on the environment; [and] 
viii.  A schedule whereby periodic proof will be submitted of the zoning inspector (additional copies submitted to the conservation commission) that the waste management system is being used and is operating as stated in the groundwater protection plan. 
c.  A map showing the location of all water bodies, wetlands, storm drains, and public and private wells within 1,000 feet of the property boundary. 
d.  Any other information the town decides is necessary to evaluate the potential for adverse impacts to groundwater quality. 
Sec. 7.6. - Maintenance. 
    All facilities and structures constructed according to section 7.5 of this ordinance shall be maintained by the owner to ensure their ability to function as designed. Failure to properly maintain said facilities and structure is a violation of this ordinance, subject to enforcement action by the town. 
Sec. 7.7. - Administration. 
A.  The zoning board clerk shall forward complete applications concurrently to the planning board and conservation commission within 45 days, the planning board and conservation commission must forward recommendations to the zoning board. The zoning board shall not render a decision before receipt and review of the recommendations of the planning board and conservation commission. 
B.  Fees will be collected in an amount designated by the town permit fee schedule to cover the actual costs incurred to review an application under the provisions of this ordinance. 
C.  All applications for a special use permit within 1,000 feet of the town border will be forwarded by the zoning board clerk to the town council of the adjacent town for review and comment. 
D.  When a request for changes to the boundaries of the district through an applicant has been received, accompanied by the adequate documentation to the Exeter planning board, the planning board shall make a recommendation to the town council within 60 days of the receipt of the request and all advisory opinions. The burden of proof shall be upon the owner(s) of the land in question to verify the location of the boundary. At the request of the owner(s), the town may engage a professional civil engineer, hydrologist, geologist or soil scientist to more accurately determine the boundaries of the district with respect to individual parcels of land. The town shall charge the owner(s) for part or all of the cost associated with this study and investigation. 
Sec. 7.8. - Severability. 
    If any provision or section of this ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such determination shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this ordinance. 
ARTICLE VIII. - CELLULAR AND OTHER COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES 

Sec. 8.1. - Communications facilities-Purpose and goals. 
    The purpose of this section is to establish special conditions and performance standards for the use of communications antennae, antenna arrays, and communications towers, as defined below, that are consistent with the rural and residential character of the town, and consistent with the land uses in the town. The goals of this section include encouraging, where appropriate, the location of antennae on existing structures, and the joint use (co-location) of new and existing towers in order to minimize or mitigate any adverse impact on the town that may result from the location or configuration of communications antenna arrays and communications towers. Every effort shall be made by the applicant to use an alternative tower structure, as defined below. The town shall give due consideration to the municipality's master plan, zoning map, existing land uses and environmentally sensitive areas in approving sites for the locations of towers and antennas. 
(Ord. of 8-7-00) 
Sec. 8.2. - Definitions. 
A.  Cellular communications antenna array shall mean the antenna or antennae from which wireless radio signals are sent and received by a personal wireless service facility as defined by the Telecommunications Act of 1996. It may in the discretion of the zoning board of review to include no more than 12 antennae in one array and one microwave antenna for the exclusive use of the carrier in transmitting its own signals. It may also include an equipment shelter as an accessory use. A cellular or other communications antenna array may be public or private. 
(1)  Public cellular communications antenna array shall mean any antenna used exclusively for governmental functions and owned by the United States of America, the state, or the town, or any political subdivision duly authorized to own and operate a cellular communications array. 
(2)  Private communications antenna array shall mean any antenna used for a private purpose and owned by a private person, partnership, corporation, organization, association or any entity subject to taxation. 
B.  Cellular communications tower shall mean a free-standing structure used for the location of one or more cellular communications antenna arrays. It may, where necessary, include an equipment shelter of no more than 120 square feet in floor area as an accessory use. A cellular communications tower may be public or private. 
(1)  Public cellular communications tower shall mean any tower structure used exclusively for a governmental function and owned by the United States of America, the state, or the town, or any political subdivision duly authorized to own and operate a cellular communications tower. 
(2)  Private communications tower shall mean any tower used for a private purpose and owned by a private person, partnership, corporation, organization, association or any entity subject to taxation. 
C.  Co-location shall mean use of a common cellular or other tower or common site by two or more license holders or by one license holder for more than one type of communications technology. 
D.  Equipment shelter shall mean an enclosed structure, cabinet, shed or box used as an accessory to a cellular communications antenna array to house electrical equipment, batteries and emergency electrical generators, directly related to such antenna array. No other uses, including storage, shall be permitted in any equipment shelter. 
E.  Height shall mean the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on a cellular communications tower including the cellular communications antenna array. 
F.  Other communications tower shall include broadcast television or radio and other non-cellular telecommunications towers. This use includes above grade towers, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers or monopole towers or similar structures more than 35 feet in height for communications equipment and principally intended for the transmittal or reception of commercial, governmental, and related radio, television, and similar telecommunication signal of a non-cellular nature. 
G.  Alternative tower structure means man-made trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. 
(Ord. of 8-7-00) 
Sec. 8.3. - Applicability. 
    No cellular or other communications antenna array or cellular or other communications tower shall be erected, constructed, altered or maintained on any lot with the town after the date of enactment of this amendment on August 7, 2000, without complying with the terms of this section. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit any previously existing public antenna or cellular communications tower used solely in the exercise of a governmental function. This ordinance does not apply to towers or antennas under 70 feet in height that are owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or used exclusively for receive only antennas. 
A.  A cellular or other communications antenna array may be allowed by special use permit on an existing nonresidential structure within the zones specified in section 2.4 zoning use table, provided that the height of such cellular or other communications antenna array shall not exceed the height of such existing structure by more than 12 feet if omni-directional or whip type 1 [] antennae are used, and by not more than six feet if direction or panel type antennae are used. 
(Ord. of 8-7-00) 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
 "Omni-directional" or "whip type antenna" is an antenna designed to receive and/or transmit signals in a 360-degree pattern, up to 12 feet in height or length, and approximately five inches in diameter. 
 Directional or panel type antenna is an antenna designed to receive and/or transmit signals in a directional pattern which is less than 360 degrees, typically an are of approximately 120 degrees. 

Sec. 8.4. - Application requirements. 
    All applications for permits to construct, install or erect cellular or other communications towers or equipment shelters, or to install, mount or erect cellular or other communications antenna arrays on existing buildings or on other alternate antenna support structures, shall be subject to the following additional requirements: 
(1)  A building permit is required; 
(2)  An electrical permit is required; 
(3)  Payment of all permit and inspection fees; 
(4)  Proof of ownership of the land upon which a cellular or other communications tower, antenna array or equipment shelter is proposed to be constructed, installed, erected, mounted or attached or a copy of an appropriate easement, lease, or rental agreement; 
(5)  A scaled plan and a scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings and calculations, indicating color and other documentation; and showing the location and dimensions of the relevant cellular or other communications tower, cellular or other communications antenna array, equipment shelter and any and all other devices and attachment, including electrical wiring cable, wire or other connective materials to and from the antennae to the equipment shelter, and to and from the equipment shelter to any existing or proposed wires, cables, or other connective devices, including conduit and ducts, whether owned, operated or managed by the applicant, or by others, and a statement identifying the owner, operator or manager of any wires, cables, or connective devices that enter or exist on or along any public street or right of way. 
(Ord. of 8-7-00) 
Sec. 8.5. - General requirements. 
A.  All antennae shall comply with applicable Federal Communication Commission and Federal Aviation Administration regulations unless there exists a proven, present emergency effecting the public health, safety, and welfare. The town shall not regulate the placement, construction, and modification of cellular communications antenna arrays on the basis of the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions, provided that such facilities shall be subject to compliance with corresponding Federal Communication Commission's regulations concerning such emissions. 
B.  A cellular or other communications tower shall be set back from all property lines a minimum of one foot for each one foot of tower height. When the property abuts an overlay district, the setback distance from such district shall be one and one-half feet for each one foot of tower height. 
C.  All tower supports, accessory equipment, equipment shelters, and peripheral anchors, including guy wire anchors, shall be set back from all property boundaries the minimum distance required for a principal structure for the zoning district in which a cellular communications tower is to be located, and shall comply with all other applicable zoning requirements and building codes. 
D.  Equipment shelters shall be obscured from view by being placed among or surrounded by trees, shrubs or fences and shall be locked at all times and shall be clearly labeled as to the person to be contacted in the event of an emergency. 
E.  Antennas and towers may be considered either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use of an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on such lot. 
F.  No cellular communications tower, if otherwise allowed or permitted, shall exceed 125 feet in height without a separate special use permit for excess height. No other communication tower, if otherwise allowed or permitted, shall exceed 500 feet in height without a separate special use permit for excess height. 
G.  To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is constructed and maintained in compliance with standards contained in the State Building Code as amended form time to time. If upon inspection, the building official concludes that a tower fails to comply with such code and standards; and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then the building official shall proceed in accordance with G.L title 23, ch. 27.3, entitled "State Building Codes." Towers must be structurally inspected by a registered engineer every ten years and a certificate of such inspection shall be filed with the building official. All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this ordinance shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. 
H.  All telecommunication facilities and structures which have not been used for a period of one year shall be considered abandoned and shall be dismantled and removed at the owner's expense. The owner of such facility shall remove same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the building official. The applicant shall post a bond or cash security with the town treasurer sufficient to cover the cost of removal and restoration of the site prior to construction in any zone. The amount of said bond or security shall be estimated by the building official. If such antenna or tower is not removed within 90 days of receipt of notice, the town may take necessary action to remove the facility and restore the site to a condition consistent with the character of the surrounding area, at the owner's expense. 
I.  All cellular communications or other antenna arrays, (except public cellular communications antenna arrays,) and all cellular or other communications towers shall be subject to development plan approval and review, as set forth herein and in the land development and subdivision regulations, and appropriate camouflaging, landscaping and screening shall be provided, pursuant to the design standards set forth in this section. For such uses permitted by right or special use permit, development plan review shall be conducted by the planning board, and the decision of such authority shall be advisory only to the zoning board in accordance with G.L. § 45-24-49. 
J.  Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower shall provide to the zoning board an inventory of its existing towers, antennas, or sites approved for towers or antennas, that are either within the jurisdiction of the town or within one mile of the border thereof, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower. The zoning board of review may share such information with other applicants applying for administrative approvals or special use permits under this ordinance or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the town, provided, however that the zoning board of review is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable. 
K.  The town supports multiple antenna/tower plans in which the users of towers and antennas are encouraged to submit a single application for approval of multiple towers and/or antenna sites. Applications for approval of multiple sites shall be given priority in the review process. 
L.  Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas shall certify that all franchises required by law for the construction and/or operation of a wireless communication system in the town have been obtained and shall file a copy of all required franchises with the zoning board of review. 
(Ord. of 8-7-00) 
Sec. 8.6. - Additional application requirements for use by special use permit. 
    In addition to all other requirements imposed by this ordinance, an application for a special use permit for a cellular or other communications antenna array or cellular or other communications tower shall include the following information: 
A.  The applicant shall define the area of service and indicate the current coverage capacity. 
B.  The applicant shall show that the proposed facility would provide the needed coverage and/or capacity. 
C.  The applicant shall provide a map or maps, covering the entire town and showing all existing, proposed or planned sites of all carriers including alternative sites from which the needed coverage could also be provided, and indicating the zoning for all such sites. 
(Ord. of 8-7-00) 
Sec. 8.7. - Additional standards for special use permit-towers. 
    In addition to all other applicable provisions of this ordinance, the zoning board of review shall make affirmative findings of fact relative to each of the following factors in determining whether to issue a special use permit for the construction of cellular or other communications tower: 
A.  Applicant has exhausted all reasonable efforts to utilize existing structures for a cellular or other communications antenna array and that no other structures are reasonably available within the area sought by the applicant to produce adequate communications coverage for the applicant. 
B.  Applicant has exhausted all reasonable efforts to avoid the necessity of erecting a new tower, including but not limited to the construction of a permitted structure on which a cellular or other communications antenna array could be placed. Every effort shall be made by the applicant to use an alternative tower structure as previously defined. 
C.  The applicant must demonstrate that an alternative technology that does not require the use of towers or structures, such as a cable microcell network using multiple low-powered transmitters/receivers attached to a wireline system, is unsuitable. Costs of alternative technology that exceed new tower or antenna development shall not be presumed to render the technology unsuitable. 
D.  Applicant's proposed tower comports with the height restrictions and/or requirements provided for herein. 
E.  Applicant's proposed tower comports with the use requirements and/or restrictions provided for herein, as well as the uses of the neighboring properties. 
F.  Applicant's proposed tower comports with the surrounding topography, tree coverage and other natural elements of the landscape of the proposed site and applicant's property. 
G.  Applicant's proposed tower comports with the design characteristics that reduce or eliminate adverse impacts on the community including type (guyed tower, lattice tower or monopole) of tower or antenna array, color of tower or antenna array, and overall visual obtrusiveness. 
(Ord. of 8-7-00) 
Sec. 8.8. - Design standards for development plan review. 
    All applicants for a cellular or other communications antenna array or a cellular or other communications tower shall be subject to development plan review. The following design standards shall apply to all cellular and other communications antennae arrays and cellular and other communications towers: 
A.  For the erection of a cellular or other communications antenna array on an existing structure, the proposed facility shall preserve or enhance the pre-existing character of the building or structure on which it is located, as well as the surrounding buildings and land uses. All components of the proposed facility shall be integrated through location and design to be compatible with the existing characteristics of the site to the extent practical. Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved or improved and the disturbance of the existing topography shall be minimized, unless such disturbance would result in less visual impact of the facility on the surrounding areas. 
B.  For the erection of a cellular or other communication tower, the proposed facility shall preserve or enhance the pre-existing character of the surrounding buildings and land uses as much as possible. All components of the proposed facility shall be integrated through location and design to be compatible with the existing characteristics of the site to the extent practical. Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved or improved and the disturbance of the existing topography shall be minimized, unless such disturbance would result in less visual impact of the facility on the surrounding areas. 
C.  Appropriate screening shall be installed at all tower sites to screen views from adjacent properties and streets. Planting shall be of such a height and density to ensure screening. Screening shall consist of plant and/or tree material approved by the planning board. Screening shall not be less than five feet in width, nor less than eight feet in height. Screening may be waived on those sides or sections which are adjacent to undevelopable lands. The owner of the property shall be responsible for all maintenance and shall replace any dead plantings within thirty days. 
D.  Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable Federal Aviation Administration standards, be painted a neutral color, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
E.  At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall use materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and existing environment. 
F.  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color identical to or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
G.  Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the reviewing authority may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. 
H.  There shall be no signs, symbols, flags, banners or other devices or things attached or painted or inscribed upon any tower. 
(Ord. of 8-7-00) 
ARTICLE IX. - AFFORDABLE HOUSING 

Sec. 9.1. - General. 
A.  Findings. It is a public purpose of the Town of Exeter to achieve and maintain a diverse and balanced community with housing opportunities for residents of all income levels. Through its affordable housing plan, the town has formally committed itself to meeting the 10 percent affordable housing goal established by the Low and Moderate Income Housing Act (G.L. ch. 45-53) and has specified the strategies and means by which the goal is to be achieved. This section sets forth a regulatory framework that is designed to ensure an adequate supply of housing to serve these needs. 
B.  Intent. The affordable housing provisions of this article IX are intended: 
1.  To promote affordable housing production in accordance with the goals and policies of the town comprehensive plan's housing element and affordable housing plan; 
2.  To encourage the development and availability of housing that qualifies as low or moderate income housing as mandated by G.L. ch. 45-53, the Rhode Island Low and Moderate Income Act, and the Rhode Island Comprehensive Housing Production and Rehabilitation Act of 2004, as amended; and 
3.  To maintain and enhance the socio-economic diversity of the community through the development of housing for all populations within the Town, including, but not limited to, housing for the resident workforce and housing for special needs populations. 
(Ord. of 9-4-07, § 2) 
Sec. 9.2. - Assurance of affordability. 
A.  Basic requirement. All inclusionary units provided under section 9.4, and other affordable units provided under section 4.6 (mixed-use commercial development) shall meet the definition of "low or moderate income housing" as contained in this ordinance. The required minimum term of affordability shall be not less than 30 years or such longer period as specified elsewhere in this ordinance, as applicable. 
B.  Eligible occupants. Ownership units shall be occupied by their purchasers as their primary residence and not rented for seasonal occupancy nor rented for any other occupancy except during temporary absences totaling not more than eight weeks in any 12-month period. Rental units may be sub-leased only to a household meeting the applicable income restrictions on affordability. 
C.  Qualification and monitoring. In order to assure that the occupancy and level of affordability of low or moderate-income housing units are maintained over time in accordance with this ordinance and with Rhode Island Housing regulations, the developer shall contract with a monitoring agency approved by the Rhode Island Housing and Mortgage Finance Corporation for the following purposes: 
1.  To determine pricing for initial sale, resale, lease or sublease of inclusionary or affordable dwelling units; 
2.  To qualify purchasers or renters for occupancy based upon household size and income; 
3.  To assist in the development of a marketing and resident selection plan that meets state and federal fair housing requirements, to be approved by the Planning Board; and 
4.  To monitor occupancy of the affordable dwelling units to ensure compliance with these requirements. 
D.  Long-term affordability. Long-term affordability shall be assured through a land lease or deed restriction, recorded in the town land evidence records prior to the sale or lease of the affordable unit, addressing the following items: 
1.  The basis for calculation of the maximum allowable sales or rental price for the housing unit both initially and on future buyers or renters; 
2.  A marketing plan that meets local preferences and state and federal fair housing requirements; 
3.  Provisions for monitoring and assurance of compliance over time; and 
4.  Provisions under which the town may exercise a right of first refusal to purchase an affordable unit being offered for sale. 
(Ord. of 9-4-07, § 2) 
Sec. 9.3. - Marketing and resident selection. 
A.  Plan required. The developer of low or moderate income units under sections 9.4 (inclusionary zoning) or 4.6 (mixed use commercial development) shall submit an affordable unit marketing and resident selection plan for approval by the planning board prior to its initiation. The plan shall describe how the low or moderate income units will be marketed and potential homebuyers or tenants selected, including a description of the lottery or other process to be used for their selection. 
B.  Local preference. Income-blind priority shall be given in resident selection for 80 percent of the inclusionary or other affordable units (rounded down to the nearest unit) to households containing persons currently residing or employed in the town, or persons having children, parents, or siblings who are resident in the town. If the applicant pool of such persons contains a smaller percentage of minority applicants (Native American or Alaskan Native, Asian or Pacific Islander, Black, Hispanic, Cape Verdean) than the statewide percentage then additional minority applicants not qualifying for local preference shall be added to the pool until it reaches the statewide percentage. 
(Ord. of 9-4-07, § 2) 
Sec. 9.4. - Inclusionary zoning. 
A.  Purpose . The purpose of inclusionary zoning is to ensure that new residential development projects support the town's goal of housing diversity consistent with the town comprehensive plan and with statewide planning and housing guidance. To achieve this purpose, new subdivisions and land development project that are subject to this section 9.4 shall include a share of housing units that are affordably priced, subject to a price limitation to assure initial affordability, with deed rider or land lease assuring that purchasers' or tenants' incomes meet prescribed limits at the time of purchase or occupancy and that such affordability and income eligibility will again be observed at the time of each future resale, release, or other transfer. 
B.  Applicability . The provisions of this section 9.4 shall apply to all residential subdivisions and land development projects that result in the creation of four or more lots or housing units from a lot in existence on the effective date of this ordinance. 
C.  Inclusionary unit requirements. 
1.  Basic requirement . A development that is subject to this section 9.4 shall include low or moderate income housing units at least equal to 20 percent of the added lots or housing units that are not low or moderate income units (with fractions below 0.5 rounded down and fractions of 0.5 or greater rounded up to the next higher number), as illustrated by the following table: 
Number of lots or units that are not low or moderate income (LMI) units Required number of LMI units Total number of lots or units including LMI units Actual percentage of LMI units (for reference only) 4-7 1 5-8 13%-20% 8-12 2 10-14 14%-20% 13-17 3 16-20 15%-19% 18-22 4 22-26 15%-18% 23-27 5 28-32 16%-18% 28-32 6 34-38 16%-18% etc. etc. etc.  
2.  Incremental development. These requirements are intended to apply to incremental development of a lot over time as well as to a one-time development of a lot. Therefore, a low or moderate income unit shall be provided whenever the cumulative number of new lots or units created from the original lot reaches a threshold number in the table in section 9.4.C.1: that is, the first low or moderate income unit shall be provided when the fourth new lot or unit is to be created; the second low or moderate income unit shall be provided when the eighth new lot or unit is to be created; etc. 
3.  Low income affordability . In a development in which all of the units are for sale, at least 50 percent of the inclusionary units shall be affordable to low income households and the remaining inclusionary units shall be affordable to households with incomes at or below 100 percent of area median income. In any development in which not all of the units are for sale, all of the inclusionary units shall be affordable to low income households. 
D.  Off-site location. 
1.  The inclusionary unit requirements may be met in part or whole by locating some or all of the required inclusionary housing units on an alternative site or sites within the town only if the Planning Board finds that an increase in the existing zoned density of the proposed development is unfeasible or inappropriate due to sensitive environmental features of the site or other factors. 
2.  Off-site inclusionary housing units may be located in an existing structure being rehabilitated, but the units must not be ones which are already eligible to be counted as low or moderate income housing under G.L. ch. 45-53. 
3.  Except where inclusionary units will be provided in an existing structure as provided in section 9.4.D.2, the planning board shall not permit off-site location of required inclusionary units unless the town council first approves the off-site location. 
E.  Term of affordability . The required minimum term of affordability for inclusionary units, whether on-site or off-site, shall be 30 years. When a unit is resold prior to the expiration of the restriction, the term of affordability shall be renewed for 30 years. 
F.  Fee in lieu. 
1.  Eligibility . The inclusionary unit requirements may be met in part or whole through payment of a fee in lieu of providing one or more inclusionary units only if the planning board finds that an increase in the existing zoned density of the proposed development is unfeasible or inappropriate due to sensitive environmental features of the site, and provision of the required off-site is not feasible. The fee in lieu option is intended to be a last resort where the developer is not able to provide the required inclusionary unit(s) either on-site or off-site. 
2.  Fee amount. The required fee in lieu of providing inclusionary units shall be equal to the number of inclusionary units required but not provided times a fee per unit as set forth in 3. below. 
3.  Fee per unit. The fee in lieu of providing one inclusionary dwelling unit shall be equal to the difference the between: 
a.  The median sales price per dwelling unit for all units sold in the town in the most recent three-year period for which sales price data is available (as determined by the assessors) and 
b.  The current maximum purchase price for a housing unit affordable at 80 percent of applicable area median income (as estimated by Rhode Island Housing). 
The fee in lieu shall be updated annually by the planning board, and the town council shall approve the fees by resolution. 
4.  Fee recipient. The fee shall be paid to the town and directed either: 
a.  To a restricted account established by the town to support the creation of affordable housing in the town, from which funds shall be expended pursuant to vote of a financial town meeting for the acquisition of land for affordable housing or for the acquisition, rehabilitation, or construction of affordable housing units; or 
b.  To an affordable housing trust fund established by municipal ordinance, to be expended in the manner specified in said ordinance. 
5.  Land conveyance. The inclusionary unit requirement may be met in part or whole through the conveyance to the town of land either on-site or off-site, subject to acceptance by the town council, provided that the planning board finds that: 
a.  The fair market value of the land is at least equal to the fee in lieu that would otherwise be required under section 9.4.F.2; and 
b.  The land is suitable for residential development and use. 
G.  Cost-mitigating provisions. The following cost mitigation measures are provided as a subsidy to contribute to offsetting the net cost impact of providing housing units at affordable prices. 
1.  Density bonus. The number of housing units allowable on the site shall be increased above that otherwise allowable by a number equal to the number of low or moderate income housing units provided. The total number of dwelling units on the parcel shall not be increased by more than 50 percent above the number that otherwise would be allowed. 
2.  Limitations adjusted. Where the residential density is increased pursuant to section 9.4.H.1, the dimensional regulations of section 2.4.2 shall be adjusted as follows: 
a.  Lot size, frontage and yard requirements (except for front yards and for side and rear yards at the perimeter boundary lines of the development) shall be reduced by multiplying the requirements in section 2.4.2 by the number of housing units allowable without a density bonus divided by the number of units allowable with a density bonus. 
b.  The planning board shall have the authority to adjust other applicable dimensional regulations if the board finds the adjustment to be necessary and consistent with good planning practice. 
c.  The adjusted dimensional regulations applicable to the development shall be shown on the final plat or site plan for the development. 
3.  Exemption from growth management ordinance. The building permit quotas established by the Town Code of Ordinances, chapter 14, article III ("growth management") shall not apply to inclusionary units (but shall apply to market rate units in the same development). 
4.  Exemption from impact fees . The impact fees established by the Town Code of Ordinances, chapter 14, article IV ("impact fees") shall not apply to inclusionary units (but shall apply to market rate units in the same development). 
H.  Integrating inclusionary units. 
1.  Inclusionary unit location and appearance. Inclusionary units shall be integrated within the development to the degree feasible, and not separately segregated. The exterior appearance of the inclusionary units shall be compatible with and, except for unit size, essentially indistinguishable from the others. 
2.  Inclusionary unit size. 
a.  If the average number of bedrooms in the market rate units is greater than 2.0, the average number of bedrooms in the inclusionary units shall not be less than 2.0. 
b.  If the average number of bedrooms in the market rate units is 2.0 or less, the average number of bedrooms in the inclusionary units shall not be less than the average number of bedrooms in the market rate units. 
3.  Timing of occupancy. The percentage of proposed market rate units granted a certificate of occupancy shall at no time exceed the percentage of proposed inclusionary units granted certificates of occupancy by more than 50 percent. The certificate of occupancy for the last market-rate unit shall not be granted until all inclusionary units have been granted such certificates. 
(Ord. of 9-4-07, § 2) 
ARTICLE X. - PLANNED VILLAGE DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 10.1. - Planned village development general requirements. 
    10.1.1. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote development that: 
A.  Incorporates residential, commercial, and public uses in a compact, walkable environment; 
B.  Includes housing units providing long-term housing affordability to low or moderate-income households; 
C.  Reflects traditional New England village development in terms of its physical design, scale, mix of uses, and visual character; 
D.  Supports environmental sustainability by providing for pedestrian access and circulation, compact design, and open space preservation through transfer of development rights; and 
E.  Implements "A Vision for Exeter" as described in the comprehensive plan. 
    10.1.2 Establishment of a planned village overlay district. Planned village development (PVD) can only occur in the Town of Exeter through the establishment of a planned village overlay district (PVOD) in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
A.  Applications for a PVD may be submitted to the Town of Exeter for land within an existing PVOD or as part of a new district. Applications for a new district shall be accompanied by a proposed future land use map amendment (if necessary) and a zoning map amendment consistent with the comprehensive plan. 
B.  Where a change to the zoning map is required, application to the planning board for the zoning map amendment shall be accompanied by site plans depicting the proposed development within the full extent of the district. Said site plans shall include all information that would be required for a master plan submittal for a PVD major land development project. 
    10.1.3. Eligibility. Locations eligible for PVOD shall meet all of the following criteria: 
A.  At least one lot within a proposed PVOD shall have adequate frontage on and access to an arterial road as defined in the zoning ordinance. 
B.  The location of the proposed PVOD shall be consistent with areas identified as potential village sites in the comprehensive plan. 
C.  For newly proposed PVOD districts, the minimum aggregate lot size shall be no less than ten acres. 
D.  Land that abuts an existing PVOD may also be considered for PVOD zoning change where the property will be integrated by design into the existing PVOD. Where an abutting property may be added on to an existing PVD, there shall be no minimum area requirement for that abutting property. 
    10.1.4. Permit procedures. 
A.  Any application for PVOD that requires a change to the zoning map shall be reviewed as a major land development project. 
B.  Approval of a PVD master plan submission by the planning board shall be conditional upon subsequent changes to the future land use map and the zoning map to establish the PVOD. 
C.  Where a PVOD is already established on the zoning map, but the development proposed as part of the initial zoning map change was not constructed per the conditions of the approved master plan within the required timeframe allowed by state law, new proposals or revisions to that first proposal shall require review as a new major land development project. 
D.  Any change to restrictions or conditions per the original zoning map amendment including, but not limited to, deed restrictions, covenants, maintenance agreements, design standards, and limits on commercial square footage, shall require a formal re-submittal of the master plan. 
E.  Where a PVOD zoning district is already established and the plans reviewed as part of the initial zoning map change are substantially constructed, applications for additional development or changes within the district that meet or exceed the following criteria shall be submitted as a major land development projects in accordance with the procedures of the town's land development and subdivision regulations: 
1.  Any new commercial use with a building footprint that exceeds [4,000] square feet; 
2.  Any proposed use that requires TDR; 
3.  The creation of new development or the expansion of existing development that would increase the amount of parking by more than ten spaces. 
    10.1.5. Relationship to other sections of the zoning ordinance. Where the provisions set forth in this section of the zoning ordinance govern the procedures or standards found elsewhere in the zoning ordinance that would otherwise apply, including but not limited to those that apply to the underlying districts, the provisions of the PVOD shall govern. Where this section of the zoning ordinance may be silent on procedures found elsewhere in the zoning ordinance, and which are otherwise applicable, those standards found elsewhere in the zoning ordinance shall govern. 
(Ord. of 9-27-12, Exh. 1) 
Sec. 10.2. - Special requirements. 
    10.2.1 Housing affordability. Development under this section (10.0) [article X] shall be subject to all applicable provisions of article IX, including section 9.4, inclusionary zoning. 
    10.2.2 Residential density. Residential development within a PVD is intended to provide a diversity of attractive housing types that will serve a range of individuals and families in accordance with the requirements of this subsection. Residential density that is proposed over and above the residential density allowed by right within the underlying district shall also require the transfer of development rights pursuant to section 6.0 of the land development and subdivision regulations. 
A.  The maximum density of residential development for an individual lot within a PVD shall not exceed [15 units per acre]. The average density of residential development in the PVOD shall not exceed [eight units per acre]. Any dedicated open space within the PVOD or on an individual lot shall not be included in these calculations. 
B.  This permitted increase in density is provided as a municipal government subsidy as defined in this ordinance and in R.I. Gen. Laws § 45-53-3. 
    10.2.3 Maximum floor area. The gross floor area of an individual commercial establishment in the PVD shall not exceed 15,000 square feet, except that a grocery store may be permitted a gross floor area up to 25,000 square feet. Architectural techniques shall be used on larger structures to reduce the impact of massing including varied rooflines and articulation pursuant to the design regulations in section 6.0 of the land development and subdivision regulations. 
    10.2.4 Public space. 
A.  At least ten percent of the land in a PVD shall be designated as public space as part of the site design, but can remain in private ownership. 
B.  Wetlands may be devoted to public space but shall not be counted towards the minimum public space requirement. 
    10.2.5. Parking. 
A.  Any application for a PVD shall demonstrate that the development complies with the requirements of the applicable provisions of the article V of the zoning ordinance with the following additions, exemptions or alterations: 
1.  Any use requiring in excess of 125 parking spaces shall not require a special use permit from the zoning board of review. 
2.  As part of a PVD application review, the planning board may allow parking within the front yard setback where the placement of said parking is part of a larger design scheme to enhance the walkability within a village setting. 
3.  As part of a PVD application review, the planning board may reduce setbacks for parking spaces or aisles where the placement of said parking or aisle is part of a larger design scheme to enhance the walkability within a village setting. Parking spaces less than ten feet from any building shall be separated from such building by raised curb, bumper or wheel guards. The requirements of this subsection shall not be applied to detached single-family dwellings. 
4.  As part of a PVD application review, the planning board may allow for different buffer configurations and design where connections with the adjacent residential district are designed as part of the PVD. 
5.  Off-street loading space shall not be part of any area used to fulfill the off-street parking requirement associated with the intended use of the land unless approved by the planning board as part of a PVD application and where the use of said parking area is consistent with the goals of creating a walkable village setting. 
B.  An applicant for a PVD may propose that all or a portion of parking associated with residential or commercial use will be located off-site. The planning board may allow off-site parking on a lot of different ownership to be counted for a given operation provided that a covenant or easement between property owners is presented in advance of final plan review. Off-site parking shall be within 500 feet of the front entrance of the use it is proposed to serve as measured along an easily accessible and well-lit pedestrian pathway. 
C.  The planning board may require, within the PVD review process, that an applicant provide justification for the number of proposed parking spaces. Analyses provided by the applicant may include, but shall not be limited to, shared parking or off-site parking analyses, case study data of similar uses, or the use of parking space management measures such as enforceable time limitations, fees, or parking limitations for employees. 
(Ord. of 9-27-12, Exh. 1) 
Sec. 10.3. - Transfer of development rights (TDR). 
    10.3.1. TDR required. TDR is required where an application for PVD would increase the amount of residential development beyond what is allowed in any of the underlying districts. 
    10.3.2. Applicability. 
1.  Areas of the Town of Exeter that qualify as potential sending areas include undeveloped or agricultural lots within the B, RE-2, RU-3, RU-4 and CR5 districts. 
2.  Districts that qualify as potential receiving districts for development rights include approved PVODs. 
3.  Where a lot is partially contained within either a sending area or a receiving area, only the portion of the lot contained in such area may be used for the purposes of establishing or landing development rights respectively. 
    10.3.3. Authority. The certification or transfer of development rights may only be approved through application to the planning board according to the procedures and standards provided in this article X of the ordinance and related provisions in the land development and subdivision regulations. A person or party proposing only to determine the development rights and vest those rights in a certificate of development rights shall apply for TDR sending area land development project approval with the planning board in accordance with section 6.0 of the land development and subdivision regulations. 
(Ord. of 9-27-12, Exh. 1) 
ARTICLE XI. - RENEWABLE ENERGY 

Sec. 11.1. - Solar. 
    11.1.A. Utility scale solar photovoltaic facility. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to promote the creation of utility scale solar photovoltaic facilities by providing standards for the placement, design, construction, operation, monitoring, modification, and removal of such facilities that address public safety, minimize impacts on scenic, natural, and historic resources, and are compatible with the Town's Comprehensive Plan. 
(b)  Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to construction, operation, and/or repair of any utility scale solar photovoltaic installation. 
(c)  Utility scale facility means the equipment and requisite hardware that, as a primary purpose, provide and are used for collecting, transferring, converting, storing, or using electricity and off-loading said electricity to the grid. The primary use of a utility scale solar facility is to provide energy for the commercial facility on which said facility is located or to produce energy solely to off-load electricity to the grid. Any excess energy produced by a commercial facility may be off-loaded to the grid. 
(d)  General Requirements. 
(1)  Major Land Development. Each utility scale solar photovoltaic installation application must be reviewed by the Exeter Planning Board in accordance with section 11.1.B. 
(2)  Location. Utility scale solar photovoltaic installations shall be allowed in accordance with Section 2.4.1 of the Town of Exeter Zoning Ordinance Use Tables. 
(3)  Exemptions. Net metering solar photovoltaic installations for residential or commercial uses shall be allowed in all zoning districts as a matter of right pursuant to section 11.1.B. 
(4)  Building permit and inspection. No solar photovoltaic installation shall be constructed, installed, or modified without first obtaining a building permit and shall be subject to periodic inspections as deemed necessary by the building official and/or electrical inspector. 
(5)  No individual panel within a ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation shall exceed 15 feet in height, as measured from pre-development lot grade at the location of the panel. 
(6)  A roof-mounted solar photovoltaic installation shall not exceed the permitted building height as set forth in section 11.1.B. 
(7)  Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall conform to the yard requirements of the applicable zoning district or be setback a distance equal to the total height of a panel, whichever is greater. 
(8)  A ground-mounted solar photovoltaic facility shall be designed to prevent unauthorized access subject to the review and acceptance of the planning board and concurrence of the director of public works and the fire marshal as it relates to the provision of emergency service. 
(9)  Parking and circulation. The applicant shall demonstrate that adequate access and parking are provided for service and emergency vehicles as determined by the Board in consultation with the Fire Marshal. 
(10)  Drainage. Erosion and sedimentation control shall conform to the Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management Stormwater Design Manual and all applicable regulations, local and state. 
(11)  Landscaping. Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to what is necessary for the construction, operation, and maintenance of the large-scale ground-mounted, solar photovoltaic field, or as otherwise prescribed by applicable laws, regulations, and by-laws. Additional landscape buffers may be required in areas where no natural buffer exists. 
(12)  Reasonable efforts, as determined by the Board, shall be made to place all utility connections from the facility underground, depending upon appropriate soil conditions, shape, topography of the site, sub-surface conditions, and any requirements of the utility provider. 
(13)  Lighting of a ground-mounted solar photovoltaic facility shall be consistent with local, state, and federal law. Lighting of other parts of the facility, such as appurtenant structures, shall be limited to that required for safety and operational purposes, and shall be reasonably shielded from abutting properties. Where feasible, lighting of the facility shall be directed downward and shall incorporate full cut-off fixtures to reduce light pollution. 
(14)  Required documents. Pursuant to RIGL 45-23-38, the planning board shall review site plans as major land development projects in accordance with section 11.1.B of the Town of Exeter Subdivision Regulations. The following items are required for submission in order for the administrative officer to certify the application as complete and place it on an agenda for review. The planning board may waive any document requirement it deems appropriate upon written request of the applicant. 
(a)  Class I survey site plan showing: 
(1)  Property lines and all physical features for the project site; 
(2)  Proposed changes to the landscape of the site, grading, vegetation clearing and planting, exterior lighting, and screening vegetation or structures. 
(3)  Blueprints or drawings of the solar photovoltaic installation showing the proposed layout of the system and any potential shading from nearby structures or vegetation. 
(4)  One- or three-line electrical diagram detailing the solar photovoltaic installation, associated components, and electrical interconnection methods, with all current state electrical code compliant disconnects and over current devices. 
(5)  Documentation of major system components to be used, including the photovoltaic panels, mounting system and inverter. 
(6)  An operation and maintenance plan. 
(7)  Proof of liability insurance. 
(8)  Decommission plan. 
(9)  Financial pro forma for the project. 
(10)  A zoning certificate for the property on which the solar facility is proposed. 
    11.1.B. Residential/small scale solar photovoltaic facility. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote the creation of residential scale solar photovoltaic facilities by providing standards for the placement and design of such facilities. 
(b)  Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to construction, operation, and/or repair of any residential scale solar photovoltaic installation. 
(c)  Residential/small scale facility means the equipment and requisite hardware that provide and are used for collecting, transferring, converting, storing, or using electricity for water heating, space heating, cooling and reducing on-site consumption of utility power, or other applications that would otherwise require the use of a conventional source of energy such as petroleum products, natural gas, manufactured gas, or electricity produced from a nonrenewable resource. A system is considered a residential scale facility only if it supplies electrical power solely for on-site use, except that when a property upon which the facility is installed also received electrical power supplied by a utility company, excess electrical power generated and not presently needed for on-site use may be off-loaded to the grid. A residential/small scale facility shall be considered an accessory use to the primary residential use of the property. 
(1)  Ground-mounted residential/small scale facility means that the installation of the facility is built on the ground. 
(2)  Roof mounted residential/small scale facility means that the installation of the facility is built on the roof of a building. 
(d)  General requirements. 
(1)  All residential/small scale solar photovoltaic facilities must obtain a building permit and/or a special use permit as required in section 2.4.1 Zoning Use Table. 
(2)  No individual panel within a ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation shall exceed 15 feet in height, as measured from pre-development lot grade at the location of the panel. 
(3)  No individual panel within a roof-mounted solar photovoltaic installation shall exceed the permitted building height for the zoning district in which the structure the panel is mounted on is located. 
(4)  All panels and other equipment and structures that are part of the installation shall be setback from all property lines as is required within the requisite zoning district. 
(5)  All ground-mounted solar photovoltaic facilities shall be designed to prevent unauthorized access, including, but not limited to protective fencing. 
(6)  All solar photovoltaic facilities shall be constructed and operated in a manner that minimizes any adverse visual, safety, and environmental impacts. 
(7)  A zoning certificate for the property on which the solar facility is proposed. 
(Ord. of 12-7-15) 
ARTICLE XII. - MEDICAL MARIJUANA 

Sec. 12.1. - Definitions. 
    Compassion center means, as defined in Rhode Island General Laws § 21-28.6-3, a not-for profit corporation, subject to the provisions of Chapter 6 of title 7, and registered under § 21-28.6-12, that acquires, possess, cultivates, manufactures, delivers, transfers, transports, supplies or dispenses marijuana, and/or related supplies and educational materials, to patient cardholders and/or their registered caregiver cardholder, who have designated it as one of their primary caregivers. 
    Marijuana cultivation center means any entity that, under state law, may acquire, possess, cultivate, manufacture, deliver, transfer, transport, or supply marijuana, to a registered compassion center, or other entity authorized to dispense marijuana. 
    Marijuana store means any retail establishment at which the sale or use of marijuana, medical or otherwise, takes place. This shall not include compassion centers regulated and licensed by the State of Rhode Island, as defined herein. 
    Medical marijuana cultivation center means any entity that, under state law, may acquire, possess, cultivate, manufacture, deliver, transfer, transport, or supply marijuana, for medical purposes, to a registered compassion center, or other entity authorized to dispense medical marijuana. 
    Non-residential cooperative cultivation means a use of land located in a non-residential zone, or of a building, or a portion thereof, located in a non-residential zone for the cultivation of marijuana by two or more cardholders, as defined in Rhode Island General Laws § 21-28.6-3. 
    Residential cooperative cultivation means use of land located in a residential zone, or of a building, or portion thereof, located in a residential zone, for the cultivation of marijuana by two or more cardholders, as defined in Rhode Island General Laws § 21-28.6-3. 
    Patient cultivation means marijuana cultivation by a single registered cardholder, as defined in Rhode Island General Laws § 21-28.6-3, within his or her residential dwelling for medical use only. This use shall only be permitted as an accessory use to a lawfully permitted residential use. In a mixed use building that contains residential and nonresidential uses, this use shall be contained within the residential dwelling unit only. 
(Amend. of 10-2-17) 
Sec. 12.2. - Compassion centers. 
A.  Compassion centers shall be permitted according to Table 2.4 and shall be subject to all applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance. All applicants for a compassion center shall be subject to Development Plan Review or Major Land Development with the Planning Board and must meet all of the following requirements: 
1.  Evidence that the requested use at the proposed location is not within 1000 feet of any property used for school, public or private, playground, play field, youth center, licensed day-care center or any location where groups of minors regularly congregate. 
2.  The requested use at the proposed location will be sufficiently buffered in relation to any residential area in the immediate vicinity so as not to adversely affect said area. 
3.  The exterior appearance of the structure must be consistent with the exterior appearance of existing structures within the immediate neighborhood. 
4.  The proposed compassion center shall implement the appropriate security measures to deter and prevent unauthorized entrance into areas containing marijuana and shall ensure that each location has an operational security/alarm system. 
5.  All compassion center uses shall comply with all licensing and permitting requirements of the Town of Exeter and the laws of the State of Rhode Island. 
6.  The use of butane for the purposes of marijuana extraction shall be prohibited in all districts. 
7.  The proposed compassion center shall provide detailed plans to the Planning Board regarding the disposal of their wastewater from the growing operations, hours of operation, number of employees, parking requirements, signage, lighting and any other items deemed necessary by the Town Planner or the Planning Board as part of the application review process. 
8.  See section X Building requirements of this chapter. 
(Amend. of 10-2-17) 
Sec. 12.3. - Medical marijuana cultivation center. 
A.  Marijuana cultivation centers shall be permitted according to Table 2.4 and shall be subject to all applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance. All applicants for a marijuana cultivation center shall be subject to Development Plan Review or Major Land Development with the Planning Board and must meet all of the following requirements: 
1.  Evidence that the requested use at the proposed location is not within 1000 feet of property used for school, public or private, playground, play field, youth center, licensed day care center or any location where groups of minors regularly congregate. 
2.  The requested use at the proposed location will be sufficiently buffered in relation to any residential area in the immediate vicinity so as not to adversely affect said area. 
3.  The exterior appearance of the structure must be consistent with the exterior appearance of existing structures within the immediate neighborhood. 
4.  The proposed cultivation center shall implement the appropriate security measures to deter and prevent unauthorized entrance into the facility and shall ensure that the facility has an operational security/alarm system. 
5.  The use of butane for the purposes of marijuana extraction shall be prohibited in all districts. 
6.  The proposed cultivation center shall provide detailed plans to the Planning Board regarding the disposal of their wastewater or waste products from the growing or manufacturing operations, hours of operation, number of employees, parking requirements, signage, lighting and any other items deemed necessary by the Town Planner or the Planning Board as part of the application review process. 
7.  See section 12.8 Building requirements of this chapter. 
(Amend. of 10-2-17) 
Sec. 12.4. - Marijuana cultivation center. 
    Reserved. 
(Amend. of 10-2-17) 
Sec. 12.5. - Marijuana store. 
    Reserved. 
(Amend. of 10-2-17) 
Sec. 12.6. - Non-residential cooperative cultivation. 
A.  Non-residential cooperative cultivation shall be permitted according to Table 2.4 and shall be subject to all applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance. In the case of a special use permit requirement all documentation shall be submitted with an application for such permit. In the case where a non-residential cooperative cultivation is permitted by right all required documentation shall be submitted to the zoning official upon request of a zoning certificate. All non-residential cooperative cultivations shall be subject to the following requirements: 
1.  A cardholder shall only cooperatively cultivate in one location. 
2.  No single location shall have more than one cooperative cultivation. For the purposes of this section, location means one structural building, not units within a structural building. 
3.  The cooperative cultivation shall not be visible from the street or other public areas. 
4.  A written acknowledgment of the limitation of the right to use and possess marijuana for medical purposes in Rhode Island, that is signed by each cardholder, shall be prominently displayed on the premises. 
5.  The use of butane for the purposes of marijuana extraction shall be prohibited in all districts. 
6.  See section 12.8 Building requirements of this chapter. 
(Amend. of 10-2-17) 
Sec. 12.7. - Residential cooperative cultivation. 
A.  Residential cooperative cultivation shall be permitted according to Table 2.4 and shall be subject to all applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance. In the case of a special use permit requirement all documentation shall be submitted with an application for such permit. In the case where a non-residential cooperative cultivation is permitted by right all required documentation shall be submitted to the zoning official upon request of a zoning certificate. All non-residential cooperative cultivations shall be subject to the following requirements: 
1.  A cardholder shall only cooperatively cultivate in one location. 
2.  No single location shall have more than one cooperative cultivation. For the purposes of this section, location means one structural building, not units within a structural building. 
3.  The cooperative cultivation shall not be visible from the street or other public areas. 
4.  A written acknowledgment of the limitation of the right to use and possess marijuana for medical purposes in Rhode Island, that is signed by each cardholder, shall be prominently displayed on the premises. 
5.  The use of butane for the purposes of marijuana extraction shall be prohibited in all districts. 
6.  See section 12.8 Building requirements of this chapter. 
(Amend. of 10-2-17) 
Sec. 12.8. - Building requirements. 
A.  All licensed cultivators, retail stores and compassion centers shall apply for all appropriate building, electrical, mechanical and plumbing permits as required by the building official. The building official may grant the application for permits pursuant to RIGL § 23-27.3-100.1 et seq. All licensed cultivators, retail stores and compassion centers shall apply for all appropriate approval and inspections by the local fire marshal. The fire marshal may grant the application for permits pursuant to RIGL § 23-28.1-1 et seq. 
B.  Additional Requirements. In addition to the requirements above, the building official or Planning Board shall require the following: 
1.  The area used for growing shall be secured by locked doors and an alarm system. 
2.  The area used for growing shall have two means of ingress and egress. 
3.  The area used for growing shall not be within ten feet of any heating source. 
4.  The area used for growing shall have proper ventilation to mitigate the risk of mold. 
5.  The area used for growing shall have carbon filters (or equivalent) installed to reduce odors. 
6.  No single non-residential location may have more than one medical marijuana facility. For the purposes of this section, location means one structural non-residential building, not units within a structural building. 
7.  No equipment or process shall be used that creates noise, dust, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses beyond the property boundary. 
8.  Storage and disposal of processing waste, fertilizers and any other hazardous chemical associated with the activities of the growing or processing of medical marijuana or medical marijuana products shall comply with all local, state and federal requirements. 
(Amend. of 10-2-17) 
Sec. 12.9. - Licensing requirements. 
    All applications for medical marijuana cultivation centers, marijuana cultivation centers, marijuana stores and/or compassion centers are required to obtain an annual business license from the Town Council. The cost of such license shall be $400.00. 
(Amend. of 10-2-17) 
Sec. 12.10. - Confidentiality. 
    Any application for a permit, any inspection reports, approvals, certificates of occupancy or any other document prepared or created pursuant to this chapter shall not include the term marijuana, cardholder, caregiver, cooperative cultivation or any other term that may indicate that such document is or has been prepared or created pursuant to this chapter. 
(Amend. of 10-2-17) 
Sec. 12.11. - Violations. 
    The building official, fire marshal, zoning official and/or other designated official shall be required to report a violation of any of the provisions of this section to the Rhode Island Department of Business Regulation. 
(Amend. of 10-2-17) 
ARTICLE XIII. - VALIDITY[6] 
    If any article, section, paragraph, clause or phrase of this ordinance shall be ruled invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision ruling shall not affect the validity of any other article, section, paragraph, clause or phrase of this ordinance. 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted October 2, 2017, amended App. A by adding a new Art. XII. At the city's discretion, former Art. XII has been renumbered as a new Art. XIII. 

APPENDIX B - LAND DEVELOPMENT AND SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein are the land development and subdivision regulations of the town, as adopted by the planning board on October 26, 2004. This ordinance replaces the ordinance adopted on December 12, 1995. For subsequent amendments to the ordinance of December 12, 1995, please see the Code Comparative Table. Amendments to the regulations are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original regulations. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

SECTION 1.0. - AUTHORITY AND INTENT 

Sec. 1.1. - Title. 
    These regulations shall be known as the Exeter Land Development and Subdivision Regulations. 
Sec. 1.2. - Authority. 
    The following regulations governing land development and subdivision have been adopted by the Exeter planning board in accordance with G.L. 1956, §§ 45-23-25-45-23-74, as amended, known as the "Rhode Island Land Development and Subdivision Review Enabling Act of 1992," (short title "Development Review Act"). 
Sec. 1.3. - Applicability. 
    These rules and regulations shall be applicable in all of the following instances: 
A.  In all cases of subdivision of land in the town, including resubdivision; 
B.  In all cases of land development projects, as provided for in G.L. 1956, § 45-24-47 of the Zoning Enabling Act of 1991; and/or 
C.  In all cases of development plan review, as provided in town zoning ordinance. 
Sec. 1.4. - Continuation and superseded of regulations. 
A.  Prior regulations superseded. Any land development or subdivision submitted after the date of enactment shall conform to the provisions of these regulations. These regulations shall supersede all other subdivision regulations in effect at the time of such adoption. 
B.  Repeal of prior regulations. All prior Exeter subdivision rules and regulations in effect on the date of enactment of these regulations are hereby repealed. 
C.  Recorded plans and plats unimpaired. Nothing contained herein and no local ordinance, rule or regulation adopted under these regulations shall impair the validity of any plat legally recorded prior to the effective date of these regulations. 
D.  Vested rights. Development applications shall have the right to initiate or continue the development of an approved project for a specified period of time, under the regulations that were in effect at the time of approval, even if, after the approval, the regulations change prior to the completion of the project (see section 5.0 for specific vested rights for types of applications). 
Sec. 1.5. - General purposes of land development and subdivision regulations. 
    These regulations have been enacted for the purpose of protecting the safety, health, convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants of Exeter by regulating land developments and subdivisions. The planning board, which shall have the authority to act on behalf of the town in all matters of land development and subdivision regulation, shall exercise that power with due regard for the following purposes: 
A.  To provide for the orderly, thorough and expeditious review and approval of land development projects and subdivisions; 
B.  To promote high quality and appropriate design and construction of land development projects and subdivisions; 
C.  To promote the protection of the existing natural and built environment and the mitigation of all significant negative impacts of any proposed development on the existing environment; 
D.  To promote design of land development projects and subdivisions, which are well integrated with the surrounding neighborhoods with regard to natural and built features, and which concentrate development in areas which can best support intensive use by reasons of natural characteristics and existing infrastructure; 
E.  To encourage local design and improvement standards to reflect the intent of the community comprehensive plans, particularly with regard to the physical character of the various neighborhoods and districts of the town; 
F.  To promote thorough technical review of all proposed land development projects and subdivisions by appropriate local officials; 
G.  To establish effective requirements and procedures for dedications of public land and impact mitigation, which are based upon clear documentation of needs and fair administrative practices; 
H.  To secure adequate, efficient and economic provisions for water, sewage, traffic circulation, storm water management, recreation, fire and police protection, in all new land development projects and subdivisions; 
I.  To protect and enhance the natural resources and historic features of the town; and 
J.  To establish procedures for, and require consistent application of, good record keeping practices on all matters of land development and subdivision review, approval, recording and construction. 
Sec. 1.6. - Consistency with comprehensive plan. 
    These regulations have been found by the Exeter planning board to be consistent with the adopted Exeter comprehensive plan, the zoning ordinance of the town and are intended to be consistent with all other duly adopted local development regulations as well as with the general purposes stated in G.L. 1956, § 45-23-30, of the Land Development and Subdivision Review Enabling Act of 1992. 
    In case of uncertainty in the construction or application of any section of these local regulations, these regulations shall be construed in a manner that will further the implementation of, and not be contrary to, the goals and policies and applicable elements of the Exeter comprehensive plan. Furthermore, these regulations shall be construed in a manner consistent with the legislative findings, intents, and purposes of the state enabling act, G.L. 1956, §§ 45-23-25-45-23-74. 
SECTION 2.0. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 2.1. - Terms defined elsewhere. 
    Where words or phrases used in these regulations are defined in either the Rhode Island Comprehensive Planning and Land Use Regulation Act of 1988, or the Zoning Enabling Act of 1991, or the town zoning ordinance, they shall have the meanings stated therein. 
Sec. 2.2. - Terms defined. 
    For the purposes of these regulations, the following terms shall have the meanings stated herein: 
    Administrative officer. The municipal official designated by the local regulations to administer the land development and subdivision regulations and to coordinate with local boards and commissions, municipal staff and state agencies. In the town, the planning board has designated the chair of the planning board or the town planner as the administrative officer. 
    Administrative subdivision. Resubdivision of existing lots; which yields no additional lots for development, and involves no creation or extension of streets. Such re-subdivision shall only involve divisions, mergers, mergers and division, or adjustments of boundaries of existing lots. 
    Agricultural land. Any land of five contiguous acres or larger that by reason of soil suitability or other natural characteristics is suitable for agriculture as defined in R.I. General Laws 45-22.2-4. 
    Board of appeal. The review authority for appeals of action of the administrative officer and the planning board on matters of land development or subdivision, which shall be the Exeter zoning board of review. 
    Bond. A type of improvement guarantee. 
    Buildable lot. A lot where construction for the use(s) permitted on the site by the Exeter zoning ordinance is considered practicable by the planning board, considering the physical constraints to development of the site as well as the requirements of the pertinent federal, state, and other town regulations and ordinances. 
    Buffer. Land which is maintained in a natural state, and is used to screen and/or mitigate the impacts of development on surrounding areas, properties or rights-of-way. Refer to section 5.14. 
    Building setback line. A line drawn parallel to the property line, establishing the minimum yard requirement on each side of the property. Structures shall not be built within the required yard areas. 
    Certificate of completeness. A notice issued by the administrative officer informing an applicant that the application is complete and meets the requirements of these regulations, and that the applicant may proceed with the approval process. 
    Concept plan. A drawing with accompanying information showing the basic elements of a proposed land development plan or subdivision as used for pre-application meetings and early discussions, and classification of the project within the approval process. 
    Conservation development. A type of land development project, which allows smaller lots in order to preserve meaningful open space, to guide growth to the most appropriate areas within a parcel of land, to avoid impacts to the environment and the community character, and to protect the character-defining features of the property in perpetuity. 
    Conventional subdivision. A subdivision in which all land being subdivided is dedicated to either development lots or street right of way, with no common open space. Not a conservation development. 
    Consistency with the comprehensive plan. A requirement of these regulations, which means that these regulations and all subsequent actions shall be in accordance with the public policies arrived at through detailed study and analysis and adopted by the municipality as the comprehensive community plan. 
    Cut. An excavation. The difference between a point on the original ground and a designated point of lower elevation on the final grade. 
    Development. The construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure; any mining, excavation, landfill or land disturbance; or any change in use, or alteration or extension of the use, of land. 
    Development regulation. Zoning, subdivision, land development plan, development plan review, historic district, official map, floodplain regulation, soil erosion control or any other governmental regulation of the use and development of land. 
    Diversion. A channel constructed across the slope for the purpose of intercepting surface or subsurface runoff and carrying the water, on a reduced grade, to a suitable outlet. Diversions generally have a supporting ridge on the lower side. 
    Division of land. A subdivision. 
    Dwelling unit. A structure or portion thereof providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation, and containing a separate means of ingress and egress. 
    Easement. A grant for an indefinite period of a right of use of land for drainage, utility, conservation or other purposes. 
    Environmental constraints. Natural features, resources, or land characteristics that are sensitive to change and may require conservation measures or the application of special development techniques to prevent degradation of the site, or may require limited development, or in certain instances, may preclude development as defined herein. See also physical constraints to development. 
    Erosion. The removal of surface materials by action of natural elements. 
    Excavation. Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar materials is dug into, cut, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated or bulldozed, and shall include the conditions resulting therefore. 
    Fill. Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is placed, pushed, dumped, transported or moved to a new location above the natural surface of the ground or on top of the stripped surface, and shall include the conditions resulting there from. The fill is also the difference in elevation between a point on the original undisturbed ground and a designated point of higher elevation of the final grade. 
    Final plan. The final stage of land development and subdivision review. 
    Final plat. The final drawing(s) of all or a portion of a subdivision to be recorded after approval by the planning board or its agents and any accompanying material as required by these regulations and/or by the planning board. 
    Floodplain. The area along a natural watercourse which is periodically overflowed by water there from and as further defined by G.L. 1956, §§ 45-22-2-45-22-4. 
    Floor area, gross. See R.I. State Building Code. 
    Frontage. Property line where it abuts the street, distance between side lot lines at the street line. 
    Grade stabilization structure. A structure to stabilize the grade or control cutting by water in natural or manmade channels. Examples are headwalls, drop boxes, chute spillways, toe walls, and rip rapped sections of watercourses, etc. 
    Governing body. The body of the local government, in the case of these regulations, the Exeter town council, having the power to adopt ordinances, accept public dedications, release public improvement guarantees, and collect fees. 
    Improvement. Any natural or built item, which becomes part of, is placed upon, or is affixed to, real estate. 
    Improvement guarantee. A security instrument accepted by the planning board to ensure that all improvements, facilities, or work required by the land development and subdivision regulations, or required by the planning board as condition of approval, will be completed in compliance with the approved plans and specifications of a development. 
    Land development project. A project in which one or more lots, tracts, or parcels of land are to be developed or redeveloped as a coordinated site for a complex of uses, units, or structures, including but not limited to, planned development cluster and/or conservation development for residential, commercial, institutional, recreational, open space, and/or mixed uses as may be provided for in the zoning ordinance. 
    Local regulations. The town land development and subdivision review regulations adopted under the provisions of the G.L. 1956, §§ 45-23-25-45-23-74, including all related local ordinances and rules properly adopted pursuant to this act. 
    Lot. Either: 
(1)  The basic development unit for determination of lot area, depth and other dimensional regulation; or 
(2)  A parcel of land whose boundaries have been established by some legal instrument such as recorded deed or recorded map and, which is recognized as a separate legal entity for purposes of transfer of title. 
    Lot merger administrative subdivision. This is a subdivision that removes the common lot line between two or more lots that have been deemed merged by the zoning official pursuant to section 3.5.2 of the zoning ordinance. A zoning certificate must accompany any application for a lot merger administrative subdivision verifying applicability. 
    Maintenance guarantee. Any security instrument, which may be required and accepted by the planning board to ensure that necessary improvements will function as required for a specific period of time. See improvement guarantee. 
    Major land development plan. Any land development plan not classified as a minor land development plan. 
    Major subdivision. Any subdivision not classified as either an administrative subdivision or a minor subdivision. 
    Master plan. An overall plan for a proposed project site outlining general, rather than detailed, development intentions. It describes the basic parameters of a major development proposal, rather than giving full engineering details. Required in major land development or major subdivision review. 
    Minor land development plan. A development plan for a residential project, provided that such development does not require waivers or modifications, as specified in these regulations, and does not propose a new street. All nonresidential land development projects shall be considered as major land development plans. 
    Minor subdivision. A plan for a subdivision of land consisting of five or fewer units or lots, provided that such subdivision does not require waivers or modifications as specified in these regulations, and does not propose a new street. 
    Modification of requirements. See section 4.5. 
    Parcel. A lot, or contiguous group of lots in single ownership or under single control, and usually considered a unit for purposes of development. Also referred to as a tract. 
    Parking area or lot. All that portion of a development that is used by vehicles, the total area used for vehicular access, circulation, parking, loading and unloading. 
    Permitting authority. The local agency of government specifically empowered by state enabling law and local ordinance to hear and decide on specific matters pertaining to local land use. 
    Phased development. Development, usually for large-scale projects, where construction of public and/or private improvements proceeds by sections subsequent to approval of a master plan for the entire site. 
    Physical constraints to development. Characteristics of a site or area, either natural or manmade, which present significant difficulties to construction of the uses permitted on that site, or would require extraordinary construction methods. See also environmental constraints. 
    Planning board. The official municipal planning agency of the town, hereinafter also referred to as "the board" or "board." 
    Plat. A drawing or drawings of a land development or subdivision plan showing the location, boundaries, and lot lines of individual properties, as well as other necessary information as specified in the local regulations. 
    Pre-application conference. An initial meeting between developers and the planning board which affords developers the opportunity to present their proposals informally and to receive comments and directions from the municipal officials and others. 
    Preliminary plan. The required stage of land development and subdivision review, which requires detailed engineered drawings and all required state and federal permits. 
    Public improvement. Any street or other roadway, sidewalk, pedestrian way, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, drainage feature, or other facility for which the town or other governmental entity is presently responsible, or will ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation. 
    Public informational meeting. A meeting of the planning board preceded by a notice, open to the public, and at which the public shall be heard. 
    Public water supply. Any water system providing a potable supply to a segment of the population on a regular basis for domestic or industrial use, including supplies furnished by municipalities, special districts, authorities, associations, and privately owned water utilities. 
    Rear setback line. A line generally parallel to a rear lot line and which establishes the distance buildings must be constructed from the rear lot line. 
    Rural residential compound. A rural residential compound is a land development project containing lots for single family household structures, which are grouped on a portion or portions of a parcel, on smaller lots and within building envelopes and with flexible dimensional requirements other than those permitted in the underlying zoning district. 
    Resubdivision. Any change of an approved or recorded subdivision plat or in a lot recorded in the town land evidence records, or that affects the lot lines of any areas reserved for public use, or that affects any map or plan legally recorded prior to the adoption of these regulations. For the purposes of these regulations, any such action shall constitute a subdivision. 
    Runoff. The surface water discharge or rate of discharge of a given watershed after a fall of rain or snow and including seepage flows that do not enter the soil but run off the surface of the land. That portion of water that is not absorbed by the soil, but runs off the surface. 
    Runoff from a fully developed area upstream. The surface water runoff that can be reasonably anticipated upon maximum development of that area of the watershed located upstream from the subject tract, as permitted by the town's zoning ordinance and comprehensive plan. 
    Sedimentation. The process by which mineral or organic matter is accumulated or deposited by moving wind, water, or gravity. Once this matter is deposited (or if remaining suspended in water), it is usually referred to as "sediment." 
    Side setback line. A line generally parallel to a side lot line and which establishes the distance buildings must be constructed from the side lot line. 
    Sketch plan overlay sheet. A scaled drawing that illustrates conceptual layouts of house lots, buildings, streets and conservation areas. 
    Slope. The face of an embankment or cut section; any ground whose surface makes an angle with the plane of the horizon. Slopes are usually expressed in a percentage based upon vertical difference in feet per 100 feet of horizontal distance. Any natural landform that is not horizontal differs from the horizontal. 
    Soil stabilization. The chemical, mechanical, or structural treatment of a mass of soil to increase or maintain its stability or otherwise improve its engineering properties and reduce erosion. 
    Specimen vegetation. Rhode Island Natural Heritage Program plant species listed as either state endangered, state threatened, state interest species of concern, or state extirpated; plant species providing habitat for animal species listed by the Heritage program in the above mentioned categories; species such as American Holly (Ilex opalca) and Rhododendron (Rhododendron maximum) which are at the limits of their natural range; any species such as American Elm (Ulmus Americana) and American Chestnut (Castenata dentate) whose population has been drastically reduced by disease, insects or habitat destruction. 
    Storm water detention. A provision for storage of storm water runoff and the controlled release of such runoff during and after a flood or storm. 
    Storm water retention. A provision for storage of storm water runoff. 
    Street. A public thoroughfare, accepted by the town, used or intended to be used, for passage or travel by motor vehicles. Streets are further classified by the functions they perform. See street classification. 
    Street, access to. An adequate and permanent way of entering a lot. All lots of record shall have access to a public street for all vehicles normally associated with the uses permitted for that lot. 
    Street, cul-de-sac. A local street with only one outlet and having an appropriate vehicular turnaround, either temporary or permanent, at the closed end. 
    Street, limited access highway. A freeway or expressway providing for through traffic. Owners or occupants of abutting property on lands and other persons have no legal right to access, except at such points and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over the highway. 
    Street line. A lot line that separates a lot from a street. 
    Street right-of-way. The area between street lines. 
    Street, stub. A portion of a street reserved to provide access to future development, which may provide for utility connections. 
    Street classification. A method of roadway organization which identifies a street hierarchy according to function within a road system, that is, types of vehicles served and anticipated volumes, for the purposes of promoting safety, efficient land use and the design character of neighborhoods and districts. The following are major categories and are further described in section 7.2.B. 
a.  Arterial. A major street that serves as an avenue for the circulation of traffic into, out of, or around the town and carries high volumes of traffic. 
b.  Collector. A street whose principal function is to carry traffic between local streets and arterial streets but that may also provide direct access to abutting properties. 
c.  Local. Streets whose primary function is to provide access to abutting properties. 
    Subdivider. Any person who: 
(1)  Having an interest in land, causes it, directly or indirectly, to be divided into a subdivision; or 
(2)  Directly or indirectly sells, leases, or develops, or offers to sell, lease, or develop, or advertises to sell, lease, or develop, any interest, lot, parcel, site, unit, or plat in a subdivision; or 
(3)  Engages directly or through an agent in the business of selling, leasing, developing, or offering for sale, lease, or development in a subdivision or any interest, lot, parcel, site, unit, or plat in a subdivision. 
    Subdivision. The division or re-division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, tracts, or parcels. Any adjustment to existing lot lines of a recorded lot by any means shall be considered a subdivision. All re-subdivision activity shall be considered a subdivision. The division of property for purposes of financing constitutes a subdivision. 
    Swale. A low-lying stretch of land, which gathers or carries surface water runoff. 
    Temporary improvement. Improvements built and maintained by a developer during construction of a development project and prior to release of the improvement guarantee, but not intended to be permanent. 
    Topsoil. Surface soils and subsurface soils, which presumably are fertile soils and soil material, ordinarily rich in organic matter or humus debris. Topsoil is usually found in the uppermost soil layer called the A-horizon. 
    Vested rights. The right to initiate or continue the development of an approved project for a specified period of time, under the regulations that were in effect at the time of approval, even if, after the approval, the regulations change prior to the completion of the project. 
    View-shed. The primary area, which can be viewed from a defined observation point. To determine the extent of the view-shed, important vantage points and significant features should be identified. The area that can be seen from those points should be designated as the view-shed. 
    Waiver of requirements. See section 4.5. 
    Watercourse. A permanent stream, intermittent stream, river, brook, creek, or a channel or ditch for water, whether natural or manmade. 
    Yield plan. A plan of a conventional (as opposed to a conservation) subdivision or land development project that depicts the maximum number of building lots or dwelling units that could reasonably be built on a parcel of land under current zoning, taking into account physical constraints to development, such as wetlands, etc. No lot shall be considered buildable unless it can be shown to have a minimum of one acre (43,560 sq. ft.) of contiguous, accessible land that is free of biological wetlands, water bodies, street rights-of way, or electrical power line easements. 
(Amd. of 2-20-17) 
SECTION 3.0. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
    The elements described within section 3.0 apply generally to all land development projects and subdivisions subject to these regulations. 

Sec. 3.1. - Town regulatory officials. 
A.  Planning board. The town planning board has been authorized as the local regulatory agency for all matters of land development and subdivision. 
B.  Administrative officer. The planning board may designate the chair of the planning board or the town planner as administrative officer to work as their agent to oversee and coordinate all aspects of the review, approval and recording as well as the construction phases for all land development projects and subdivisions (see section 9.1, administrative officer). 
C.  The qualifications for the town planner are set by the planning board and the appointment of the town planner shall be by the town council. 
Sec. 3.2. - Required submission documents. 
    All applications subject to these regulations shall have specific submission requirements, depending upon the type of development proposed (see Section 12.0 for itemized lists of application requirements). 
Sec. 3.3. - Fee structures and regulations. 
A.  General . The planning board shall impose reasonable fees for the review of applications, which come before it. The planning board may impose administrative fees and project review fees as may be applicable to the types of applications set forth below. Each fee shall be submitted separately, in accordance with the following provisions. 
B.  Administrative fees. 
1.  Applicability. An administrative application shall be assesed at the time of application, to offset the expense of review by the planning board and its office staff with regard to all applications set forth in subsection 2, below. Any application filed without this fee shall be deemed incomplete and no review work by the town shall commence until the fee has been paid in full. 
2.  Application fees. Application fees shall be as follows: 
A.  Pre-application review: $100.00 
B.  Administrative subdivision: $100.00 
C.  Minor land development projects and minor subdivisions (including rural residential compounds): 
1.  Pre-application meeting: $100.00 (if more than two meetings, additional $100.00 required per additional meeting) 
2.  Preliminary plan: $200.00 plus $50.00 for each additional unit or lot 
3.  Final plan: $100.00 
D.  Major land development projects and major subdivisions: 
1.  Pre-application meeting (if more than two meetings, additional fees required equivalent to original meeting fee for each additional meeting): 
Residential: $200.00 plus $20.00 for each additional unit or lot ;b5; Nonresidential: $100.00 plus five cents per square foot of gross floor area. 
2.  Master plan: 
Residential: $300.00 plus $50.00 for each additional unit or lot ;b5; Nonresidential: $100.00 plus five cents per square foot of gross floor area. 
3.  Preliminary plan: 
Residential: $500.00 plus $100.00 for each additional lot or unit 
Nonresidential: $100.00 plus five cents per square foot of gross floor area 
4.  Final plan: 
Residential: $100.00 plus $20.00 for each additional unit or lot 
Nonresidential: $100.00 plus five cents per square foot of gross floor area 
E.  Development plan review: 
1.  Pre-application meeting: $100.00 plus five cents per square foot of gross floor area. 
2.  Preliminary: $100.00 plus five cents per square foot of gross floor area. 
3.  Final: $100.00 plus five cents per square foot of gross floor area. 
F.  Extension requests: $100.00 
G.  Any appeal filed pursuant to section 10, documents and reproduction fees including, but not limited to stenographic, copying, and tape reproduction. Fee will commensurate with actual cost. 
3.  Fees for revised applications. Where an administrative fee has been calculated and the application is revised after payment of said fee, the following rules shall apply: 
A.  If the basis for calculating the fee increases after the initial submittal, the applicant shall pay a fee equivalent to the difference between the fee originally paid and the fee that would have been paid had the original submission included these revisions. No review of these revisions shall take place until this additional fee is paid. The application is incomplete until such fee is paid. Failure to make this payment after requesting additional revisions shall be grounds for denial of the application. 
B.  If the basis for calculating the fee decreases, a refund of that portion of the application fee predicated on those lots or units shall be granted only if, in the judgment of the planning board, no cost associated with the review of those lots or units has been yet incurred. The application is incomplete if the fee is not paid. 
4.  Fee waivers. The planning board may waive or reduce any administrative fee, if, in the opinion of the board, unusual circumstances exist regarding the subject property or the applicant. 
5.  Refund. Once the review process has been commenced, the planning board shall not refund administrative fees, including the case of withdrawal of the application by the applicant, except as provided in subsection B.3.B, above. 
C.  Project review, hearing and inspection fees. 
1.  Applicability. In addition to the administrative fees cited in section 3.3.B.2, the applicant shall also provide payment for all hearing costs, including the cost of legal ads and stenographers. The planning board shall also impose a project review fee on those applications which require, in the judgment and sole discretion of the planning board, analyses or review by outside consultants due to the size, scale or complexity of a proposed project, the project's potential impacts, and/or because the town lacks the necessary expertise to perform the review work related to the permit or approval. In hiring outside consultants, the board may engage, including but not limited to, engineers, planners, lawyers, landscape architects, architects, geo-technical experts, hydrology experts, or other appropriate firms, persons or professionals able to assist the board in its review of the proposal or application and to ensure compliance with all relevant laws, ordinances, and regulations, as well as with the formulation of reasonable measures to assess and/or mitigate identified impacts. Such assistance may include, but shall not be limited to, analyzing an application, review of information submitted by an applicant, design review of applications to determine consistency with the town's design standards and objectives including those referenced in the community comprehensive plan, examining the adequacy and reasonable alternatives of measures to mitigate potential impacts, monitoring or inspecting a project or site for compliance with the board's decisions or regulations, or inspecting a project during construction or implementation, or such other similar technical assistance as the planning board may require. 
2.  Submittal. Project review fees shall be submitted at the time of the submittal of the application for deposit in an escrow account established by the town treasurer. Any application filed without this fee shall be deemed incomplete and no review work shall commence until the fee has been paid in full. 
3.  Schedule of project review fees. The following schedule applies to the types of applications to the planning board set forth below. This schedule supersedes all previous schedules as they may have appeared in the zoning ordinance, the subdivision and land development regulations, and any listings, which may have been compiled from time to time for the benefit of applicants. 
A.  Conceptual master plan, subdivision or land development project: $1,000.00 for the first six units or lots, plus $100.00 per unit or lot, after the first six. 
B.  Preliminary plan, subdivision or land development project: $1,000.00 for the first six units or lots, plus $100.00 per unit or lot, after the first six. 
C.  Final plan, subdivision or land development project: $1,000.00 for the first six units or lots, plus $100.00 per unit or lot, after the first six. 
D.  Development plan, subdivision or land development project: $1,000.00 for the first six units or lots, plus $100.00 per unit or lot, after the first six. 
4.  Replenishment. When the balance in an applicant's escrow account falls below 25 percent of the initial project review fee, as imposed above, the planning board shall consider whether to require a supplemental project review fee to cover the cost of the remaining project review. 
5.  Inspection phase. After the granting of a final plan approval, or authorizing construction upon the acceptance of a performance guarantee, the planning board may require a supplemental project review fee for the purpose of ensuring the availability of funds to cover the inspection phase of the review process. 
6.  Handling of project review fees. The project review fee is to be deposited into a special account as established by the town. 
A.  Project review fees shall be turned over to the town by the planning board for deposit into an escrow account. 
B.  Outside consultants retained by the planning board to assist in the review of an application shall be paid from this account. 
C.  A copy of the latest statement from the banking institution handling the escrow account shall be forwarded to the planning board office as soon as it is received for timely and accurate accounting. 
D.  A report on activity in the escrow account on an annual basis shall be submitted to the planning board and town council for review. 
E.  An accounting of an applicant's funds held in the escrow account may be requested by the applicant at any time. 
1.  The planning board shall respond to the request in a timely fashion. 
2.  This accounting may include the following information: 
a.  The latest statement from the banking institution handling the account, which should include an accurate accumulated interest portion to the closing date of the statement if such statements are subdivided into individual applicant's accounts. 
b.  A report of all checks authorized for issuance since that last banking statement. 
F.  An applicant may request an estimate of bills pending from consultants for work completed, or in progress, but not yet invoiced. 
G.  Excess fees in the escrow account shall be returned to the applicant or the applicant's successor in interest, at the conclusion of the review process, as defined below. For the purpose of this section, any person or entity claiming to be an applicant's successor in interest shall provide the board with documentation establishing such succession in interest. All accumulated interest shall accrue to the town to cover costs associated with the management and processing of those procedures. 
1.  With the approval or disapproval of a preliminary subdivision plan. 
2.  With the disapproval of a final subdivision plan. 
3.  With the release of the performance bond at the end of construction of an approved final subdivision plan. 
4.  With the final inspection or the approval or disapproval on all other types of applications under the zoning ordinance or subdivision and land development regulations, whichever comes later. 
7.  Appeal. The choice of a consultant, selected by the planning board for project review, may be appealed in writing to the board of appeal by the applicant, providing such appeal is initiated in accordance with section 10.0 of these regulations. 
A.  Two circumstances may disqualify the selected consultant. These conditions constitute the only grounds for an appeal. 
1.  Conflict of interest: A consultant shall not have a financial interest in the project under review, or be in a position to financially benefit in some way from the outcome of the pending review process. Consultants must be in compliance with the Rhode Island Ethics Law. 
2.  Lack of appropriate qualifications: A consultant shall possess the minimum required qualifications. The minimum qualifications shall consist of either an educational degree in, or related to, the field at issue or three or more years of practice in the field at issue or a related field. 
B.  The required time limits for action upon an application by the planning board shall be extended by duration of the appeal. 
C.  This appeal shall not preclude further judicial review, as an appeal of the board of appeal's decision. 
D.  Delinquent accounts. The following rules apply to fees owed to the planning board by applicants: 
1.  Monthly interest charge. All fees past due by one month from the date of invoice shall be subject to a monthly interest charge based upon an annual interest rate of 12 percent. 
2.  Costs of collection. All costs of collection associated with past due accounts shall be borne by the applicant. 
(Amd. of 2-20-17) 
Sec. 3.4. - Project description and impact study. 
    Any application for a residential subdivision creating more than five lots, and all nonresidential subdivisions shall include a narrative describing the proposed project's major elements, potential significant impacts on the surrounding neighborhood and/or community and the means by which these identified impacts shall be mitigated by the project design or otherwise. 
1.  The planning board shall have the authority to require the applicant to prepare an Environmental and Community Impact Study (ECIS) to assess the potential short and long term effects of the proposed subdivision or land development project under any of the following conditions: 
a.  If all or part of the property that is the subject of the application includes land identified by any or all of following agencies; the Exeter planning board, the Exeter conservation commission, the Rhode Island Natural Heritage Program, the Rhode Island Historic Preservation and Heritage Commission, the Nature Conservancy, the RI Department of Environmental Management, the U.S. Geological Survey, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, as unique natural areas or areas of critical and/or environmental concern; or 
b.  The planning board finds that there is reasonable expectation that the proposed subdivision or land development project may have a negative environmental impact on natural systems located on the property or adjacent to the property that is the subject of the application or upon nearby properties or natural systems. 
c.  The planning board finds that there is reasonable expectation that the proposed subdivision or land development project may have a negative impact on community services and facilities. 
2.  The board shall make findings of fact in writing and shall identify the environmental resources found to be potentially threatened. The board's findings shall be made a part of the record of the application 
3.  An ECIS required under this section shall include research and documentation describing and assessing short and long-term cumulative environmental impacts, which may include but not be limited to impacts upon: 
a.  Freshwater wetlands; 
b.  Flooding and drainage; 
c.  Noise and air quality; 
d.  Solid waste generation; 
e.  Historic/archaeologic areas; 
f.  Traffic/road capacity; 
g.  Hydric soils; 
h.  Forests and agricultural lands; 
i.  Unique vegetation, significant trees, and important scenic or designed landscapes; 
j.  Natural heritage sites; 
k.  Wildlife and wildlife habitat; 
l.  Groundwater quality and quantity; 
m.  Surface water quality, streams and rivers; 
n.  Schools and other community facilities; and 
o.  Public wells and well fields. 
4.  If an ECIS is required, the applicant shall be so informed at the preliminary meeting for a minor subdivision, or the conceptual master plan stage for a major subdivision and shall be advised at that meeting as to the specific issues that the ECIS must address. 
5.  For any subdivision or land development project for which an ECIS is required, the board shall have the authority to impose conditions on approval, including but not limited to off-site improvements, that, based on the findings and analysis of the ECIS, are reasonably necessary to minimize adverse impacts that the development may have on the natural or manmade environment. 
6.  All environmental and community impact studies shall be referred to the conservation commission and other appropriate town boards, commissions, or other local, state or federal, agencies for their review and comment prior to planning board approval of the preliminary plan. 
7.  It in the opinion of the planning board, impacts identified in the ECIS cannot be adequately mitigated so as to achieve compliance with each of the requirements specified in section 3.5, the planning board shall have the authority to deny approval of the proposed development design. 
Sec. 3.5. - Required findings for all approvals. 
    For all development and subdivision applications subject to these regulations the planning board, or its designated agents, shall address each of the general purposes stated in section 1.5, and shall make positive findings on the following standard provisions as part of the proposed project's record, prior to approval. If a negative finding for any of these standards is made, the planning board shall have grounds for denial of the project design: 
1.  The proposed development is consistent with the town's comprehensive plan and/or has to the board's satisfaction addressed the issues where there may be inconsistencies; 
2.  Each lot in the subdivision shall conform to the standards and provisions of these regulations and of the town zoning ordinance. Provided, however, that lots not being created for the purpose of present or future development need not meet the area and other dimensional requirements of the town zoning ordinance provided that: 
a.  A notation is shown on the recorded plat that the lot being created is not a buildable lot; and 
b.  A conservation or preservation restriction pursuant to Title 34, Chapter 39 of the Rhode Island General Laws, as amended, is granted to the town prohibiting any such present or future development. 
3.  There will be no significant negative environmental impacts from the proposed development as shown on the preliminary plan as determined by the planning board, with all required conditions for approval; 
4.  Subdivision, as proposed, will not result in the creation of individual lots with such physical constraints to development that building on those lots according to pertinent regulations and building standards would be impracticable (see definition of buildable lot). Lots with such physical constraints to development may be created only if identified as permanent open space or permanently reserved for a public purpose on approved recorded plans; 
5.  All proposed land developments land development projects and all subdivision lots shall have adequate, permanent and safe physical vehicular access to a public street. Lot frontage on a public street without physical access shall not be considered compliance with this requirement; 
6.  Each subdivision shall provide for safe circulation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic for adequate surface water run-off, for suitable building sites, and for preservation of natural, historical, or cultural features that contribute to the attractiveness of the community; and 
7.  The design and location of streets, building lots, utilities, drainage improvements and other improvements in each subdivision shall minimize flooding, soil erosion, and shall embody to the degree feasible a design that minimizes future maintenance; 
8.  For each new lot frontage at the minimum setback or building line shall be not less than 75 percent of that required at the front lot line or street line; 
9.  Provisions may be required for specific developments for access to any area isolated from the frontage on an existing public street. This shall be accomplished by reservation of land within the development to provide future access to isolated, adjacent parcels through a de-feasible easement running with the deed in favor of the town; 
10.  The proposed development meets all of the design standards within section 7.0 of these regulations, including all approved waivers accepted and authorized by the planning board under section 4.5 of these regulations; 
11.  The open space within conservation developments meets the standards and requirements of these Regulations with regard to amount, location, use, nature and design. 
12.  The proposed development meets all other requirements of these regulations. 
SECTION 4.0. - SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS 
    The elements within section 4.0 may be applicable to individual land development projects and subdivisions, depending upon the individual site and project design. 

Sec. 4.1. - Off-site improvements. 
1.  Purpose. This section is intended to ensure that sub-dividers provide off-site infrastructure improvements in order to mitigate the impacts that the development may have on the town's natural and manmade environment which are directly or indirectly attributable to new development. The planning board may require such improvements if the board finds that there is a reasonable relationship between the requested improvement and the proposed new development. Off-site improvements may include, but are not limited to improvements to the following: 
a.  Utility structures; 
b.  Water supply systems; 
c.  Roadways; 
d.  Sidewalks; 
e.  Bicycle paths; 
f.  Drainage systems; 
g.  Bridge/culverts; and 
h.  Public safety. 
2.  Definition and principles. As a condition of final approval, the planning board may require a subdivider to construct reasonable and necessary improvements located off of the proposed land being subdivided. "Necessary" improvements are those clearly and substantially related to the subdivision or land development being proposed. The planning board shall provide in its resolution of preliminary approval, the basis for requiring such off-site improvements. In its resolution, the board must find that a significant negative impact on existing conditions will result if the off-site improvements are not made, and are clearly documented in the public record. The mitigation required as a condition of approval must be related to the significance of the identified impact. All required off-site improvements must reflect the character the town. 
Sec. 4.2. - Improvement guarantees. 
A.  The planning board shall approve agreements for the completion of all required public improvements prior to final plan approval in the form of: 
(1)  Completion of actual construction of all improvements, 
(2)  Improvement guarantees, or 
(3)  A combination thereof. 
B.  Where improvements are constructed without a financial guarantee, the work is to be completed prior to final approval. All construction shall be inspected and approved under the direction of the public works director and according to these regulations. Before final approval the applicant must supply the planning board with a letter from the public works director certifying that the improvements have been completed in a satisfactory manner. 
C.  Improvement guarantees shall be in an amount and with all necessary conditions to secure for the town the actual construction and complete installation of all the required improvements, within the period specified by the planning board. The amount shall be based on actual cost estimates for all required public improvements. The guarantee shall enable the town to gain timely access to the secured funds, for cause. The public works director shall submit a written recommendation of the amount of the performance bond to the planning board for their approval. The board may fix the guarantee in a reasonable amount in excess of the estimated costs to anticipate for economic or construction conditions. The board shall review guarantees on a regular basis and upgrade them as necessary. 
D.  The security shall be in the form of a certified check, payable to the town, to be deposited in an interest-bearing account. All accrued interest will be returned to the applicant. 
E.  The planning board, in consultation with the public works director, shall set the amounts of improvement guarantees, review and approve the constructed improvements and release the improvement guarantee to the applicant. 
F.  The applicant may apply to the board for a partial release of the bond upon completion of a portion of the required improvements. The public works director will notify the planning board in writing as to the amount of reduction recommended, if any, based upon the completion of improvements according to the required specifications. 
G.  In the cases of developments and subdivisions, which are being approved and constructed in phases, the planning board shall specify improvement guarantee requirements related to each particular phase. 
H.  Upon completion of all required improvements, the applicant may request the board to release 90 percent of the bond originally posted. The public works director will notify the board in writing as to whether the improvements have been satisfactorily completed. If all improvements are completed by the subdivider, a maintenance bond of ten percent of the improvement costs shall be required. 
I.  One year from the date of completion of all of the required improvements as provisionally certified by town's consulting engineer, the applicant may request the board to release the remaining bond. The public works director will notify the board in writing as to whether defects in the design or construction of the required improvements have become evident since the release of the original 90 percent of the bond. 
J.  Until the required improvements have been completed and accepted by the town, no building permit shall be issued for the construction or alteration of any building on any lot in a development, unless an acceptable guarantee of performance of the subdivision has been received the town treasurer and approved by the planning board. 
K.  Required improvements shall be completed within two years of final approval of the development by the board. The developer must request an extension of time from the board if additional time is needed. Any such extension request must be accompanied by a bond review, update, and posting of additional bond if so determined by the board. If the improvements are not completed within two years or time extensions arranged with the board, the bond will be forfeited to the town. Upon forfeiture, the board shall authorize the public works director to use the forfeited bond to oversee the completion of the required improvements. 
L.  All such improvements, once inspected and approved, shall be accepted by the town or appropriate town agency for maintenance and/or as part of the town system. 
M.  The town is hereby granted the power to enforce the guarantees by all appropriate legal and equitable remedies. 
Sec. 4.3. - Phasing of major land developments land development projects and major subdivisions. 
1.  When a major land development project, or a major subdivision, is submitted for master plan approval as provided in section 5.5, the planning board shall review the adequacy of existing and projected future public improvements, services and facilities, which may be impacted by the proposed development in its entirety, and taking into account the cumulative impacts of the proposed subdivision or land development project on such services and facilities with regard to area growth and development. If the planning board determines that such improvements, services and facilities, including but not limited to water supply, sewerage, streets and associated drainage facilities, schools, recreational facilities and fire and police protection will not be adequate to serve the residents of the subdivision or development at the time of recording of the plat, the planning board shall have the authority to establish a rate of development of the entire development by requiring it to be built in phases. 
2.  When an application is submitted for master plan approval, the applicant shall submit to the applicable municipal, state or private agency as provided in the master plan checklist for major land development projects and major subdivisions, a copy of the master plan narrative report for their review and comment. Each agency so notified by the applicant shall be requested to provide its comments in writing to the planning board. Comments shall be received from each agency prior to the date of the informational meeting. If comments are not received by the administrative officer by that date, it shall be assumed that the agency does not wish to comment. 
If the public informational meeting on the master plan and the public hearing on the preliminary plan are combined as provided in section 5.5C, all comments from reviewing agencies shall be received prior to the date of the public hearing. 
3.  Each department or agency to which such a request for comments is made shall deliver to the administrative officer, in addition to the written correspondence, any supplementary material, which shall describe: 
a.  An estimate of the impact of the development on the facilities and/or services provided by the department or agency. Such estimate shall take into account the cumulative impacts of all growth and development in the area of the proposed development; 
b.  Whether existing facilities and/or services are adequate to serve the residents of the proposed development; 
c.  Whether plans for the necessary improvements to existing facilities and/or services are included in the town's capital improvement program or are otherwise planned; and 
d.  An estimate of how long it would take to provide any necessary improvements to existing facilities and/or services. 
4.  Based on the responses received from the various departments and agencies, the planning board shall establish, at the time of master plan approval, a rate of development of the entire development that will permit residential construction only when improvements, services and facilities will be adequate to serve the residents of the development. As part of such a growth rate plan, the planning board may require that improvements be installed, or lots sold, in two or more phases. 
5.  If phasing is required, the planning board shall approve the entire master plan first. Thereafter, the applicant shall be required to submit plans for preliminary and/or final review and/or approval indicating the development of the entire site in two or more phases as required by the planning board in section 5.5, above. In such review and approval, the board may, in its discretion, impose conditions for determining the physical limits of phases, for allowing progression to additional phases, for allowing two or more phases to proceed in review or construction simultaneously, for interim public improvements or construction conditions, for changes to master or preliminary plans, and may include other provisions as necessitated by special conditions. 
6.  The master plan documents may contain information on the physical limits of the phases, the schedule and sequence of public improvement installation, improvement guarantees, and the work and completion schedules for approvals and construction of the phases. 
Sec. 4.4. - Waiver of development plan approval. 
A.  The planning board may waive requirements for development plan approval where there is a change in use or occupancy and not extensive construction of improvements is sought. The waiver may be granted only by a decision by the planning board finding that the use will not affect existing drainage, circulation, relationship of buildings to each other, landscaping, buffering, lighting and other considerations of development plan approval, and that the existing facilities do not require upgraded or additional site improvements. 
B.  The application for a waiver of development plan approval review shall include documentation, as required by the planning board, on prior use of the site, the proposed use, and its impact. 
Sec. 4.5. - Waiver and modification of requirements. 
A.  The planning board shall have the authority to waive or modify one or more of the requirements for land development or subdivision approval contained in these regulations if the planning board finds, on the record that: 
1.  The waiver or modification is reasonable and within the general purposes and intents of these regulations; and 
2.  Literal enforcement of one or more provisions of the regulations is impracticable and will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question, or where such waiver and/or modification is in the best interest of good planning practice and/or design as evidenced by consistency with the town's comprehensive plan and zoning ordinance. 
B.  The planning board shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny a request for a waiver or modification by the following procedure: 
1.  The planning board's decision shall be made within 45 days of the day the request for the waiver or modification was first considered by the planning board, unless the applicant waives that deadline. 
2.  The planning board's decision shall be in writing and shall contain findings of fact addressing the conditions contained in section 4.5.A. 
Sec. 4.6. - Reinstatement of development applications. 
A.  When an applicant has exceeded a deadline established by these regulations for submission of material for a land development or subdivision, there rendering a previously granted approval invalid, the application may be reinstated by the planning board under the following conditions: 
1.  The development is consistent with the comprehensive community plan; 
2.  The land development and subdivision regulations are substantially the same as they were at the time of original approval; 
3.  The zoning of the development parcel is substantially the same as it was at the time of original approval; 
4.  Physical conditions on the development parcel are substantially the same as they were at the time of original approval; and 
5.  Any applicable state or federal regulations are substantially the same as they were at the time of original approval. 
B.  Application for reinstatement of a previously approved subdivision shall be made, in writing, to the planning board. The planning board, in approving or denying the request for an extension, shall make findings of fact, which shall be made part of the record. 
Sec. 4.7 - Dedication of land for public purposes. 
1.  Subdivider must provide open space. The planning board may require all residential land to dedicate a portion of the land being developed or subdivided for the purpose of providing open space, conservation, park and recreational facilities to serve present and future residents of the proposed land development or subdivision. The planning board may, in its discretion, require the payment of a fee-in-lieu of land dedication, or a combination of land dedication and payment of a fee, as an alternative to the dedication of land. 
2.  Relationship to comprehensive plan. No dedication of land to the public or payment-in-lieu of such dedications shall be required unless the need for such is documented in the adopted plans of the town, i.e., the comprehensive community plan, the local recreation conservation and open space plan, or the capital improvement program (CIP). The requirement for dedication of land for open space, conservation, park and recreation facilities shall be based upon the policies and standards set forth in the above plan or in the CIP and shall reflect the character defined for the neighborhood or district in which the subdivision is located by comprehensive community plan. The nature of the land dedication must reflect the character of the land being subdivided and must be suitable for the intended use. If payments, in-lieu-of-land dedications are required, they must be kept in a restricted account and shall only be spent for the intended purpose of providing open space, conservation, park and recreation facilities. 
3.  Amount of land to be dedicated. The minimum amount of land to be dedicated shall be based upon the following formula: 
Amount of land Dedicated = Number of house lots x Minimum lot size in the underlying zoning district x Three percent  
*Further subdivision of such lot(s) may be subject to further fee(s) 
4.  Ownership of land. Land dedicated under the provisions of this Section may, subject to the approval of the planning board, be dedicated by transfer of fee simple ownership to the town or, in the case of a conservation development, to an agency or organization as provided in section 5.12.D. 
5.  Fees-in-lieu-of-land dedication. Where a fee is required by the planning board to be paid in-lieu-of land dedication, the amount of such fee shall be based on the fair market value of the amount of undeveloped land which would otherwise be required to be dedicated under subsection 3 hereof. Fair market value of the land shall be established by the Exeter Tax Assessor at the time of final plan review. Fair market value shall be established assuming subdivision approval has been granted and review of recent sales of comparable vacant undeveloped land within the Town and neighboring towns. The amount of such fee shall be determined by the following formula: 
Fee-in-lieu of land dedication = Fair Market value per acre of undeveloped land x Amount of land to be dedicated  
a.  If the sub-divider objects to such amount of evaluation, he/she may, at his/her own expense, obtain two separate independent appraisals of the property by qualified real estate appraisers, which appraisals may be accepted by the planning board, if found to be reasonable; or 
b.  The planning board and sub-divider may agree as to the fair market value. 
6.  Use of fees collected. Fees-in-lieu of land dedication shall be held by the Town Treasurer in a restricted account for recreation and open space activities only. Such account shall be used to purchase, maintain and operate parks, playgrounds, recreational facilities and open space areas. Fees shall be made available for use by the Exeter Rural Land Preservation Trust for these purposes. A proportionate share may be used for capital improvements at existing recreational or open space areas demonstrated to be used by the approved subdivision. 
(Amd. of 2-20-17) 
SECTION 5.0. - CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 5.1. - Purpose. 
    Pursuant to and consistent with section 1.4.B.D of the zoning ordinance, the purposes of this section, conservation development, are: 
A.  To protect natural resources, including but not limited to those areas containing woodlands, unique vegetation, streams, floodplains, wetlands, aquifers to their recharge areas, agricultural lands, wellheads and vernal pools, by setting them aside from development; 
B.  To preserve cultural, historical and archaeological resources; 
C.  To protect recreational resources; 
D.  To provide greater design flexibility and efficiency in the siting of services and infrastructure, including wastewater disposal systems and wells, and to reduce length of roads, utility runs, and the amount of paving required for residential development; 
E.  To provide for a diversity of lot sizes, building densities, and housing choices to accommodate a variety of age and income groups, and residential preferences, so that the population diversity of the community may be maintained; 
F.  To implement adopted municipal policies to conserve a variety of irreplaceable and environmentally important resources as set forth in the comprehensive plan, 
G.  To provide reasonable incentives for the creation of a contiguous greenway system within the town; 
H.  To implement adopted land use, transportation and community service policies, as set forth in the comprehensive plan, 
I.  To protect areas of the town with productive agricultural soils to encourage continued or future agricultural use by conserving blocks of land large enough to allow for efficient farm operations; 
J.  To create neighborhoods with direct visual and/or physical access to open land, with amenities in the form of neighborhood open space, and with a strong neighborhood identity; 
K.  To provide for the maintenance of open land set aside for active or passive recreational use, storm water drainage or conservation lands; 
L.  To conserve and create scenic views and preserve the rural character of the town; 
M.  To provide a buffer between new development and existing streets, neighborhoods, active farmland and adjacent park or conservation land. 
Sec. 5.2. - Applicability. 
A.  In accordance with the standards set forth in this section 5.0, the planning board shall allow all major subdivisions and major land development projects be developed as a conservation development, whether a subdivision or not. Major subdivisions and major land development projects shall be required to follow the procedure for review and approval prescribed in section 6.5 
B.  The planning board shall allow a minor subdivision or minor land development project to be developed as a conservation development, if it finds that a conservation development would a better form of development, after consideration of the general purposes and required standards for subdivisions and land development projects set forth in these regulations, and after consideration of the purposes of conservation developments set forth in section 5.1. 
Sec. 5.3. - Procedures. 
    Applications for conservation development approval shall be made in accordance with the procedures for approval of a major or minor subdivision or land development project based on the number of lots or dwellings in the development as provided in section 6.0 of these regulations. 
Sec. 5.4. - Design process. 
    The design of a conservation development shall follow the design process specified in the following steps. As a guide in designing conservation developments, applicants are encouraged to review the provisions of the Rhode Island Conservation Development Manual, RIDEM, June 2003 in the preparation of plans. The maps illustrated in this manual will provide graphic examples of what is required of applicants. When the master plan is submitted for major land development projects or subdivisions, or preliminary plans for minor land development projects or subdivisions, applicants shall demonstrate to the planning board that this design process was considered in determining the layout of proposed streets, building locations, and open space. See section 12 for specific requirements. 
    Step 1 - Analyze the site. The first step is to inventory existing site features, taking care to identify sensitive and noteworthy natural, scenic and cultural resources on the site, and to determine the connection of these important features to each other and strategies for protection. For pre-application meetings, the applicant shall submit the information required by the pre-application checklist. For master plan meetings, this information shall be submitted in the form of an existing resources and site analysis map, as specified in section 5.16. 
    Step 2 - Evaluate site context. The second step is to evaluate the site in its larger context of the neighborhood and town by identifying physical (e.g., stream corridors, wetlands), transportation (e.g., street and bicycle networks), and cultural (e.g., open spaces, recreational opportunities) connections to surrounding land uses and activities. This information shall be submitted in the form of a site context map, as specified in section 5.6. 
    Step 3 - Designate potential conservation areas. The third step is to identify the areas on the site to be preserved on the site as open space. The open space shall at a minimum include portions of the site that are unsuitable for development and which constitute the most sensitive and noteworthy natural, cultural and recreational resources of the site. Where appropriate, areas that serve to extend neighborhood open space networks to/from surrounding property shall be identified. The designation of open space shall reflect consistency with the town comprehensive plan. 
    Step 4 - Determine maximum number of units. At the master plan stage for major subdivisions and major land development projects, and at the preliminary stage for minor subdivisions and minor land development projects, the applicant and planning board shall agree upon an initial number of dwelling units that will be permitted in the conservation development or subdivision, using the yield plan approach as described in section 5.8. The number of units may be changed by the planning board during subsequent stages of review, as more information is provided, until the final basic maximum number of dwelling units is determined. 
    Step 5 - Locate development areas and explore conceptual alternatives. As part of the pre-application submission, the applicant shall show a minimum of two alternative proposed development layouts in the form of a sketch plan(s), or sketch plan overlay sheet(s), as described in section 5.5. These alternative plans shall be substantially different. The planning board shall review how each alternative impacts the viability of the development plan, versus the benefits to the town of one or another approach. This sketch plan shall be further refined for re-submission and discussion between the board and applicant during subsequent stages of review, as an overlay to the existing resources and site analysis map (section 5.16). 
    Step 6 - Locate the house sites. The sixth step is to locate building sites, using the proposed open space as a base map as well as other relevant data on the existing resources and site analysis map. The design shall take into account the potential negative impacts of residential development on nearby conservation areas as well as the potential positive benefits of such locations to provide attractive views and visual settings for residences, with emphasis on consistency with the town's rural character. 
    Step 7 - Lay out streets, trails and other infrastructure. Upon designation of the building sites, a street plan shall be designed to provide vehicular access to each building, complying with the standards herein and bearing a logical relationship to topographic conditions. Detailed information regarding storm water drainage, water supply and sewage disposal, trails, sidewalks and other infrastructure are also provided during this step. 
    Step 8 - Design and program open space. Details regarding the use, design, ownership and management of proposed open spaces shall be developed during the review process. Starting with conceptual proposals at the early stages of review, the function of open space areas shall be developed and refined. Based on review by the planning board and other reviewers, these concepts shall be clarified during the review process to establish as clear an approach to the use and maintenance of open space as it does for development areas. 
    Step 9 - Draw in the lot lines. Upon completion of the preceding eight steps, the next step is simply to draw in the lot lines to delineate the boundaries of individual residential lots (if applicable). 
    Step 10 - Establish ownership and management of open space and other community elements. At the time of preliminary review for major land development projects or major subdivisions, or at the time of final review for minor land development projects or minor subdivisions, a more detailed open space use and management plan as described in section 5.12.H shall be submitted. 
Sec. 5.5. - Sketch plan overlay sheet. 
    The design process described above shall be documented by the applicant and presented to the planning board. To expedite this process, a conceptual sketch plan(s) for development shall be presented as overlay sheets to be superimposed on top of more detailed site surveys and environmental data (at the same scale). 
    At the pre-application stage of review, the initial sketch plan may be presented as an overlay to survey plans, topographic maps or aerial photographs of the parcel(s) proposed for development. As an alternative, if detailed site information and surveys are not available, a separate diagrammatic sketch plan(s) may be presented. 
    At the preliminary stage of review for minor land development projects and subdivisions, and at the master plan stage of review for major land development projects and subdivisions, the sketch plan of development shall be presented as an overlay to the existing resources and site analysis map. 
Sec. 5.6. - Site context map. 
    A map showing the location of the proposed development within its neighborhood context shall be submitted. The site context map, which may be superimposed on an aerial photograph, shall be drawn to a scale of 1? = 400' or as necessary to show the area within two miles of the subdivision parcel. It shall show the locations of all streets, existing lot lines, and zoning district boundaries. Existing developed areas, open spaces, conservation areas, parks, wetlands, rivers and streams, agricultural areas, Rhode Island Natural Heritage Areas, flood plains or flood hazard areas, aquifers, and significant public facilities shall be indicated on this map. Topography at ten-foot contour intervals (from USGS maps) shall be shown. 
    A separate soils map of the surrounding area shall be prepared. If present, agricultural land (see definition in section 2.0) and any very poorly drained soils shall also be shown on the site context map. 
Sec. 5.7. - Modification of lot requirements. 
    Applicants are encouraged to modify lot size, shape, and other dimensional characteristics within a conservation development. A conservation development may be developed with dwelling units on separate lots, a single lot, or a combination thereof. 
    Where dwellings are proposed to be located on individual lots, the following minimum dimensional regulations shall be applicable to dwellings within a conservation development. 
Use Lot Area (sq. ft.) Lot Frontage and Width (ft.) see Note) Front Yard Depth (ft.) Rear Yard Depth (ft.) Side Yard (each side) (ft.) Single household dwelling 43,560 150 40 40 20 Two household dwelling (duplex) 65,340 150 40 40 20  
    Note: The planning board may authorize, through a request for waiver, modifications to the above lot frontage and width as provided in section 2.4.3 of the zoning ordinance. 
Sec. 5.8. - Basic maximum number of dwelling units. 
    The basic maximum number of dwelling units allowed on a parcel of land proposed for development as a conservation development is defined as the maximum number of dwellings that could reasonably be expected to be developed as a conventional subdivision upon that parcel under a yield plan as defined herein. The applicant shall have the burden of proof with regard to the reasonableness and feasibility of the design and of the engineering specifications for such yield plan; provided, however, that the planning board's determination of the basic maximum number shall be conclusive. 
    Yield plans shall be prepared as conceptual layout plans in accordance with the pre-application checklist (checklist I). Yield plans shall show proposed streets, lots, rights-of-way, land unsuitable for development and other pertinent features. The yield plan must be drawn to scale, and it must be a realistic layout reflecting a development pattern that could reasonably be expected to be implemented, taking into account the presence of land unsuitable for development (as defined in section 1.2 of the zoning ordinance), existing easements or encumbrances and the suitability of soils for subsurface sewage disposal. 
    The yield plan shall also reflect the dimensional standards for uses being proposed, as contained in the dimensional regulations in section 2.4.2 of the zoning ordinance, or other applicable dimensional requirement of the zoning ordinance. The yield plan must identify how conventional lots or uses could be developed having the required area, frontage and other dimensional requirements of the zoning ordinance. Although lots shown in the yield plan may contain land unsuitable for development as defined in section 1.2 of the zoning ordinance, each lot shall have at a minimum, one acre of contiguous land that is suitable for development. 
    On sites served by individual sewage disposal systems (ISDS), density shall be further determined by evaluating the number of dwellings or other uses that could be supported by ISDS on lots in a conventional subdivision. Lots or dwelling units shown on a yield plan shall not include dwellings proposed to be serviced by an ISDS that requires the granting of a variance by the RI Department of Environmental Management. The planning board shall determine the suitability of the parcel to be developed as a conventional subdivision, based on the soils information provided by the applicant, upon observations made during the site visit to the property, and/or upon other evidence available to the board at any time during the development review process. 
    Upon completion of their review, the planning board shall determine the initial basic maximum number of lots/dwelling units permitted in a development. This initial determination shall be made at the master plan stage of review for major subdivisions and major land development projects, and at the preliminary stage of review for minor subdivisions and minor land development projects. The applicant shall use this initial determination as the basis for submission of more detailed information during subsequent stages of review. Upon further investigation and upon receipt of more detailed soils and environmental information as may be provided in subsequent stages of review, the planning board may increase or reduce the number of lots/dwelling units contained in the initial basic maximum number. For all developments, the final basic maximum number shall be established by the planning board at the final stage of review. 
    In developments that require alterations to be made to freshwater wetlands, the board may establish an initial basic maximum number contingent upon confirmation by the RI Department of Environmental Management that such alterations are permitted under the provisions of the Freshwater Wetlands Act. 
Sec. 5.9. - Types and location of buildings. 
    A conservation development may contain only single household residential structures (permitted by right) or duplexes (permitted by special use permit) and uses customarily accessory thereto. The planning board may require the development plan to show the location of building footprints, and their relation to driveways and streets, and may approve, approve with modification, or deny such locations. 
    For the purposes of determining the basic maximum number, a single household dwelling shall be counted as one dwelling. Accessory dwelling units shall not count towards the basic maximum number, if constructed in accordance with section 4.3 of the zoning ordinance 
    Lots having reduced area or frontage shall not have frontage on a street other than on a street created by the conservation development; provided, however, that the planning board may waive this requirement where it is determined that such reduced lot(s) are consistent with existing development patterns in the neighborhood. 
Sec. 5.10. - Storm water management. 
    The storm water management system for a conservation development shall conform to the town's land development and subdivision regulations, with particular regard for the need to encourage infiltration and groundwater recharge as opposed to detention or retention basins. 
Sec. 5.11. - Parking. 
    Each dwelling unit shall be served by off-street parking as provided in article V of the zoning ordinance; provided, however, that this requirement may be waived by the planning board where on-street parking, or parking in approved parking lots or structures is determined to be acceptable. Spaces in garages, or in driveways in front of garages may be counted in any computation of required parking. 
Sec. 5.12. - Open space. 
    Every conservation development shall provide protected open space in accordance with the following standards: 
A.  The open space shall be established as a lot or lots separate and distinct from the lots intended for residential and accessory uses, and from land dedicated as street rights-of-way. 
B.  The minimum amount of required open space area shall be based on a percentage of the land suitable for development in the entire conservation development as provided in the table below. None of the minimum required open space area shall be devoted to land unsuitable for development as defined in section 1.2. of zoning regulations. 
Zoning District Minimum Amount CR-5 75 percent RU-4 70 percent RU-3 60 percent RE-2 40 percent  
C.  This minimum required area shall be in addition to any open space used for storm water drainage facilities. Provided, however, that the planning board may allow storm water drainage facilities to count toward the minimum required open space area if it finds that the drainage areas are designed as a fully integrated part of an overall open space landscape plan which incorporates trails, active or passive parks, landscaped site features, stream belts or greenways, and are designed to facilitate infiltration and recharge of water, and that such facilities are not in conflict with the intent and purpose of a conservation development as stated in section 5.1 of these regulations, or with the general purposes of these regulations. 
D.  Open space provided by a conservation development for public or common use, shall either (1) be conveyed to the town and accepted by the town for park, open space, agricultural, or other permitted use or uses; or (2) be conveyed to a nonprofit organization, the principal purpose of which is the conservation of open space or resource protection; or (3) be conveyed to a corporation or trust owned or to be owned by the owners of lots or units within the conservation development or owners of shares within a cooperative development. If such a corporation or trust is used, ownership shall pass with conveyances of the lots or units; or (4) remain in private (non-common) ownership if the use is limited to agriculture, habitat or forestry, and, in accordance with the comprehensive plan and zoning ordinance, that private ownership is necessary for the preservation and management of the agriculture, habitat or forest resources. The planning board may limit or restrict the amount of open space that may remain in private ownership where necessary to contribute to a connecting greenway system or to provide public access to open space, as provided in the comprehensive plan. 
E.  In any case where the land is not conveyed to the town, a restriction, in perpetuity, enforceable by the town or by any owner of property in the land development project in which the land is located shall be recorded providing that the land shall be kept in the authorized condition(s) and not be built upon or developed. 
In addition, in any case where the land is not conveyed to the town, the development rights and other conservation easements on the land may be held, in perpetuity, by a nonprofit organization, the principal purpose of which is the conservation of open space or resource protection. 
F.  Buildings, structures, parking areas or other impervious improvements which are accessory to and subordinate to a permitted open space use, may be located on any open space lot provided that, in all cases, they occupy no more than five percent of the total open space area of the conservation development. 
G.  All open space, regardless of whether it is conveyed to the town, shall be protected against further development and unauthorized alteration in perpetuity by appropriate deed restrictions, and by the grant of a conservation or preservation restriction to the town, pursuant to Title 34, Chapter 39 of the Rhode Island General Laws, as amended. In addition, the perpetual maintenance of all open space shall be guaranteed by appropriate deed restrictions, and by the grant of a conservation or preservation restriction to the town, pursuant to Title 34, Chapter 39 of the Rhode Island General Laws, as amended. The planning board or administrative officer shall approve the form and content of all deed restrictions at the time of final approval of the subdivision. Every deed restriction providing a maintenance guarantee shall contain the following provision: 
"If the owners, or their successors or assigns fail to maintain the open space, the town may perform any necessary maintenance and enforce the payment for such costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, by an action at law or in equity against the owners or their successors or assigns." 
H.  The planning board shall specifically authorize plans for the use, ownership, management and maintenance of all open space areas within any conservation development. Areas proposed to fulfill the minimum open space requirement within a conservation development shall not be excavated or re-graded, except as permitted by the planning board. Disturbance to the natural contours of the land shall be minimized to the greatest extent possible. Existing natural vegetation and any significant natural or man-made features shall be preserved except as permitted by the planning board to create or enhance areas of landscaping, parks, recreation, conservation, forestry or wildlife habitat. These disturbances shall be specifically shown on the open space use plan. 
At the time of master plan review by the planning board for major subdivisions or land development projects, or preliminary review for minor subdivisions or land development projects, the applicant shall submit a separate open space use plan containing: 
a.  The general location and area of all proposed open space; 
b.  The general proposed use(s) of the open space; 
c.  Existing topography and existing ground cover of open space areas; 
d.  The location and nature of any existing buildings, structures, stone walls or other unique natural and/or historic features; 
e.  Areas of open space from which existing vegetation will be removed or altered and areas which are proposed to be disturbed or otherwise graded, excavated or altered from their existing natural state; 
f.  Generalized proposals for the re-grading, re-vegetating and/or landscaping of proposed disturbed areas; 
g.  The location and nature of any proposed buildings, structures, parking areas or roadways, impervious areas recreation areas and, 
h.  Areas proposed to be left in their existing natural states without any disturbance. 
At the time of preliminary review by the planning board, a more detailed management plan that specifies the use of the open space shall be submitted for review and approval, which may be combined with any required grading plans, landscaping plans, soil erosion plans or drainage plans required for preliminary approval. 
The planning board shall require final construction plans to show proposed open space use(s) and alterations required as a condition of final approval. 
I.  Clearing and excavation of open space areas may be permitted only for the installation of storm water retention or detention facilities, other drainage facilities, or for permitted park, open space, recreational, agricultural or forest management uses in accordance with a plan approved by the planning board. 
In addition, no commercial earth removal, even if permitted by the zoning ordinance, in the zoning district in which the development is proposed, shall be permitted within any open space areas. In approving an open space use plan, the board may permit grading that includes removal of earth materials. The board shall, however, clearly indicate, as a condition of preliminary approval, the approximate quantities of material and the general areas from which earth removal is authorized, and shall only authorize the minimal amount of earth removal required to grade the land for the intended purpose. 
Sec. 5.13. - Open space design review standards. 
A.  List of resources to be conserved. The design of open space lands in any conservation development shall reflect the standards set forth in this subsection 5.13 and, to the fullest extent possible, incorporate any of the resources listed below if they occur on the parcel (not listed in order of significance). The applicant should be consulting the greenspace maps for natural, cultural and recreational resources as identified in the comprehensive plan. 
1.  Stream channels, floodplains, hydric soils, swales, springs, and other freshwater wetland areas, including adjacent buffer areas that may be required to ensure their protection; 
2.  Wellhead protection areas; 
3.  Special aquatic sites, vernal pools and significant natural areas of species listed as endangered, threatened, or of special concern, such as those listed in the statewide natural heritage inventory; 
4.  Moderate to steep slopes, particularly those adjoining watercourses and ponds, where disturbance and resulting soil erosion and sedimentation could be detrimental to water quality; 
5.  Healthy woodlands, particularly those performing important ecological functions such as soil stabilization and protection of streams, wetlands, and wildlife habitats; 
6.  Areas where precipitation is most likely to recharge local groundwater resources because of topographic and soil conditions affording high rates of infiltration and percolation; 
7.  Hedgerows, groups of trees, location and species of large individual trees of botanic significance, specimen vegetation and other vegetation features representing the site's rural past; 
8.  Active agricultural uses, pastures, croplands; 
9.  Prime farmland soils and farmland soils of statewide importance; 
10.  Historic structures and archaeological sites; 
11.  Visually prominent topographic features such as knolls, hilltops and ridges; 
12.  Geologic features such as eskers or kettle holes; 
13.  Scenic view sheds as seen from public roads (particularly those with historic features); 
14.  Existing or potential trails connecting the parcel to other locations in the Town; 
15.  Any other natural, cultural or recreational resources determined by the planning board. 
B.  Other design considerations. The configuration of proposed open space lands set aside for common use in a conservation development shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  They shall be free of all structures except historic buildings or structures, stonewalls, and structures related to open space uses. The planning board may grant approval of structures and improvements required for storm drainage within the open space provided that such facilities would not be detrimental to the purpose for which the open space is proposed. 
2.  They shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots or dwellings within the development. Non-adjoining lots shall be provided with safe and convenient pedestrian access to open space land; 
3.  They shall be suitable for active or passive recreational uses to the extent deemed necessary by the planning board, without interfering with adjacent dwelling units, parking, driveways, and roads; 
4.  They shall be interconnected wherever possible to provide a continuous network of greenway lands within and adjoining the subdivision; 
5.  They shall provide buffers to adjoining parks, preserves or other protected lands; 
6.  They shall provide for pedestrian pathways for use by the residents of the development. Consideration shall be given to providing for public access on such trails if they are linked to other publicly accessible pathway systems within the town or region. Provisions should be made for access to the open space lands, as required for land management and emergency purposes; 
7.  Whenever possible, they shall be undivided by public or private streets, except where necessary for proper traffic circulation; 
8.  They shall be suitably landscaped either by retaining existing natural cover and wooded areas and/or according to a landscaping plan to protect open space resources; 
9.  They shall be consistent with the comprehensive community plan. 
C.  Uses permitted within open space areas. The open space in a conservation development shall be devoted only to conservation purposes or for park, recreation, forest management, and agricultural purposes. 
Sec. 5.14. - Streets. 
    Streets within a conservation development may be publicly or privately owned and maintained and shall conform to the standards provided in these regulations. Streets shall be designed to conform to the standards of the town where the street is or may be ultimately intended for dedication and acceptance by the town. Private streets shall be adequate for the intended use and vehicular traffic and shall be maintained by an association of unit owners or such other means or entity as may be approved by the planning board. 
Sec. 5.15. - Decision. 
    The planning board may approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for a conservation development upon finding that the conservation development does or does not meet the purposes of these land development and subdivision regulations, after consideration of the general requirements set forth at section 3.5, and after consideration of the purposes set forth in section 5.1, herein. 
Sec. 5.16 - Existing resources and site analysis map. 
    All subdivisions and land development projects, whether or not proposed to be developed as a conservation development, shall be required to prepare an existing resources and site analysis map. Provided, however that administrative subdivisions and subdivisions that create lots which are not for the purpose of present or future development shall not be required to provide such map. The purpose of this map is to provide the planning board with a comprehensive analysis of existing conditions, both on the proposed development site and within 500 feet of the site. Conditions beyond the parcel boundaries may be described on the basis of existing published data available from governmental agencies, and from aerial photographs. 
    An existing resources and site analysis map is required to be prepared for the following types of subdivisions and land development projects: 
  Pre-application meetings and concept review checklist - Minor or major land developments and minor or major subdivisions (checklist I) 
  Preliminary plat checklist - Minor land developments and minor subdivisions checklist - Creation or extension of a public or private street (checklist J) 
  Master plan checklist - Major land developments and major subdivisions (checklist L) 
    The checklists referenced above provide guidance to the applicant regarding preparation and use of the map and its components. 
    The planning board shall review the map to assess its accuracy, conformance with municipal ordinances, and likely impact upon the natural and cultural resources on the property. Unless otherwise specified by the planning board, such plans shall generally be prepared at the scale of 1? = 100' or 1? = 200', whichever would fit best on a single standard size sheet (24? × 36?). Where necessary for clarity, the map may be submitted as a series of more than one map. The following information shall be included in this map(s). 
A.  Topography and slopes. 
1.  Topography, the contour lines of which shall generally be at ten-foot intervals, interpolated from U.S.G.S. published maps. More detailed topographic mapping determined by photo-grammetry or on-site survey shall be required in areas proposed for development. The determination of appropriate contour intervals shall be made by the administrative officer, who may require greater or lesser intervals on exceptionally steep or flat sites. Slopes between 15 and 25 percent and exceeding 25 percent shall be clearly indicated by shading on the map, and the area thereof in acres shall be indicated. Topography for major subdivisions shall be prepared by a professional land surveyor or professional engineer from an actual field survey of the site or from stereoscopic aerial photography and shall be coordinated with official U.S.G.S. benchmarks. 
B.  Natural resources inventory. 
1.  The location and delineation of ponds, streams, ditches, drains, special aquatic sites, vernal pools, natural drainage swales, 100-year floodplains and freshwater wetlands, as defined in the zoning ordinance. Additional areas of wetlands on the proposed development parcel shall also be indicated, as evident from testing, visual inspection, or from the presence of wetland vegetation. 
2.  Vegetative cover conditions on the property according to general cover type including cultivated land, agricultural land, permanent grassland, meadow, pasture, old-field, hedgerow, woodland and wetland. Trees with a caliper in excess of 18 inches DBH, if located within an area proposed for disturbance or alteration shall also be indicated. Vegetative types shall be described by plant community, relative age, and condition. Specimen vegetation as defined in section 2.0 shall be identified. 
3.  Soil series, types and map units, as mapped by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service in the latest published soil survey for the state, and accompanying data published for each soil relating to its suitability for construction and for septic suitability 
4.  Geologic formations on the proposed development parcel, including rock outcroppings, cliffs, kettle holes, eskers, etc. based on available published information or more detailed data obtained by the applicant. 
5.  Ridgelines of existing hills and watershed boundaries shall be identified. 
C.  Cultural resources inventory. 
1.  All existing man-made features including but not limited to streets, driveways, farm roads, woods roads, buildings, foundations, walls, wells, drainage fields, dumps, excavated areas, utilities, and storm and sanitary sewers. 
2.  Location of all historically significant sites or structures on the tract, including but not limited to cemeteries, stone walls, cellar holes and foundations, and known archaeological resources. 
3.  A view shed analysis showing the location and extent of views both from and within the proposed development parcel as well as views into the property from adjacent public or private streets and properties. See definition in section 2.0. 
D.  Recreational resources inventory. 
1.  Location of trails that have been in public use (pedestrian, equestrian, bicycle, etc.) 
2.  Boat launches, stream access locations and water trails. 
3  Existing play fields and recreation areas. 
E.  Utilities and infrastructure. 
1.  Location of all easements and other encumbrances of property, which are or have been filed of record with the land evidence records of the town. 
2.  Location of all streets and utilities. 
Sec. 5.17. - Incentives. 
    The planning board may award a zoning incentive so as to increase the number of dwelling units beyond the basic maximum number; provided, however, that the maximum number of permitted dwellings in the conservation development site shall not be increased by a factor of more than 1.3. An incentive may be awarded in the following circumstances: 
A.  Where the planning board determines that the amount of open space area provided in the entire conservation development exceeds the minimum amount as provided in the subdivision and land development regulations, the basic maximum number of permitted dwelling units in the development may be increased by a factor in accordance with the following table: 
Amount of Open Space Provided Permitted Increase in Density 5 to 10 percent more than minimum Factor of 1.05 More than 10 to 20 percent more than minimum Factor of 1.1 More than 20-50 percent more than minimum Factor of 1.2 More than 50 percent above minimum Factor of 1.3  
B.  The planning board may determine that an existing dwelling which is currently located on the property being developed should be preserved for any of the following purposes: maintenance of historic or traditional development patterns; preservation of streetscape features; maintenance of building placement, setback and alignment on the site; preservation of historic structures that contribute to the character of an area; design of public or common open space; or other design or site planning issues identified in the comprehensive plan. In such cases, the planning board may allow the applicant to exceed the basic maximum number of permitted dwelling units in the development by one. Any dwelling granted a zoning incentive under the provisions of this section shall be subject to deed restrictions prohibiting the removal or alteration of the dwelling except as may be approved by the planning board as a condition of approval. This dwelling may contain more than two bedrooms. 
    In computing the number of incentive dwelling units, all figures shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number. 
SECTION 6.0. - DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION, REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCESS 
    The town planning board, as a body, shall conduct all meetings and shall make decisions pertaining to the land development and subdivisions under the jurisdiction of these regulations. No approval authority shall be designated to any other official or committee. The administrative officer, and technical consultants to the planning board may act as the board's agents in administrative matters, plan review and construction inspection. 

Sec. 6.1. - application for development and certification of completeness. 
A.  Classification. The administrative officer shall advise the applicant as to which approvals are required and the appropriate board for hearing an application for a land development project or subdivision. The following types of applications, as defined in section 2.1, may be filed: 
1.  Administrative subdivision; 
2.  Minor subdivision or minor land development project; 
3.  Major subdivision or major land development project. 
B.  Certification of a complete application. An application shall be complete for purposes of commencing the applicable time period for action when so certified by the administrative officer. In the event such certification of the application is not made within the time specified in these regulations for the type of plan, the application shall be deemed complete for purposes of commencing the review period unless the application lacks information required for such applications as specified in these regulations in section 12.0, checklists, and the administrative officer has notified the applicant, in writing, of the deficiencies in the application. 
C.  Notwithstanding subsections A and B above, the planning board may subsequently require correction of any information found to be in error and submission of additional information specified in the regulations but not required by the administrative officer prior to certification, as is necessary to make an informed decision. 
D.  Where the review is postponed with the consent of the applicant, pending further information or revision of information, the time period for review shall be stayed and shall resume when the administrative officer or the planning board determines that the required application information is complete. 
Sec. 6.2. - Pre-application meetings and concept plan review. 
A.  One or more pre-application meetings may be held for all major and minor land development or subdivision applications. Pre-application meetings may be held for administrative applications, upon request of either the town or the applicant. Pre-application meetings shall allow the applicant to meet with planning board for advice as to the required steps in the approvals process, the pertinent local plans, ordinances, regulations, rules and procedures and standards which may bear upon the proposed development project. 
Where deemed appropriate by the administrative officer, town officials, other town boards and/or commissions, planning staff, state agencies and abutting property owners may be notified of the pre-application meetings by the administrative officer and invited to provide comments on the proposed subdivision or land development plan. 
B.  Applicants seeking a pre-application meeting shall submit general conceptual materials in advance of the meeting(s) as requested by the planning board and as required by checklist I, checklist for pre-application meetings and concept review in section 12.0. At a minimum, the applicant shall follow steps 1-4 of the design process as provided in section 5.4. 
C.  Applicants seeking an informal concept review by the planning board shall submit the information and materials as provided in checklist A, informal concept review. This procedure is restricted only to minor land development projects or subdivisions, development plan review and to rural residential compounds. After the planning board has conducted the informal concept review, the board shall provide the applicant with direction regarding the necessary steps required to submit a full application for further review and approval. 
D.  Pre-application meetings shall aim to encourage information sharing and discussion of project concepts among the participants. Pre-application meetings should include a review of the physical character of the land, and any environmental or physical constraints to development. Meetings should include a discussion initiated by the planning board regarding what form of land development may be appropriate to meet the goals and policies of the comprehensive plan with regard to preserving the character of the land, the natural environment and the ability of the town to provide essential services. Pre-application discussions are intended for the guidance of the applicant and shall not be considered approval of a project or its elements. 
E.  Provided that at least one pre-application meeting has been held for major land development or subdivision application, or 60 days has elapsed from the filing of the pre-application submission and no pre-application meeting has been scheduled to occur within said 60-days, nothing shall be deemed to preclude an applicant from thereafter filing and proceeding with an application for a land development or subdivision project in accordance with section 6.1. 
Sec. 6.3. - Administrative subdivision. 
A.  Any applicant requesting approval of a proposed administrative subdivision, as defined in this chapter, shall submit to the administrative officer the items required by checklist B administrative subdivision in section 12.0. 
B.  Any applicant requesting approval of a proposed lot merger administrative subdivision, as defined in this chapter, shall submit to the administrative officer the items required by checklist B-1, lot merger administrative subdivision in section 12.0. 
C.  The application shall be certified as complete or incomplete by the administrative officer within 15-days from the date of its submission according to the provisions of section 6.1.B. 
D.  Review process: 
1.  Within 15 days of certification of completeness, the administrative officer shall review the application and approve, deny or refer it to the planning board with recommendations. The administrative officer shall report the action to the planning board at its next regular meeting, to be made part of the record. 
2.  If no action is taken by the administrative officer within the 15 days, the application shall be placed on the agenda of the next regular planning board meeting. 
3.  If referred to the planning board, the board shall consider the application and the recommendations of the administrative officer and shall either approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application within 65 days of certification of completeness. Failure of the planning board to act within the period prescribed shall constitute an approval of the administrative subdivision plan and a certificate of the administrative officer as to the failure of the planning board to act within the required time and the resulting approval shall be issued on request of the applicant. 
4.  Denial of an application by the administrative officer shall not be appealable and shall require the application to be submitted as a minor subdivision. 
5.  Any approval of an administrative subdivision shall be evidenced by a written decision, which shall be filed and posted in the office of the town clerk. 
6.  Approval of an administrative subdivision shall expire 90-days from the date of approval unless within such period a plat in conformity with such approval is submitted for signature and recording as specified in section 9.7. 
(Amd. of 2-20-17) 
Sec. 6.4. - Minor land development projects and minor subdivisions. 
A.  Review stages. Minor plan review shall consist of at least two stages; preliminary including a site visit; and final, provided that if a street creation or extension is involved, a public hearing is required. The planning board may combine the approval stages, providing requirements for both stages have been met by the applicant to the satisfaction of the planning board. A pre-application is recommended. 
B.  Any applicant requesting approval of a proposed minor subdivision or minor land development project, as defined these regulations, shall first follow the procedure specified for pre-application review as provided in section 6.2, above. If the creation or extension of a public or private street is involved, following the pre-application meeting(s), the applicant shall submit the information required in checklist J, preliminary plat checklist for minor land development projects and minor subdivisions as provided in section 12.0. 
If a minor land development project or minor subdivision does not involve the creation or extension of a public or private street, the applicant shall submit the information required in checklist D, preliminary plat checklist for minor land development projects and minor subdivisions (no street creation or extension) as provided in section 12.0. 
C.  Certification. The preliminary application shall be certified complete or incomplete by the administrative officer within 25 days, or within 15 days if no street creation or extension is required, according to the provisions of section 6.1.B. The running of the time period set forth herein shall be deemed stopped upon the issuance of a certificate of incompleteness of the application by the administrative officer and shall recommence upon the resubmission of a corrected application by the applicant. However, in no event shall the administrative officer be required to certify a corrected submission as complete or incomplete less than 14 days after its submission. 
D.  Site visit. After preparing the existing resources and site analysis map, and before the preliminary plan is approved, the planning board shall schedule a site visit to the property. In order to facilitate the inspection of the site, the planning board may require field location of all proposed roads, improvements and site features consistent with the level of information required at this stage of review. The existing resources and site analysis map shall be distributed at the site visit to those town officials in attendance, if it has not been distributed earlier. It is strongly encouraged that the site visit be attended by members of the planning board, town officials, the applicant and/or the applicant's representatives. Owners of property within the notice radius specified in section 6.5.1.C shall also be notified by the applicant and invited to attend. The site visit shall be considered a public meeting and shall be conducted in accordance with the town's normal procedures for compliance with the state open meetings law. Members of the public shall be permitted to attend the site visit. 
Lack of a quorum of the planning board in attendance at this visit shall not constitute a failure on the part of the applicant to satisfy the requirements of a site visit. In the event that the planning board does not schedule a site visit, or that a scheduled site visit is not conducted within the prescribed time period through no fault of the applicant, the applicant shall not be found to be deficient in the application process, and shall be allowed to proceed with the application. 
The purpose of the visit is to familiarize local officials with the property's existing conditions and special features, to identify potential site design issues, and to provide an informal opportunity to discuss site design concepts, including the general layout of designed open space lands, buildings and street alignments. Comments made by town officials or their staff and consultants shall be interpreted as being only suggestive. It shall be understood by all parties that no formal recommendation can be offered, and no official decisions can be made at the site visit. Minutes of the site visit shall be kept in accordance with title 42, chapter 46 of the RI General Laws entitled "Open Meetings." 
E.  Reassignment to major review. The planning board may reassign a proposed minor project to major review only when the planning board is unable to make the positive findings required in section 3.5. 
F.  Decision. If no street creation or extension is required, the planning board shall approve, deny, or approve with conditions, the preliminary plan within 65 days of certification of completeness, or within such further time as is agreed to by the applicant and the board, according to the requirements of section 8.6. If a street extension or creation is required, the planning board shall hold a public hearing prior to approval according to the requirements in section 6.5 and shall approve, deny, or approve with conditions, the preliminary plan within 95 days of certification of completeness, or within such further time as is agreed to by the applicant and the board, according to the requirements of section 9.6. 
G.  Failure to act. Failure of the planning board to act within the period prescribed shall constitute approval of the preliminary plan and a certificate of the administrative officer as to the failure of the planning board to act within the required time and the resulting approval shall be issued on request of the applicant. 
H.  Final plan. The applicant shall submit to the administrative officer the items required by these regulations on checklist E, final plat checklist, as provided in section 12.0, as well as all material required by the planning board when the application was given preliminary approval. The planning board may delegate final plan review and approval to the administrative officer. The officer shall report his actions to the planning board at its next regular meeting, to be made part of the record. 
I.  Expiration of approval. Approval of a minor land development or subdivision plan shall expire 90 days from the date of final approval unless within such period a plat or plan, in conformity with such approval, and as defined in these regulations, is submitted for signature and recording as specified in section 9.7. Validity may be extended for a longer period, for cause shown, if requested by the applicant in writing, and approved by the planning board. 
Sec. 6.5. - Major land development projects and major subdivisions. 
A.  Major plan review shall be required of all applications for land development and subdivision approval subject to these regulations, unless classified as an administrative subdivision or as a minor land development project or a minor subdivision. 
B.  Major plan review shall consist of four stages of review listed below. Also required are a public informational meeting and a public hearing. 
1.  Pre-application meeting(s); 
2.  Master plan, including a site visit; 
3.  Preliminary plan; and 
4.  Final plan. 
C.  The planning board may vote to combine review stages and to modify and/or waive requirements as specified in section 4.5. Review stages may be combined only after the planning board determines that all necessary requirements have been met by the applicant. 
D.  Submission requirements-Pre-application. Any applicant requesting approval of a proposed major subdivision or major land development project, as defined in these regulations, shall first submit to the administrative officer the plans and supporting materials provided in the checklist C, pre-application meetings and concept review as provided in section 12.0. For a conservation development project, or conservation development subdivision, see checklist I. The procedure and criteria for pre-application meetings and concept review as provided in section 6.2 shall apply. At the conclusion of the pre-application meeting(s) the applicant may proceed to the master plan stage of review. 
    6.5.1 Master plan review procedure. 
A.  Submission requirements - Master plan. 
1.  The applicant shall first submit to the administrative officer the items required by these regulations for master plans on checklist F, master plan checklist in section 12.0. For a conservation development project, or conservation development subdivision, see checklist L. 
2.  Master plan information and supporting material for this phase of review shall include, but not be limited to: information on the natural and built features of the surrounding neighborhood, existing natural and manmade conditions of the development site, including topographic features, the freshwater wetland and coastal zone boundaries, the floodplains, as well as the proposed design concept, proposed public improvements and dedications, tentative construction phasing, and potential neighborhood impacts. 
3.  Initial comments shall be solicited from: 
(a)  Town/local agencies and commissions, as appropriate; 
(b)  Adjacent communities; 
(c)  State agencies, as appropriate; and 
(d)  Federal agencies, as appropriate. 
The administrative officer shall coordinate and review comments by local officials, adjacent communities, and state and federal agencies. If an agency fails to provide written comments prior to the date of a scheduled meeting at which an application is being discussed or heard, the applicant may not be found to be deficient in the application process, and the application shall not be found to be incomplete due to the failure of an agency to provide comment. 
B.  Certification. The application shall be certified complete or incomplete by the administrative officer within 60 days, according to the provisions of section 6.1.B. The running of the time period set forth herein shall be deemed stopped upon the issuance of a certificate of incompleteness of the application by the administrative officer and shall recommence upon the resubmission of a corrected application by the applicant. However, in no event shall the administrative officer be required to certify a corrected submission as complete or incomplete less than 14 days after its submission. 
C.  Site visit. The planning board shall schedule a site visit in accordance with the procedure and requirements of section 6.4.D, entitled "Site visit," provided, however that the site visit shall be scheduled before the master plan is approved. In order to facilitate the inspection of the site, the planning board may require field location of all proposed roads, improvements and site features consistent with the level of information required at this stage of review. 
D.  Informational meeting. A public informational meeting shall be held prior to the planning board decision on the master plan, unless the master plan and preliminary plan approvals are being combined, in which case the public informational meeting shall be optional, based upon planning board determination that all necessary requirements for all stages so combined have been met by the applicant. 
1.  Public notice for the informational meeting is required and shall be given at least seven days prior to the date of the meeting in a newspaper of general circulation within the town. Written notice shall be mailed by the applicant and to all property owners within 1,000 feet of the property proposed for development. Certificates of mailing must be presented by the applicant to the administrative officer prior to the commencement of the public informational meeting. 
2.  The applicant shall also provide an on-site sign or signs notifying the public of the application pending before the planning board as specified in section 6.5.3.C, below. 
3.  At the public informational meeting the applicant shall present the proposed development project. The planning board shall allow oral and written comments from the general public. All public comments shall be made part of the public record of the project application. 
4.  The costs of all informational meetings required by these regulations, including, but not limited to legal advertising, mailing, signage and stenographers shall be borne by the applicant. 
E.  Decision. The planning board shall, within 120 days of certification of completeness, or within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant, approve of the master plan as submitted, approve with changes and/or conditions, or deny the application, according to the requirements of section 9.6. 
F.  Failure to act. Failure of the planning board to act within the period prescribed shall constitute approval of the master plan and a certificate of the administrative officer as to the failure of the planning board to act within the required time, and the resulting approval shall be issued on request of the applicant. 
G.  Expiration of master plan approval. 
1.  The approved master plan shall be vested for a period of one year, with a one-year extension upon written request by the applicant, who must appear before the planning board for the annual review. Vesting may be extended for a longer period, for good cause shown, if requested by the applicant in writing, and approved by the planning board. Master plan vesting shall include the zoning requirements, conceptual layout and all conditions shown on the approved master plan drawings and supporting materials. 
2.  The initial two-year vesting for the approved master plan shall constitute the vested rights for the development. 
H.  Evidence of notice. The applicant shall be responsible for all required notice for the public informational meeting and shall submit evidence of proper notice as required. 
    6.5.2 Preliminary plan review procedures. 
A.  Submission requirements. 
1.  The applicant shall first submit to the administrative officer the items required by these regulations for preliminary plans on checklist G, preliminary plat checklist in section 12.0. For a conservation development project, or conservation development subdivision, see checklist M. 
2.  Requirements for the preliminary plan and supporting materials for this phase of the review shall include, but not be limited to: engineering plans depicting the existing site conditions, engineering plans depicting the proposed development project, a perimeter survey, all permits required by state or federal agencies prior to commencement of construction, including permits related to freshwater wetlands, floodplains, preliminary suitability for individual septic disposal systems, public water systems, and connections to state roads. 
3.  At the preliminary plan review phase, the administrative officer shall solicit final written comments and/or approvals of all town departments and commissions, as appropriate. 
4.  Prior to approval of the preliminary plan, copies of all legal documents describing the property, proposed easements and rights-of-way necessary for the proposed development. 
B.  Certification. The application shall be certified as complete or incomplete by the administrative officer within 60 days, according to the provisions of section 6.1.B. The running of the time period set forth herein shall be deemed stopped upon the issuance of a certificate of incompleteness of the application by the administrative officer and shall recommence upon the resubmission of a corrected application by the applicant. However, in no event shall the administrative officer be required to certify a corrected submission as complete or incomplete less than 14 days after its submission. 
C.  Public hearing. Prior to [the] planning board decision on the preliminary plan, a public hearing, which adheres to the requirements for notice described in section 6.5.3 below, must be held. 
D.  Public improvement guarantees. Proposed arrangements for completion of the required public improvements, including construction schedule and/or financial guarantees, shall be reviewed and approved by the planning board at preliminary plan approval. 
E.  Decision. A complete application for a major subdivision or development plan shall be approved, approved with conditions or denied within 120 days of the date when it is certified complete, or within such further time as may be consented to by the developer. 
F.  Failure to act. Failure of the planning board to act within the period prescribed shall constitute approval of the preliminary plan and a certificate of the administrative officer as to the failure of the planning board to act within the required time and the resulting approval shall be issued on request of the applicant. 
G.  Expiration of preliminary approval. The approved preliminary plan shall be vested for a period of one year, and vesting may be extended for a longer period, for good cause shown, if requested in writing by the applicant, and approved by the planning board. The vesting for the preliminary plan approval shall include all general and specific conditions as shown on the approved preliminary plan drawings and supporting material. 
    6.5.3 Public hearing and notice. 
A.  Public hearing. A public hearing shall be required for a major land development project or a major subdivision or where a street extension or creation requires a public hearing for a minor land development project or minor subdivision. 
B.  Notice requirements. Public notice of the hearing shall be given by the town at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the town. Written notice shall be sent by the applicant, provided by the town, to each property owner within 1,000 feet of the proposed development, by certified mail, return receipt requested, not less than ten days prior to the date of the hearing. 
All mail and newspaper notices required by this subsection shall specify (1) the date, time and place of public hearing, (2) the assessor's plat and lot number of the subject property; (3) the street address of the subject property, or if not street address is available, the name of the street(s) on which or near which the subject property is located and the distance and direction from the nearest existing street intersection in tenths of a mile; (4) advise interested parties where and when a copy of the plans of the proposed major subdivision or major land development project may be examined; and (5) contain a statement that the proposal major subdivision or major land development project may be revised by the planning board as a result of further study or because of the views expressed at the public hearing. Certificates of mailing must be presented by the applicant to the administrative officer prior to the commencement of the public hearing. 
C.  On-site sign. The applicant shall also provide an on-site sign or signs notifying the public of the scheduled public hearing or informational meeting pending before the planning board. This sign(s) shall be considered to be supplemental notice and shall be of a weather-resistant design, measuring a minimum 20? × 30? in size, erected in a location upon the site proposed for development which is visible from the nearest public or private street and fixed upon a support that is of sufficient height to make the sign visible from the nearest public or private street. The sign shall be placed on the site at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. Such sign shall contain a basic project description and notice of the public hearing or informational meeting, and shall be maintained on the site by the applicant until the public hearing or informational meeting is closed. The administrative officer shall determine if additional notification signs are required in order to provide sufficient public notice, up to a maximum of two signs. The administrative officer shall provide signage specifications and content to the applicant. 
D.  Notice area. 
1.  The distance(s) for notice of the public hearing shall be 1,000 feet from the perimeter of the property proposed for development. 
2.  Watersheds. Additional notice within watersheds shall also be sent as required in G.L. 1956, § 45-23-53(B) and (C) where a proposed project is located within 2,000 feet of an active or identified potential public water source. 
3.  Adjacent municipalities. Notice of the public hearing shall be sent by the administrative officer to the administrative officer of an adjacent municipality if (1) the notice area extends into the adjacent municipality, or (2) the development site extends into the adjacent municipality, or (3) there is a potential for significant negative impact on the adjacent municipality. 
E.  Evidence of notice. The applicant shall be responsible for all required notice for the public hearing and shall submit the returned receipts from the certified mail as evidence of the notice. 
F.  The costs of all public hearings required by these regulations, including, but not limited to legal advertising, mailing, signage and stenographers shall be borne by the applicant. 
    6.5.4 Final plan. 
A.  Submission requirements. 
1.  The applicant shall submit to the administrative officer the items required by these regulations on checklist H, final plat checklist, as provided in section 12.0, as well as all material required by the planning board when the application was given preliminary approval. 
2.  Arrangements for completion of the required public improvements, including construction schedule and/or financial guarantees. 
3.  Certification by the tax collector that all property taxes are current. 
4.  For phased projects, the final plan for phases following the first phase shall be accompanied by copies of as-built drawings not previously submitted of all existing public improvements for prior phases. 
B.  Certification. The application for final plan approval shall be certified complete or incomplete by the administrative officer within 25 days, according to the provisions of section 6.1.B. This time period may be extended to 45 days by written notice from the administrative officer to the applicant when the final plans contain changes to or elements not included in the preliminary plan approval. The running of the time period set forth herein shall be deemed stopped upon the issuance of a certificate of incompleteness of the application by the administrative officer and shall recommence upon the resubmission of a corrected application by the applicant. However, in no event shall the administrative officer be required to certify a corrected submission as complete or incomplete less than 14 days after its submission. If the administrative officer certifies the application as complete and does not require submission to the planning board as per subsection C. below, the final plan shall be considered approved. 
C.  Referral to the planning board. If the administrative officer determines that an application for final approval does not meet the requirements set by local regulations or by the planning board at preliminary approval, the administrative officer shall refer the final plans to the planning board for review. The planning board shall, within 45 days after the certification of completeness, or within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant, approve or deny the final plan as submitted. 
D.  Failure to act. Failure of the planning board to act within the period prescribed shall constitute approval of the final plan and a certificate of the administrative officer as to the failure of the planning board to act within the required time, and the resulting approval shall be issued on request of the applicant. 
E.  Recording. The final approval of a major subdivision or land development project shall expire one year from the date of approval unless, within that period, the plat or plan shall have been submitted for signature and recording as specified in section 9.7. The planning board may, for good cause shown, extend the period for recording for an additional period. 
F.  Acceptance of public improvements. Signature and recording as specified in section 9.7 shall constitute the acceptance by the town of any street or other public improvement or other land intended for dedication. Final plan approval shall not impose any duty upon the municipality to maintain or improve those dedicated areas until the governing body of the town accepts the completed public improvements as constructed in compliance with the final plans. 
G.  Validity of recorded plans. The approved final plan, once recorded, shall remain valid as the approved plan for the site unless and until an amendment to the plan is approved under the procedure set forth in section 9.8 or a new plan is approved by the planning board. 
Sec. 6.6. - Planned Village Development. 
    Process: Planned Village Development (PVD) is only allowed on land zoned as Planned Village Overlay District (PVOD), as described in Article X of the Exeter Zoning Ordinance. Any applicant wishing to propose a PVD project shall submit a pre-application to the planning board (see checklist "O"). After the pre-application meeting, the applicant may apply to the planning board for a conditional master plan (see checklist "P"), subject to obtaining a zoning ordinance map amendment to PVOD on the property that is the subject of the PVD proposal. If the proponent obtains a PVOD zoning district designation for the property that is the subject of a PVD proposal, the applicant shall only then return to the planning board to seek preliminary plan approval (checklist "Q"), and then final plan approval. See also supplemental flowcharts 1 and 2 [following section 6.10 herein]. 
(Amend. of 6-25-13) 
Sec. 6.7. - Performance and design standards. 
    6.7.1 Purpose. The purpose of Planned Village Development is to provide an alternative to conventional development that is pedestrian friendly and reflects the historic patterns that help to define Exeter's community character. Increased densities in commercial and residential development are allowed only through the transfer of development rights, thereby protecting open space and farmland. 
    6.7.2 Mix of uses. Consistent with the purposes of PVD under section 10.1.1 of the zoning ordinance, every PVD development must provide for a mix of complementary uses within a village setting. Applicants for PVD shall demonstrate that the proposed development includes a variety of uses and/or housing types consistent with the purpose articulated in this article. Multiple primary uses may be constructed on a single lot to achieve this purpose. The planning board may approve a uniformity of use in an application for PVD where the proposal shall be part of a larger mixed use plan to be developed at a later date and where a sufficient diversity of building types is provided pursuant to section 6.7.5. 
    6.7.3 Circulation. Streets, driveways, alleys, and rights-of-way (ROWs) shall be designed to provide safe circulation for all modes of vehicular and pedestrian transportation. 
A.  The development plan shall consider the anticipated level of traffic for all modes of circulation when assembling various infrastructure elements within the right-of-way. Sidewalks, drainage infrastructure, street trees, parking lanes, bicycle lanes, bridges, bicycle racks, pavement width, lighting, traffic calming features, and other amenities shall be shown in accordance with the checklists associated with each stage of PVD plan review. Examples of different street and intersection configurations that may be applied to a proposed PVD can be found in the Village Design Manual in the Land Development and Subdivision Regulations. 
B.  Private roads, alleys, or other means of access may be used to satisfy primary access requirements to any use or lot with approval from the planning board and the submission and approval of appropriate supporting legal documents. 
C.  Applicants shall illustrate where different surface treatments are used to delineate spaces dedicated primarily to automobiles, bicycles, pedestrians, and landscaping. 
D.  Cul-de-sacs and dead end streets shall be prohibited in favor of streets that have multiple connection points to other streets, providing multiple access and egress points. 
    6.7.4 Lot design. 
A.  Site plans provided at the master plan stage shall provide plan-view illustrations of each individual lot types within a proposed PVD. These illustrations shall show the disposition of the basic elements of the lot including the location of building footprints, driveways, parking, and walkways. Examples of different lot types that may be applied to a proposed PVD can be found in the Village Design Manual, adopted herein by reference. The configuration, dimension, and size of lots shall be designed in a manner that reinforces the compact and walkable nature of traditional neighborhood development. 
B.  Lot layout and size shall facilitate a diversity of building types and high levels of accessibility for motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians in residential, mixed-use, and commercial areas. The planning board may approve a uniformity of lot types in an application for PVD where the proposal shall be part of a larger diverse scheme of lot types to be developed at a later date. 
    6.7.5 Building types. 
A.  Development plans at the master plan stage shall provide architectural elevations or illustrations for the individual building types within a proposed PVD. Examples of different building types that may be applied to a proposed PVD can be found in the Village Design Manual. 
B.  In order to modulate their scale, multi-story buildings shall clearly articulate the base, middle, and top of the building through the use of cornices, step-backs, borders of distinct material, or other articulating features. 
C.  Larger buildings with long façades shall articulate the façade with varied rooflines, distinct signage for multiple tenants, awnings, recessed spaces and/or entrances, and any other features that serve to add texture to these longer façades. 
D.  Large, flat, unadorned, blank walls on commercial or mixed use buildings shall be avoided for any side or rear walls unless specifically related to acceptable architectural forms (e.g., barns). Where windows are not feasible, articulating features may be used such as awnings and decorative lighting to make these surfaces more attractive. 
E.  Building types for corner lots shall be designed in a manner that actively engages each side that fronts on a street, alley, or way. Multiple entrances are not necessary but the building surfaces along public space shall be conducive to pedestrian activity through the use of windows, lighting, awnings, signage, or other features. 
F.  Building types shall be varied along streets, within commercial areas, and within neighborhoods to create architectural diversity. The planning board may approve the repetition of building types where the use of different architectural elements and details will successfully create variation along an individual streetscape, within a commercial area, or throughout a neighborhood. Architectural elements that may be used to create this variation include, but are not limited to, dormers, porches, cornices, fenestration, roof configuration, and building materials. 
    6.7.6 Entrances. 
A.  All commercial and mixed use buildings shall have a principal façade and entry facing a sidewalk or other area dedicated to pedestrian circulation. Commercial buildings may have more than one principal façade and/or entry where more than one side of the building fronts on public space. 
B.  Main entrances shall incorporate architectural features that draw attention to the entrance. These features may include covered porches, planters, porticos, recessed doorways, awnings, and/or different sidewalk surface treatment. 
C.  Awnings in commercial or mixed use settings shall be made of canvas and/or weather-coated materials. Vinyl awnings are prohibited. Each awning should be distinct from its neighbor and continuous awnings over several stores are discouraged. 
    6.7.7 Fenestration. 
A.  The width-to-height ratio of window bays in façades above the first story in commercial or mixed use settings should have a minimum width-to-height ratio of 1:2 unless acceptable dormers or other features necessitate a different dimension. Multiple bays may be placed immediately adjacent to one another in order to create larger window areas. 
B.  Large uninterrupted window glass panes are discouraged unless appropriately integrated into commercial façades with other smaller windows and articulating features. 
C.  Mullion pattern and thickness shall reflect traditional New England design with broad decorative surfaces or trim between windows. Any mullion finishes that would be highly reflective or industrial in nature are not allowed. 
    6.7.8 Signage. 
A.  For nonresidential uses in the district there may be one non-internally illuminated wall mounted sign for each main building not to exceed eight square feet. The location of these signs shall be such that architectural features are not wholly or partially obscured, including dormers, windows, decorative trim, for example. 
B.  In addition to permitted wall mounted signs, there may be one individual projecting sign to identify each individual use in a multiple use building. Such signs shall not exceed eight square feet in area per side and shall be located at or near any entrance open to the public. 
C.  Wall mounted or projected signs should typically be located above the ground floor storefront and just below the second floor windows. Signs should not obscure architectural features or windows and should be integrated with the design of the building. 
D.  In addition to permitted wall mounted signs, the planning board may allow for free standing signs for those roads or driveways which provide access to complexes of uses and buildings within the district. No such major entrance sign shall be permitted for individual uses or buildings. Such free standing signs shall not exceed six feet in height above the ground and shall not be larger than 32 square feet in sign display area per side. No such free standing sign shall be erected in such a manner as to materially impede vision or obstruct access to or from any public or private street, sidewalk, driveway, off-street parking, or loading facility or any other access required by this ordinance. Free standing signs should incorporate design details, materials, and colors of the associated buildings. The base or support elements of free standing signs should be integrated with the surrounding environment and should incorporate ornamental landscaping where possible. 
E.  Sign colors should be selected to provide sign legibility for both day and nighttime viewing. Sign colors and finishes should be compatible with the color of the building and surrounding development. 
F.  Sign materials should be of high quality and compatible with the design of the building and façade on which they are placed. 
G.  Externally illuminated signs should have downward-directed, wall mounted lights with fully-shielded decorative lamps that do not obscure the graphics of the sign. 
H.  Signage on awnings is permitted only on the apron portion of the awning for business identification or to advertise particular goods and/or services. 
I.  Internally illuminated signs are not permitted. 
(Amend. of 6-25-13) 
Sec. 6.8. - Ownership, operations and maintenance. 
    6.8.1 Required agreements. An applicant for PVD shall submit a report to the planning board at the preliminary plan stage of review which describes the various ownership, operations, and maintenance agreements associated with the proposed development. These agreements may include, but are not limited to: 
A.  Any provisions to be recorded with a property deed that may restrict the ownership or use of property based on the age, income, or other characteristics of the occupant. 
B.  Any covenants, contracts, or agreements that describe the sole or shared ownership of and responsibility for access ways, roads, sidewalks, utilities, storm water management facilities, wastewater management facilities, and/or drinking water supply infrastructure. 
C.  Any monitoring programs associated with hazardous materials/waste or wastewater facility discharge. 
    6.8.2 Approval of covenants. The planning board shall be provided copies of any formal covenants, contracts and legal documents with supporting information that will be associated with the development and may condition final approval on the approval and appropriate maintenance of these documents. Where the planning board does condition approval on the maintenance of any such documents, future changes to these documents shall include planning board approval. 
    6.8.3. Solicitor review. The planning board may require these documents to be reviewed by the town solicitor at the applicant's expense. 
(Amend. of 6-25-13) 
Sec. 6.9. - Transfer of development rights (TDR)-Sending areas. 
    6.9.1 TDR required. TDR is required where an application for PVD would increase the amount of residential development beyond what is allowed in any of the underlying districts. See section 10.3 of the zoning regulations. 
    6.9.2. Determining and certifying development rights. 
A.  General. Development rights may be approved by the planning board as part of a TDR sending area land development project. Master plan approval is required to officially determine the number of development rights associated with a parcel(s) of land and authorize certification from the administrative officer. 
B.  Establishing yield. The development rights that may be created on a given parcel of land are determined by the maximum number of detached single family dwelling units that may be developed as determined by the planning board, in accordance with the zoning ordinance and land development and subdivision regulations. The applicant shall have the burden of proof with regard to the reasonableness and feasibility of the design and engineering specifications for the development plan; provided, however, that the planning board's determination of the number of development rights, which is based on the review of approved application documents, shall be conclusive. The site yield plan shall not include the use of any density bonuses or development increases that may be offered elsewhere in the zoning ordinance including, but not limited to, inclusionary zoning, conservation developments, and low/moderate density bonuses. Site plans developed as part of a comprehensive permit application shall not be considered viable yield plans for the purposes of a TDR sending area land development application. 
C.  Submittal requirements. Applicants for a TDR sending area land development project shall be required to submit plans to the planning board in accordance with the TDR sending area pre-application checklist and TDR sending area master plan checklist in the land development and subdivision regulations per section 6.6. 
D.  Scope of yield plan. Applicants for a TDR sending area land development project shall show the yield for the entirety of all parcels associated with the application. Determining yield for a portion of any associated parcel is not allowed. 
E.  Certificates of development rights. Upon the approval of a master plan of a TDR sending area land development application, the planning board shall authorize the issuance of a certificate of development rights from the administrative officer, barring any appeals during the appropriate appeal period. This authorization has the same vesting rights as any master plan approval. 
F.  Issuance and maintenance of development rights. Issuance and maintenance of these certificates shall be as follows: 
1.  Barring any appeals, the certificate of development rights shall be issued within ten days of the expiration of the appeal period following the planning board's approval of master plan, however 
2.  No certificates shall be issued until the applicant demonstrates that all required deed restrictions have been recorded in town hall. 
3.  The certificate shall be signed by the owner of the development rights and the administrative officer and recorded by the town clerk. 
4.  The planning board shall be notified in writing of any sale, transfer, conveyance, or extinguishing of development rights. Revised certificates shall be issued upon change of ownership or upon the reduction of development rights vested in a certificate and recorded by the town clerk. 
G.  Approved subdivision or land development plans. Any applicant that has received master, preliminary, or final plan approval for a parcel in a designated sending area and has not commenced construction may apply to the planning board for a certificate of development rights to convert the approved property yield into transferable development rights provided the property is eligible as a sending area in accordance with section 10.3.2.1 of the zoning ordinance. 
H.  Deed restrictions. Approval of any certified development rights shall be accompanied by a draft deed restriction on the associated parcels. This restriction shall include the following provisions at a minimum: 
1.  The number of the development rights associated with the parcel shall be clearly stated; 
2.  As development rights may be purchased and subsequently extinguished, this reduction in the number of development rights shall be amended on the deed; 
3.  Following the receiving of the deed restrictions, should the property owner wish to develop all or a portion of remaining development rights on the property, the town's conservation development design process shall be used. 
    6.9.3 Sending area land value for TDR. Certified development rights shall have different capacities to yield density bonuses in receiving area districts. The differing capacity or "value" of each development right shall depend on its TDR score. Land owners in a sending area district cannot obtain a certificate of development rights without establishing a score for their property in accordance with Table 6A and 6B below: 
TABLE 6A 
6.9.3.A - Scoring Lands in the Sending Area 
ALLOWABLE POINTS SCORING CRITERIA 1. Location 5 10 15 20 Land is adjacent to, in close proximity, or will provide value to the proposed village area. Land is more than 1/2 mile away from the Receiving Area and provides no direct connection to the Receiving Area Land is more than 1/2 mile from the Receiving Area but is connected via a dedicated pedestrian/bike trail. Land is not connected to, but is within 1/2 mile of the Receiving Area. Land is directly adjacent to Receiving Area or contiguous with other preserved land that is adjacent to the Receiving Area. 2. Development Pressure 0-20 Land under development pressure which is critical to the preservation of the rural character and lifestyle of Exeter. 3. Farmland 5 10 15 20 Active Farming and Agricultural Lands(Schedule F form filed with IRS.) Parcel is currently not farmed. Parcel is a working farm with less than 10 acres. Parcel is a working farm with 10-25 acres of prime agricultural lands. Parcel is a working farm over 25 acres of prime farmland soils. 4. Drinking Water Supply Protection 0-5 6-10 11-20 Groundwater protection Land is outside the Groundwater Protection Overlay District. Land is partially inside the Groundwater Protection Overlay District. Land is totally inside the Groundwater Protection Overlay District. 5. Green Corridor/Connectivity 0-5 6-10 11-15 16-20 Criteria for linking open spaces. Parcel has no potential to be part of a larger green corridor. Parcel is important link in a planned open space corridor. Parcel will link, extend or infill existing protected open space in town, State, or private non-profit ownership. Parcel is part of a designated green corridor priority area such as the Queen River Watershed and Arcadia Management Area. Basic Open Space criteria Parcel has 10 acres or less of unfragmented forest. Parcel is part of an unfragmented forest area over 10 acres in extent. Unfragmented forest area over 50 acres. Unfragmented forest area over 100 acres. 6. Development Suitability 0-5 6-10 11-15 16-20 Land Unsuitable for Development Less than 10% of the parcel is considered suitable for development. Between 10% and 50% (inclusive) of the parcel is covered by land suitable for development. Between 51-90% inclusive of the parcel is considered suitable for development. Above 90% of parcel is considered suitable for development. Frontage Lot Capacity Parcel is not easily developable with frontage lots. Parcel is easily developable with frontage lots regardless of constraints to development. 7. Natural Resources 0-10 11-20 Habitat Parcel does not include habitat of rare or unique species as identified in the Comprehensive Plan or by the RI Natural Heritage Program, RI Audubon Society or The Nature Conservancy (Cite map reference) Parcel includes habitat of rare or unique species as identified in the Comprehensive Plan or by the RI Natural Heritage Program, RI Audubon Society or The Nature Conservancy (Cite map reference) 8. Other 0-5 6-10 11-15 16-20 Scenic Views/Recreational Potential/Cultural Attributes Does not contain any of the qualities listed in the adjacent cell.   Parcel contains a scenic view   Parcel contains a scenic view   Parcel contains a scenic view   Parcel protects views from a designated scenic highway   Parcel contains a scenic view opportunities.   Parcel protects views from a designated scenic highway opportunities.   Parcel contains important historic site or structure   Parcel contains important historic site or structure   Parcel contains important historic site or structure   Parcel is identified for recreational opportunities.   Parcel is identified for recreational opportunities.   Parcel is identified for recreational opportunities.  
B.  Using the sending area score to determine transfer ratio. Development rights certified as part of a TDR Sending Area Land Development project may be transferred to a PVD to create housing at densities that would otherwise not be allowed. Housing types developed as part of a PVD may include single-family detached dwellings, two-family, townhouse, or multi-family units. For every development right certified in a sending area, the planning board may allow housing units to be developed in the receiving area at the following ratios. Fractions of units shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number when calculating potential density bonuses. 
Table 6.9.3.B - Transfer Ratio 
Sending Area Lands Score* Detached Single
Family Housing
(Development Right/
Housing Unit) Two-Family or Townhouse (Development Right/Housing Unit) Multi-Family or Age
Restricted (Develop-
ment Right/Housing
Unit) 20-50 1 : 1.2 1 : 1.5 1 : 2.0 51-84 1 : 1.5 1 : 2.0 1 : 2.5 85+ 1 : 1.7 1 : 2.5 1 : 3.0  
*Sending area lands must score at least 20 points to be eligible for the TDR program. 
    6.9.4 Procedures for transferring development rights to a receiving area. 
A.  General. All applications for transferring development rights to a receiving area shall come before the planning board as part of a PVD application review. At the outset of the permit review process, applicants must demonstrate to the planning board that the bearer of the certificate of development rights is in agreement with the terms of the proposed application and understands the number of development rights that will be extinguished after the landing process is complete. Documentation of this assurance shall be provided in a letter signed by the bearer of the certificate of development rights or his/her representative at the time of the application to land the development rights. 
B.  Calculating the number of required development rights. The number of development rights required for PVD involves a three-step process: 
1.  The applicant shall first determine how many residential units would be allowed as of right in the underlying districts. 
2.  The applicant shall then determine the number of proposed residential units in the PVD. 
3.  The difference between the two numbers shall then be divided by the transfer ratio as determined in section 6.9.4.B. 
Hypothetical calculation: 
Step 1. Number of units allowed as of right: Four Step 2. Number of proposed units: 30 single family; 30 multi-family Number of units requiring TDR: 60 - 4 = 56 (half for single-family; half for multi-family) Step 3. Sending Area score: 75 Single-family requirement: 28 ÷ 1.5 = 17 development rights Multi-family requirement: 28 ÷ 2.5 = 11 development rights Total requirement: 17 + 11 = 28 development rights  
C.  Materials. In addition to the materials customarily required as part of an application for a major land development or major subdivision, an applicant proposing to transfer development rights shall submit the appropriate number of copies of his/her certificate of development rights to the planning board. The validity of these development rights shall be verified by the town planner or his/her designee during the pre-application review. 
D.  Transfer. A person or party purchasing development rights already vested in a certificate of development rights without landing said rights in a receiving area shall record the purchase with the town planner and receive an updated certificate of development rights reflecting the change in ownership. Parties may purchase all or a portion of the development rights vested in a certificate of development rights. 
E.  Fractions of development rights. Any sale, conveyance, or transfer of development rights shall apply to whole units of development rights and not fractions thereof. Fractions of development rights remaining after the transfer of development rights has occurred shall be extinguished. 
F.  Final approval. The planning board shall not issue final approval of any transfer of development rights until: 
1.  The master plan submittal for the proposed PVD is approved; 
2.  The changes to the future land use map and zoning map are approved by town council (as applicable); 
3.  All necessary conservation easement restrictions are recorded in the land evidence records and said development rights are formally extinguished by the town planner through the issuance of a revised certificate of development rights. 
    6.9.5 Conservation easements on sending area lands. Conservation easements shall be applied to the sending area parcels in accordance with section 10.6 once all development rights have been purchased or otherwise extinguished. Easements shall also be applied to any conservation areas established as part of a conservation development. 
A.  Existing agricultural lands. Lands identified for preservation in the sending area that are in agricultural production or are otherwise identified for agricultural activities by the applicant when development rights are purchased should be preserved for agricultural activities; 
B.  Existing natural lands. Lands identified for preservation in the sending area that are not in agricultural production or otherwise identified for agricultural activities by the applicant when development rights are purchased shall be preserved as conservation areas; 
C.  Restrictions on sending area parcels. Restrictions on sending area parcels shall be recorded as conservation easement restrictions on the title of the parcel to be preserved upon approval of a TDR sending area land development application. These restrictions shall include a management plan, to be approved by the planning board, which will specify how the open space will be used in the future. The guidance provided in the Rhode Island Conservation Easement Guidance Manual (DEM 2009, or as amended) shall be used to prepare a conservation easement and management plan. Conservation or agricultural lands preserved through TDR shall either: 
1.  Be conveyed to and accepted by the town for park, open space, agricultural, or other permitted use or uses; 
2.  Be conveyed to a nonprofit organization, the principal purpose of which is the conservation of open space or resource protection; or 
3.  Be conveyed to a corporation or trust whose principal purpose is the stewardship of said land for uses approved by the planning board. 
4.  Remain in private (non-common) ownership if the use is limited to those approved by the planning board through a binding conservation easement restriction that runs with the land. With agreement of the property owner through the land development or subdivision process, the planning board may limit the amount of space that remains in private ownership to ensure the protection of natural resources or the maintenance of an established greenway. 
D.  Easements for non-agricultural lands. All non-agricultural land preserved through the TDR permit process shall be protected in perpetuity against further development and unauthorized alteration by appropriate conservation easement restrictions, and by the grant of a conservation or preservation restriction to the town, pursuant to R.I.G.L. 34-39, as amended. In addition, the perpetual maintenance of open space and any authorized uses shall be guaranteed by appropriate conservation easement restrictions and by grant of a conservation or preservation restriction to the town, pursuant to R.I.G.L. 34-39, as amended. Every conservation easement restriction shall require approval by the planning board before any development rights are sold, landed, or otherwise extinguished. Every conservation easement restriction shall contain the following provision: 
"If the owners, or their successors or assigns fail to maintain conservation lands in accordance with those restrictions placed upon the property, the town may perform any necessary maintenance and enforce the payment for such costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, by an action at law or in equity against the owners or their successors or assigns." 
E.  Easements for agricultural lands. All land designated for conservation as agricultural land shall be protected in perpetuity against non-agricultural development and shall allow agricultural use in accordance with this ordinance by appropriate conservation easements and management plans. Said restrictions shall be imposed via restrictions for farming and agricultural uses (pursuant to Title 34, Chapter 39 of the Rhode Island General Laws as amended). The town, acting through the planning board shall serve as the principal steward and enforcer of these restrictions. The planning board may allow other entities to hold various stewardship and enforcement rights to supplement those rights held by the parties. These entities shall have missions dedicated to agricultural preservation and a commitment to continuing allowable agriculture use. Any rules or enforcement enacted by said entity shall be consistent with any applicable rules of the department of environmental management, division of agriculture. No restrictions shall be placed upon the property that would preclude agricultural lands that have been left fallow to be cleared, re-cultivated and returned to an active agricultural operation subject to applicable state laws. 
F.  Allowable uses on conservation lands (where rights have been transferred). Uses allowable in conservation lands shall be devoted to conservation purposes or alternatively agriculture, park, recreation, or forest management purposes as determined appropriate by the planning board. 
G.  Allowable uses on agricultural lands. Consistent with any applicable local, state, or federal regulations, the planning board shall allow agricultural lands preserved through TDR to be used as prescribed during the development right certification process and as recorded by the administrative officer. 
(Amend. of 6-25-13) 
Sec 6.10. - Fee-in-lieu option for density transfer. 
    Pursuant to section 10.3 of the zoning ordinance, applicants for eligible development proposals (e.g., Planned Village Development) may petition the planning board for a fee-in-lieu of TDR option as an alternative to transferring development rights in order to achieve higher densities than what would ordinarily be allowed in designated receiving areas. The planning board shall have sole and exclusive discretion whether or not to approve the use of this provision. 
1.  Calculating the fee. To calculate the appropriate amount that would qualify for fee-in-lieu of TDR, the Town of Exeter shall require appraisals of property in a residential district that is considered by the planning board to be most consistent with their preservation goals. Said appraisals shall be performed at the applicant's expense. The appraised value will be divided by the assumed number of development rights to determine the cost of each development right. This cost will then be multiplied by the number of development rights required for the proposed development to determine the fee. The planning board may accept the results of an existing appraisal as part of determining the value of development rights. 
2.  Approval. The planning board shall approve of the required fee as part of the major land development application for the receiving area parcel(s). Approval of the required fee shall occur no later than preliminary plan approval. 
3.  Fee recipient. The fee shall be paid to the town and directed either: 
a.  To a restricted account established by the town to support the preservation of farmland and open space in the town through the purchase of land or development rights. Funds from this account shall be expended pursuant to expenditure provisions in the Town Charter. 
b.  To a land preservation trust fund established by municipal ordinance, to be expended in the manner specified in that ordinance. 
4.  Payment schedule. The town and the applicant may negotiate a payment schedule as part of the major land development review process. At a minimum, the town shall be paid on a schedule that generally reflects payment to the developer for individual lots or units. 
(Amend. of 6-25-13) 


SECTION 7.0. - DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS 

Sec. 7.1. - Physical design requirements, general. 
A.  These regulations, with their appendices, specify all physical design requirements for the subdivision and land development projects, which are to be reviewed and approved pursuant to these regulations. These regulations specify all requirements and policies for subdivisions and land development projects, which are not contained in the town zoning ordinance. 
B.  The requirements and policies include, but are not limited to, requirements and policies for rights-of-way, landscaping, connections of proposed streets and drainage systems with those of the surrounding neighborhood, and the relationship of proposed developments to natural and manmade features of the surrounding neighborhood. 
C.  The regulations specify all necessary findings, formulas for calculations and procedures for meeting said requirements and policies. These requirements and policies shall apply to all subdivisions and land development projects reviewed and/or administered under these regulations. 
D.  Public design and improvement standards for subdivisions and land development projects are specified in this section. Standards include, but are not limited to, specifications for rights-of-way, streets, sidewalks, lighting, landscaping, public access, utilities, drainage systems, fire protection, and soil erosion control. 
E.  All public improvements of a land development project or subdivision shall reflect the physical character and design for that district which is specified by the town's comprehensive plan. Public improvement requirements and standards may not be the same in all areas or districts of the town. 
F.  The land development or subdivision developer, at his own expense, shall construct all improvements required by the planning board, as shown on the approved final plans of the development. 
Sec. 7.2. - Land development and subdivision design standards, specific. 
    All land development projects and subdivisions shall conform to the following minimum design standards: 
A.  Easements. The planning board may require the provision of easements for the installation and maintenance of utilities. 
B.  Streets. 
1.  Street layout will be considered in relation to the official road map of the town and to any major street plan, which the town may adopt. The planning board may require limited access to major highways for safety and for other purposes as deemed necessary by the board. 
2.  Street right-of-way, both existing and proposed, shall be maintained with at least the same width throughout the subdivision. 
3.  Street centerlines shall coincide precisely at intersections or shall be offset by at least 150 feet. 
4.  Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. No intersection shall have an angle that is less than 60 degrees. 
5.  No subdivisions shall be approved unless access to that subdivision is by way of a public street. 
6.  Private streets and publicly accepted streets existing on the parcel of land to be subdivided shall be shown on the preliminary plat and must be clearly identified as such. 
7.  Private streets shall not be permitted and shall not be shown on the final plans, except where allowed in a rural residential compound or conservation development. 
8.  Driveways shall be shown on the subdivision plans, except in a rural residential compound. 
9.  Street right-of-way may not be less than 50 feet in width; street pavements shall be 18 to 24 feet in width, as determined by the planning board, measured between curbs or edge of pavement. 
10.  The planning board will require additional right-of-way and pavement width for arterial streets subject to heavy traffic. 
11.  Grades of residential streets shall not be less than one percent nor more than eight percent on minor streets or five percent on arterial streets. 
12.  Dead-end streets shall not be more than 600 feet in length and shall have at their closed end a turnaround constructed as shown in Figure 1 (last page of this regulation). The interior of the turnaround shall not be paved, but rather it shall retain the natural vegetation or, if no natural vegetation exists, it shall be planted with native vegetation that is suitable to the site and adds to the character of the site as determined by the planning board. The shape of the turnaround may be modified, and/or the size of the turnaround may be increased, to accommodate existing trees, ledge, or other natural features. Where a dead-end street is to provide access to adjacent property, the planning board may require provision for a temporary turnaround or "tee" until such time as the adjacent tract is developed and the street is extended. Reservation of strips of land controlling access to a street or land dedicated for other public use will not be permitted. 
13.  Where a deflection angle of ten degrees or more occurs along the centerline of a street, a curve with a radius of less than 150 feet shall be introduced. 
14.  Corners at intersections shall be rounded to provide a curb radius of not less than 25 feet. 
15.  An extension of an existing street shall have the same name as the existing street. Names of other proposed streets shall be substantially different from any existing street name in the town. 
16.  In order to maintain a visual screen and rural character, the planning board will require the maintenance of an undisturbed natural vegetative buffer along the frontage of the lot in a range of 25 to 100 feet, as determined by the planning board. 
C.  Lots. 
1.  All lots shall abut an existing or a proposed public street, except where abutting a private street allowed in a rural compound or a conservation development. 
2.  Except for those sides bordering a street, lots shall not have interior angles of more than 200 degrees except as provided in section 2.4.3 of the zoning ordinance. 
3.  The proportion of average lot depth to average lot width shall not exceed 2.5 to one, except as provided in section 2.4.3 of the zoning ordinance. 
4.  All lots shall conform to the provisions of any zoning ordinance that may be adopted in the town. 
5.  Side lot lines shall be as near right angles to street lines as practical. 
6.  Other than at corners, lots shall abut only one existing or proposed street. 
7.  Minimum lot dimensions and minimum building setback lines shall be established for all lots in the zoning ordinance of the town, unless the need for larger lots is indicated by the standard soil survey. 
8.  The minimum lot dimensions established by these regulations or any zoning ordinance adopted by the town may be increased by the planning board if larger dimensions are warranted for the safe and effective operation of individual sewage disposal systems (ISDS). Lots shall be of such area, shape and dimensions as will allow the operation of individual sewage disposal systems in such manner that the water supplies of said lots and all of the surrounding lots are adequately safeguarded. In addition, slopes over 12 percent, and bedrock areas may be a determining factor in affecting lot size due to the effect this has on onsite (proposed) sewage systems. 
9.  Lots in all subdivisions and land development projects created for the purpose of development shall be designed so as to contain the minimum land area required by the zoning ordinance. 
10.  Corner lot street lines shall be of sufficient length to accommodate the required front building setback lines. 
D.  Fresh water wetlands. No fresh water wetlands, as defined in chapter 213 of the Public Laws of 1971 and as amended in the future, shall be excavated, drained or filled nor shall any extraneous materials be placed into these wetlands. Water flow shall not be diverted nor shall any change be made to the natural condition of fresh water wetlands without prior approval of the director of the state department of environmental management and the town council in accordance with the provisions of said chapter. 
E.  Sewage disposal fields. The disposal field of any onsite sewage disposal system shall be in conformity with the provisions of the current state department of environmental management ISDS regulations and also be in compliance with any other applicable state or local code. 
F.  Standards for rural residential compounds. Rural residential compounds, if permitted by the planning board under the provisions of section 5.2, shall be constructed to the standards and specifications provided in these regulations, and as provided in section 1.4.B.C. of the town zoning ordinance entitled "Rural residential compounds." 
Sec. 7.3. - Construction of subdivision. 
    The subdivider, at his own expense, shall construct the subdivision according to specifications of the town planning board or otherwise designated town official or technical consultant. Required construction for each subdivision, according to the standards in section 7.2 shall be as follows: 
A.  Streets shall be graded, graveled and paved and curbing installed where required. 
B.  Water lines shall be installed in the street where connection to a public system is feasible. Installation shall precede road construction. 
C.  Storm water and drainage impacts shall be mitigated in accordance with standards in the "Rhode Island Storm Water Design Manual," as amended. 
D.  Walks or trails may be required where necessary to control and/or protect pedestrian traffic. Where provided, sidewalks shall have a minimum width of four feet. 
E.  Special safety structures may be required, such as guardrails and other devices depending upon the nature of the terrain. 
F.  Permanent monuments are to be set at every corner and angle point on the boundary line of the subdivision and at every angle point of curvature on the proposed street right-of-way. The planning board may also require monuments to be set as necessary along lot lines, which abut open space areas so as to clearly mark the location of the division between the lot and the open space. 
G.  Street signs with sufficient supports consisting of two-inch galvanized pipe in cement; a minimum of three feet in the ground and of a type acceptable to the public works director shall be erected by the sub-divider at each street intersection in the subdivision. Street signs shall be six inches in height with letters four inches in height. Dead-end streets shall be clearly indicated as such at their entrances. 
H.  Every effort shall be made to retain existing vegetation, especially significant trees, by limiting clearing to the minimum needed to construct the new road. Where existing vegetation is not preserved within the right-of-way, new shade trees shall be planted at intervals of one tree on an average of every 30 feet on both sides of the road. Shade trees shall be of indigenous species specified by the planning board and shall have a two and one half inch caliper when measured three feet above grade. 
Sec. 7.4. - Completion of subdivision. 
    All road improvements shall be inspected and approved by the Exeter public works director and the planning board's consulting engineer in accordance with the procedures in sections 12.0 and 13.0 of these regulations. 
    Upon completion of all streets and other public improvements in the development, the public works director and the planning board's consulting engineer shall report in writing to the planning board as to the condition of the required improvements. The planning board will review the report and inspect the development and within 30 days from the receipt of their report, and at the next regular planning board meeting, will issue written notice to the sub-divider and to the town council, if the development improvements are found to be satisfactory by the board. If found acceptable; the planning board shall recommend that the town accept as town property the road and other required public improvements. (See section 4.2. improvement guarantees, item I, maintenance bond requirement). 
SECTION 8.0. - ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT OF REGULATIONS 

Sec. 8.1. - Authority to create and administer regulations. 
    The town council shall empower, by ordinance, the town planning board to adopt, modify and amend regulations and rules governing land development and subdivision projects within the town and to control land development and subdivision projects pursuant to these regulations and rules. 
Sec. 8.2. - Procedure for adoption and amendment. 
A.  The planning board, once authorized by the ordinance required under G.L. 1956, § 45-23-51, shall adopt or repeal, and provide for the administration, interpretation, and enforcement of land development and subdivision review regulations. 
B.  The land development and zoning regulations and all the amendments thereto, shall be consistent with all provisions of the Land Development and Subdivision Review Enabling Act of 1992 as well as the town comprehensive plan and zoning ordinance. 
Sec. 8.3. - Public hearing and notice. 
A.  No town land development and subdivision regulations shall be adopted, repealed, or amended until after a public hearing has been held upon the question before the planning board. The planning board shall first give notice of the public hearing by publication of notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the town at least once each week for three successive weeks prior to the date of the hearing, which may include the week in which the hearing is to be held. At this hearing opportunity shall be given to all persons interested to be heard upon the matter of the proposed regulations. Written notice, which may be a copy of the newspaper notice, shall be mailed to the statewide planning program of the Rhode Island Department of Administration at least two weeks prior to the hearing. The newspaper notice shall be published as a display advertisement, using a type size at least as large as the normal type size used by the newspaper in its news articles, and shall: 
1.  Specify the place of said hearing and the date and time of its commencement; 
2.  Indicate that adoption, amendment or repeal of local regulations is under consideration; 
3.  Contain a statement of the proposed amendments to the regulations that may be printed once in its entirety, or may summarize or describe the matter under consideration; 
4.  Advise those interested where and when a copy of the matter under consideration may be obtained or examined and copied; and 
5.  State that the proposals shown thereon may be altered or amended prior to the close of the public hearing without further advertising, as a result of further study or because of the views expressed at the public hearing. Any such alteration or amendment must be presented for comment in the course of said hearing. 
B.  Notice of the public hearing shall be sent by first class mail to the town planning board of any municipality where there is a public or quasi-public water source, or private water source that is used or is suitable for use as a public water source, located within 2,000 feet of the town boundaries. 
C.  Notice of a public hearing shall be sent to the governing body of any state or municipal water department or agency, special water district, or private water company that has riparian rights to a surface water resource and/or surface watershed that is used or is suitable for use as a public water source located within either the municipality or 2,000 feet of the town boundaries; provided, however, that a map survey has been filed with the building inspector as specified in G.L. 1956, § 45-24-53(E). 
D.  No defect in the form of any notice under this section shall render any regulations invalid, unless such defect is found to be intentional or misleading. 
Sec. 8.4. - Publication and availability of regulations. 
A.  Printed copies of the town land development and subdivision regulations shall be available for purchase by the general public in the town hall. The regulations shall be revised to include all current amendments and all appendices. There shall be a charge for a copy to cover the cost of printing. 
B.  Upon publication of the local regulations and any amendments thereto, the town shall send a copy to the Rhode Island Department of Administration's Division of Planning and to the state law library. 
SECTION 9.0. - ADMINISTRATION OF THE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 9.1. - Administrative officer. 
A.  Local administration of the town land development and subdivision regulations shall be under the direction of the administrative officer. 
B.  The administrative officer shall oversee and coordinate the review, approval, recording and enforcement provisions of the local regulations. 
C.  The administrative officer shall be responsible for coordinating reviews of proposed land development projects and subdivisions with adjacent municipalities as is necessary to be consistent with applicable federal, state and local laws and as directed by the planning board. 
D.  The administrative officer may direct the planning clerk, other members of the planning board and/or professional consultants to the planning board to perform some of the clerical and technical tasks for which he/she is responsible. 
E.  Enforcement of the local regulations shall be under the direction of the administrative officer. 
Sec. 9.2. - Board of appeal. 
    The town council shall establish the town zoning board of review as the board of appeal to hear appeals of decisions of the planning board or the administrative officer on matters of review and approval of land development and subdivision projects. 
Sec. 9.3. - Violations and penalties. 
A.  These regulations provide for a penalty for any violation of the regulations, or for a violation of any terms or conditions of any action imposed by the planning board or of any other agency or officer charged in the regulations with enforcement of any of the provisions, as follows. 
B.  Violation of the regulations shall include any action related to the transfer or sale of land in unapproved subdivisions. Any owner, or agent of the owner, who transfers, sells or negotiates to sell any land by reference to or exhibition of, or by other use, a plat of the subdivision before the plat has been approved by the planning board and recorded in the town's land evidence records, shall be in violation of the local regulations and subject to the penalties described in this chapter. 
C.  The penalty for violation shall reasonably relate to the seriousness of the offense, and shall not exceed $1000.00 for each violation, and each day of existence of any violation shall be deemed to be a separate offense. Any such fine shall accrue to the town. 
D.  The town may also cause suit to be brought in the supreme or superior court, to restrain the violation of, or to compel compliance with, the provisions of these regulations. The town may consolidate an action for injunctive relief and/or fines under these regulations in the Washington County Superior Court. 
[Sec. 9.4. - Reserved.] 
Sec. 9.5. - Precedence of approvals between planning board and other local permitting authorities. 
A.  Zoning board. 
1.  Where an applicant requires both a variance from the town's zoning ordinance and planning board approval, the applicant shall first obtain an advisory recommendation from the planning board, as well as conditional planning board approval for the first approval stage for the proposed project, which may be simultaneous, then obtain conditional zoning board relief, and then return to the planning board for subsequent required approval(s). 
2.  Where an applicant requires both a special use permit under the town's zoning ordinance and planning board approval, the applicant shall first obtain an advisory recommendation from the planning board, as well as conditional planning board approval for the first approval stage for the proposed project, which may be simultaneous, then obtain a conditional special use permit from the zoning board, and then return to the planning board for subsequent required approval(s). 
B.  Town council. Where an applicant requires both planning board approval and council approval for a zoning ordinance or zoning map change, the applicant shall first obtain an advisory recommendation on the zoning change from the planning board, as well as conditional planning board approval for the first approval stage for the proposed project, which may be simultaneous, then obtain a conditional zoning change from the council, and then return to the planning board for subsequent required approval(s). 
Sec. 9.6. - Meetings, votes, decisions and records. 
A.  All records of the planning board proceedings and decisions shall be written and kept permanently available for public review in the town hall. Completed applications for proposed land development and subdivision projects under review by the planning board, shall be available for public review at the town hall. 
B.  Participation in a planning board meeting or other proceedings by any party shall not be a cause for civil action or liability except for acts not in good faith, intentional misconduct, knowing violation of law, transactions where there is an improper personal benefit, or malicious, wanton, or willful misconduct. 
C.  All final written comments to the planning board from the administrative officer, town departments, state and federal agencies, and local commissions shall be part of the permanent record of the development application. 
D.  All votes of the planning board shall be made part of the permanent record and shall show the members present and their votes. A decision by the planning board to approve any land development or subdivision application shall require a vote for approval by a majority of the current planning board membership. 
Sec. 9.7. - Signing and recording of plats and plans. 
A.  All approved final plans and plats for land development and subdivision projects shall be signed by the planning board chairperson with the date of approval. Plans and plats for major land developments land development projects and subdivisions shall be signed by the planning board chairperson, the secretary or by the administrative officer with the authorization of the planning board. All minor land development or subdivision plans and plats and administrative plats shall be signed by the planning board chairperson or secretary, or by the administrative officer with authorization of the planning board. 
B.  Upon signature, all plans and plats shall be submitted to the administrative officer prior to recording and filing in the appropriate town departments. The material to be recorded for all plans and plats shall include all pertinent plans with notes thereon concerning all the essential aspects of the approved project design, the implementation schedule, special conditions placed on the development by the town, permits and agreements with state and federal reviewing agencies, and other information as required by the planning board. 
C.  Other parts of the applications record for subdivisions and land development projects, including all meeting records, approved master plan and preliminary plans, site analyses, impact analyses, all legal agreements, records of the public hearing and the entire final approval set of drawings shall be kept permanently by the town departments responsible for implementation and enforcement. 
D.  The administrative officer shall notify the statewide 911 emergency authority and the local police and fire authorities servicing the new plat with the information required by each of the authorities. 
E.  All plans, plats, surveys, easements, or other graphic representations of land subdivisions that do not constitute a subdivision or land development project under these regulations shall be reviewed and authorized for recording in the office of the town clerk, only upon a finding by the administrative officer that planning board approval is not required under these regulations. 
Sec. 9.8. - Changes to recorded plats and plans. 
A.  For all changes to the approved plans of land development projects or subdivisions subject to this act, an amendment of the final development plans is required prior to the issuance of any building permits. Any changes approved in the final plan shall be recorded as amendments to the final plan in accordance with the procedure established for recording of plats in section 9.7. 
B.  Minor changes, those included in the definition of administrative subdivision (see section 2) to a land development or subdivision plan may be approved upon written request and submittal of amended plans to the planning board, whereupon a permit may be issued. Such changes may be authorized without additional public hearings, at the discretion of the board. All such changes shall be made part of the permanent record of the project application. This provision shall not prohibit the board determining that the proposed changes require planning board review as a major change. 
C.  Major changes to a land development or subdivision plan, defined as all those changes, which are not included in the definition of administrative subdivision (see section 2) may only be approved by the planning board and must follow the same review and public hearing process required for approval of preliminary plans as described in section 6.4 or 6.5. 
D.  Rescission procedure. The planning board, only upon application by all landowners of the plat to be affected, may determine that the application for plat rescission is not consistent with the comprehensive plan and is not in compliance with the standards and provisions of the town's zoning ordinance and/or land development and subdivision review regulations and shall hold a public hearing, which adheres to the requirements for notice described in section 6.4 or 6.5. The planning board shall approve, approve with conditions or modifications, or deny the application for rescission of the plat according to the requirements of section 9.6. If it is necessary to abandon any street, the planning board shall submit to the town council the documents necessary for the abandonment process. Once the required process for rescission or for rescission and abandonment has been completed, the revised plat shall be signed and recorded as specified in section 9.7. 
SECTION 10.0. - APPEALS 

Sec. 10.1. - Right of appeal. 
A.  An appeal from any decision of the planning board, or administrative officer charged in the regulations with enforcement of any provisions, except as provided herein, may be taken to the board of appeal by an aggrieved party. Appeals from a decision granting or changing approval of a final plan shall be limited to elements of such approval or disapproval not contained in the decision reached by the planning board at the preliminary stage providing that a public hearing has been held on the plan pursuant to section 6.4 or 6.5. 
B.  An appeal from a decision of the board of appeal may be taken by an aggrieved party to the county superior court. 
Sec. 10.2. - Process of appeal. 
A.  An appeal to the board of appeal from a decision or action of the planning board or administrative officer may be taken by an aggrieved party to the extent provided in section 10.1. Such appeal must be taken within 20 days after the decision has been filed and posted in the office of the town clerk. 
B.  The appeal shall be in writing and shall state clearly and unambiguously the issue or decision, which is being appealed, the reason for the appeal, and the relief sought. The appeal shall either be sent by certified mail, with a return receipt requested, or shall be hand-delivered to the board of appeal. The town clerk shall accept delivery of an appeal on behalf of the board of appeal. 
C.  Upon receipt of an appeal, the board of appeal shall require the planning board or administrative officer to transmit forthwith to the board of appeal, all papers, documents and plans, or a certified copy thereof, constituting the record of the action, which is being appealed. 
Sec. 10.3. - Stay of proceedings. 
    An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action being appealed. 
Sec. 10.4. - Public hearing. 
A.  The board of appeal shall hold a public hearing on the appeal within 45 days of the receipt of the appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties of interest. At the hearing any party may appear in person, or may be represented by an agent or attorney. The board shall render a decision within ten days of the close of the public hearing. The cost of any notice required for the hearing shall be borne by the appellant. 
B.  The board of appeal shall only hear appeals of the actions of a planning board or administrative officer at a meeting called especially for the purpose of hearing such appeals and which has been so advertised. 
C.  The hearing, which may be held on the same date and at the same place as a meeting of the zoning board of review, must be held as a separate meeting from any zoning board of review meeting. Separate minutes and records of votes as required by section 10.5.C shall be maintained by the board of appeal. 
Sec. 10.5. - Standards of review. 
A.  As established by this chapter [Appendix B], in instances of a board of appeal's review of a planning board or administrative officer's decision on matters subject to this chapter [Appendix B], the board of appeal shall not substitute its own judgment for that of the planning board or the administrative officer, but must consider the issue upon the findings and record of the planning board or administrative officer. The board of appeal shall not reverse a decision of the planning board or administrative officer except on a finding of prejudicial procedural error, clear error, or lack of support by the weight of the evidence in the record. 
B.  The concurring vote of three of the five members of the board of appeal sitting at a hearing, shall be necessary to reverse any decision of the planning board or administrative officer. 
C.  In the instance where the board of appeal overturns a decision of the planning board or administrative officer, the proposed project application shall be remanded to the planning board or administrative officer, at the stage of processing from which the appeal was taken, for further proceedings before the planning board or administrative officer and/or for the final disposition, which shall be consistent with the board of appeal's decision. 
D.  The board of appeal shall keep complete records of all proceedings including a record of all votes taken, and shall put all decisions on appeals in writing. The board of appeal shall include in the written record the reasons for each decision. 
Sec. 10.6. - Appeals to the superior court. 
A.  An aggrieved party may appeal a decision of the board of appeal, to the county superior court by filing a complaint setting forth the reasons of appeal within 20 days after the decision has been recorded and posted in the office of the town clerk. The board of appeal shall file the original documents acted upon by it and constituting the record of the case appealed from, or certified copies thereof, together with such other facts as may be pertinent, with the clerk of the court within 30 days after being served with a copy of the complaint. When the complaint is filed by someone other than the original applicant or appellant, such original applicant or appellant and the members of the planning board shall be made parties to the proceedings. The appeal shall not stay proceedings upon the decision appealed from, but the court may, in its discretion, grant a stay on appropriate terms and make such other orders, as it deems necessary for an equitable disposition of the appeal. 
B.  The review shall be conducted by the superior court without a jury. The court shall consider the record of the hearing before the planning board and, if it shall appear to the court that additional evidence is necessary for the proper disposition of the matter, it may allow any party to such appeal to present such evidence in open court, which evidence, along with the report, shall constitute the record upon which the determination of the court shall be made. 
C.  The court shall not substitute its judgment for that of the planning board as to the weight of the evidence on questions of fact. The court may affirm the decision of the board of appeal or remand the case for further proceedings, or may reverse or modify the decision if substantial rights of the appellant have been prejudiced because of findings, inferences, conclusions or decisions which are: 
1.  In violation of constitutional, statutory, ordinance or planning board regulations provisions; 
2.  In excess of the authority granted to the planning board by statute or ordinance; 
3.  Made upon unlawful procedure; 
4.  Affected by other error of law; 
5.  Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable, probative, and substantial evidence of the whole record; or 
6.  Arbitrary or capricious or characterized by abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise of discretion. 
Sec. 10.7. - Appeals to the superior court-Enactment of or amendment of local regulations. 
A.  An appeal of an enactment of or an amendment of local regulations may be taken to the county superior court filing a complaint, as set forth herein, within 30 days after such enactment, or amendment has become effective. The appeal may be taken by any legal resident or landowner of the town or by any association of residents or landowners of the town. The appeal shall not stay the enforcement of the local regulations, as enacted or amended, but the court may, in its discretion, grant a stay on appropriate terms, which may include the filing of a bond, and make such other orders as it deems necessary for an equitable disposition of the appeal. 
B.  The complaint shall set forth with specificity the area or areas in which the enactment or amendment is not consistent with the comprehensive planning Act, G.L. 1956, § 45-22.2-1 et seq.; the Zoning Enabling Act of 1991, G.L. 1956, § 45-24-27 et seq.; the town comprehensive plan; or the town zoning ordinance. 
C.  The review shall be conducted by the court without a jury. The court shall consider whether the enactment or amendment of the local regulations is consistent with the comprehensive planning Act, G.L. 1956, § 45-22.2-1, et seq.; the Zoning Enabling Act of 1991, G.L. 1956, § 45-24-27, et seq.; the town comprehensive plan; or the town zoning ordinance. If the enactment or amendment is not consistent, then the court shall invalidate the enactment or the amendment, or those parts of such enactment or amendment, which are not consistent. The court shall not revise the local regulations to be consistent, but may suggest appropriate language as part of the court decision. 
D.  The court may in its discretion, upon motion of the parties or on its own motion, award reasonable attorney's fees to any party to an appeal, as set forth herein, including a municipality. 
Sec. 10.8. - Appeals to the superior court-priority in judicial proceedings. 
    Upon the entry of any case or proceeding brought under the provisions of this chapter [Appendix B], including pending appeals and appeals hereinafter taken to the court, the court shall, at the request of either party, advance the case, so that the matter shall be afforded precedence on the calendar and shall thereupon be heard and determined with as little delay as possible. 
SECTION 11.0. - SEVERABILITY 
    If any provision of these regulations or of any rule, regulation or determination made hereunder, or if the application thereof to any person, agency or circumstances, is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the regulations, rule, or determination and the application of such provisions to other persons, agencies, or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. The invalidity of any section or sections of these regulations shall not affect the validity of the remainder of the regulations. 
SECTION 12.0. - CHECKLISTS 
A.  Informal concept review checklist - Minor land conventional developments, minor subdivisions and rural residential compounds 
B.  Administrative subdivisions 
C.  Pre-application meetings and concept review checklist - Minor or major conventional land developments and minor or major subdivisions 
D.  Preliminary plat checklist - Minor land conventional developments and minor conventional subdivisions (no street creation or extension) 
E.  Final plat checklist - Minor land conventional developments and minor conventional subdivisions 
F.  Master plan checklist - Major land developments and major subdivisions 
G.  Preliminary plat checklist - Major land conventional developments and major conventional subdivisions 
H.  Final plat checklist - Major land conventional developments and major conventional subdivisions 
I.  Pre-application meetings and concept review checklist - Minor or major conservation land developments and minor or major conservation development subdivisions 
J.  Preliminary plat checklist - Minor land conservation developments and minor conservation development subdivisions (creation or extension of a public or private street) 
K.  Final plat checklist - Minor land conservation development and minor subdivisions (See checklist E above) 
L.  Master plan checklist - Major land conservation developments and major conservation development subdivisions 
M.  Preliminary plat checklist - Major land conservation developments and major conservation development subdivisions 
N.  Final plat checklist - Major land conservation developments and major subdivisions (see checklist H above) 

A. - Informal concept review checklist for a conventional development. 
The submission materials for an informal concept review shall, at a minimum consist of the following maps and supporting information: The applicant shall submit to the administrative officer at least two black line full-scale copies (24" x 36") and eight reduced copies (11"x 17") as required below, at a scale that is sufficient to clearly show all of the information required. The scale may be modified with the permission of administrative officer. 
Base Map 
The base map shows the principal existing features of the site including parcel boundaries, roads, structures, water bodies and vegetation. It should be drawn at a scale sufficient to clearly show all of the information required - depending on the size and complexity of the property usually 1? = 100' or 1? = 50'. Much of this information could be shown based on the USGS maps and/or orthophotos available from RIGIS. 
1.  ____________ Name of the proposed subdivision. 
2.  ____________ Name and address of property owner and applicant. 
3.  ____________ Name, address and telephone number of the person or firm preparing the pre-application plan(s). 
4.  ____________ Date of plan preparation, with revision date(s) (if any). 
5.  ____________ Graphic scale and true north arrow. 
6.  ____________ Plat and lot numbers(s) of the land being subdivided. 
7.  ____________ Zoning district(s) of the land being subdivided; if more than one district, zoning boundary lines shall be shown. 
8.  ____________ Perimeter boundary lines of the subdivision, drawn so as to distinguish them from other property lines. 
9.  ____________ Location of existing streets, property lines, easements, and rights-of-way within and immediately adjacent to the parcel(s) being developed. 
10  ____________ Area in acres of the parcel. 
11.  ____________ Location and approximate size of existing structures. 
12.  ____________ Known surface waters including rivers, streams, lakes, ponds and wetlands, it is not necessary to field verify wetlands at this stage. 
Sketch Plan Overlay Sheet 
The site features described above have been documented by the applicant and presented to the planning board. At this point, the applicant can present initial proposals for development. To expedite this process, a conceptual sketch plan(s) for development shall be presented as overlay sheets to be superimposed on top of the base map and existing resources and site analysis maps required above (at the same scale). As an alternative, if detailed site information and surveys are not available, a separate diagrammatic sketch plan(s) may be presented. 
13.  ____________ Identification of areas proposed for development. 
14.  ____________ Location of proposed open space areas, if any. 
15.  ____________ Initial layout of streets. 
16.  ____________ Initial number of dwelling units. 
Supporting Materials 
17.  ____________ Administrative fee. See section 3.3.B. 
B. - Administrative subdivision checklist. 
The applicant shall submit to the administrative officer at least five black line copies and one Mylar sheet, no larger than 24? by 36?, of the proposed plat. The scale shall be sufficient to show all of the information required and shall be subject to the approval of the administrative officer. Plans shall also be submitted on CD in AutoCAD, .dwg, GIS shapefile or .dxf file format as a PDF. At a minimum, the following information shall be provided: 
1.  ____________ Name and address of the property owner and applicant. 
2.  ____________ Date of plan preparation, with revision date(s) (if any). 
3.  ____________ Graphic scale and true north arrow. 
4.  ____________ Plat and lot numbers of the parcel being re-subdivided. 
5.  ____________ Zoning district(s) of the parcel being resubdivided -If more than one district, zoning boundary lines must be shown. 
6.  ____________ Existing property lines, easements and rights-of-way. 
7.  ____________ Proposed property lines, drawn so as to distinguish them from existing property lines. 
8.  ____________ Existing and proposed area(s) and dimensions of the parcel(s) being re-subdivided, for the entire extent of all lots included in the administrative subdivision. 
9.  ____________ Approximate location of wooded areas. 
10.  ____________ Approximate location of wetlands or other land unsuitable for development. 
11.  ____________ Location and size of existing buildings, structures, utilities and improvements. 
12.  ____________ Location, width and names of existing public and private streets within or immediately adjacent to the parcel being re-subdivided. 
13.  ____________ Certification (stamp) of a professional land surveyor that the plan is correct, and that it conforms to a minimum of a class I survey. 
14.  Administrative fee. 
15.  ____________ RIDEM or RIDOT approvals, if necessary. 
16.  The signature of the owner(s) of all existing lots involved in the subdivision shall appear on the Mylar plat prior to recording. 
17.  ____________ Certificate of the tax collector showing that all taxes due on the parcel being developed have been paid for a period of five years prior and that there are no outstanding municipal liens on the parcel. 
C. - Pre-application and concept review checklist for a conventional development. 
The applicant shall submit to the administrative officer at least two black line full-scale copies (24" x 36") and eight reduced copies (11"x 17") of conceptual plans. The scale of all plans shall be sufficient to clearly show all of the information required and shall be subject to the approval of the administrative officer. At a minimum, the following information shall be provided: 
Concept plan 
A map or plan of the development parcel showing the following information: 
1.  ____________ Name and address of the proposed development. 
2.  ____________ Name and address of property owner and applicant. 
3.  ____________ Date of plan preparation, with revision date(s) (if any). 
4.  ____________ Graphic scale and true north arrow. 
5.  ____________ Plat and lot number(s) of the land being developed. 
6.  ____________ Zoning district(s) of the land being developed. If more than one district, zoning boundary lines must be shown. 
7.  ____________ Perimeter boundary lines of the development drawn so as to distinguish them from other property lines. 
8.  ____________ Area of the development parcel and proposed number of buildable lots, dwellings or other proposed improvements. 
9.  ____________ Location and dimensions of existing property lines within or adjacent to the development parcel, easements and rights-of-way. 
10.  ____________ Location, width and names of existing streets within and immediately adjacent to the development parcel. 
11.  ____________ Name of abutting property owners and property, and property owners immediately across any adjacent streets. 
12.  ____________ Location of wooded areas and notation of existing ground cover. 
13.  ____________ Location of wetlands, watercourses or coastal features within and immediately adjacent to the development parcel. 
14.  ____________ Areas of agricultural use (if applicable). 
15.  ____________ Approximate topography. 
16.  ____________ Location and approximate size of existing buildings or significant aboveground structures on or immediately adjacent to the development. 
17.  ____________ Proposed locations of wells and ISDS systems. 
18.  ____________ Provisions for collecting and treating storm water. 
19.  ____________ Location of historic cemeteries within or immediately adjacent to the development (if any). 
20.  ____________ Proposed improvements including streets, lots, lot lines, with approximate lot areas and dimensions. Proposed lot lines shall be drawn so as to distinguish them from existing property lines. 
21.  ____________ Notation on plan if the development parcel(s) are located within any of the following areas: 
a.  ____________ Natural heritage areas (RIDEM); 
b.  ____________ Groundwater protection overlay district (town). 
Supporting materials 
The applicant shall submit to the administrative officer ten copies of a narrative report providing a general description of the existing physical environment and existing use(s) of the property along with a general description of the uses and type of development proposed by the applicant. The narrative report shall include copies of all plans required in no. 1 above, plus the following: 
22.  ____________ An aerial photograph or a copy of an existing aerial photograph of the proposed subdivision parcel and surrounding area. 
23.  ____________ A copy of the soils map of the subdivision parcel and surrounding area, and a general analysis of soil types and suitability for the development proposed. 
24.  ____________ An estimate of the approximate population of the proposed subdivision. 
25.  ____________ An estimate of the number of school-aged children to be housed in the proposed subdivision. 
26.  ____________ Application fee. See section 3.3.B. 
D. - Preliminary plat checklist for a minor land development projects and minor subdivisions for a conventional development (no street creation or extension). 
The following information shall be presented in the form of a written narrative report, supplemented as necessary with drawings, sketches or plans to convey intent. 
The applicant shall submit to the administrative officer at least four full-scale black line copies of preliminary plan maps required below. In addition, at least ten copies of the narrative report, including supporting material and eight reduced sets of all drawings and plans required below on 11? by 17? sheets shall be submitted. Unless otherwise indicated, plans shall be drawn to a scale of one inch to 40 feet. The scale may be modified with the permission of the administrative officer. Each sheet shall be no larger than 24 inches by 36 inches, and a sufficient number of sheets shall be included to clearly show all of the information required. Sheets shall be numbered sequentially (e.g., sheet 1 of 3, 2 of 3, etc.). 
Drafting standards 
All sheets must contain the following basic information: 
1.  ____________ Name of the proposed subdivision or development. 
2.  ____________ Name and address of property owner and applicant. 
3.  ____________ Name, address and telephone number of engineer, land surveyor or person preparing the plan. 
4.  ____________ Date of plan preparation, with revision date(s) (if any). 
5.  ____________ Graphic scale and true north arrow. 
6.  ____________ Plat and lot number(s) of the land being subdivided or developed. 
7.  ____________ Zoning district(s) of the land being subdivided or developed - If more than one district, zoning boundary lines must be shown. 
8.  ____________ Perimeter boundary lines of the subdivision or development, drawn so as to distinguish them from other property lines. 
9.  ____________ Area of the parcel(s) being developed, and proposed number of build able lots, dwellings or other proposed improvements. 
10.  ____________ Location and dimensions of existing property lines within or adjacent to the parcel(s) being subdivided or developed. 
11.  ____________ Easements and rights-of-way within or adjacent to the parcel(s) being subdivided or developed. 
12.  ____________ Location, width and names of existing streets within and immediately adjacent to the parcel(s) being developed. 
13.  ____________ Names of abutting property owners and property owners immediately across any adjacent streets. 
14.  ____________ Notation on plan if the parcel(s) being developed are located within any of the following areas: 
____________ Natural heritage areas (RIDEM); 
____________ Zoning overlay districts, if any. 
15.  ____________ Land unsuitable for development as defined in the zoning ordinance. 
16.  ____________ Certification by a professional land surveyor that a perimeter survey of the land being subdivided has been performed and conforms to the survey requirements to a minimum of a class I survey. 
Preliminary plan application checklist 
A proposed conditions map(s) to show the following: 
17.  ____________ Proposed improvements, including lots, lot lines, with approximate lot areas and dimensions shown. Proposed lot lines shall be drawn so as to distinguish them from existing property lines. 
18.  ____________ Proposed building envelopes or build-to lines shall be shown, if applicable. 
19.  ____________ Grading plan showing existing and proposed contours at two-foot intervals for all grading proposed for on and offsite construction, drainage facilities, and grading on individual lots if part of the proposed subdivision improvement. 
20.  ____________ Storm water management plan and drainage calculations prepared by a registered professional engineer. The storm water management plan should emphasize infiltration and the low impact design, and how the selected management techniques will be operated and maintained during and after construction. 
21.  ____________ Utilities plan, including sewer, water, gas, electric, phone, cable TV, fire alarm, hydrants, utility poles, or other proposed above or underground utilities as applicable. 
22.  ____________ Landscaping plan, to show all significant proposed clearing of land, removal of existing vegetation, re-vegetation and/or landscaping along existing street right-of-way, buffers and upon individual lots, if part of proposed subdivision improvements. All proposed plantings should use only non-invasive plants (see URI Cooperative Extension's "Sustainable Plant List". 
23.  ____________ Location, dimension and area of any land proposed to be set aside as open space. 
24.  ____________ Open space use and management plan, if applicable (see section 5.12.G). 
25.  ____________ Limit of disturbance line/ limit of clearing, with method of tree protection if applicable. 
26.  ____________ Location of proposed stump dumps. 
27.  ____________ Soil erosion and sediment control plan, including inspection and maintenance provisions. 
28.  ____________ Construction plans for access road(s) or routes(s), temporary parking and storage areas, location of construction trailers, and stockpiles of soil, stone, or waste materials. 
29.  ____________ Other (specify). 
Supporting materials 
30.  ____________ Administrative fee. See section 3.3.B. 
31.  ____________ Project review fee. See section 3.3.C. 
32.  ____________ Yield plan, modified from pre-application review (if necessary). 
33.  ____________ Written confirmation that the appropriate water company or district has reviewed the plan and is able to provide water service (if proposed). 
a.  ____________ Water company or district _____ 
b.  ____________ Date of letter _____ 
34.  ____________ If individual sewage disposal systems are proposed, confirmation from the state department of environmental management that the soils are adequate for the use of ISDS. Either of the following: 
a.  ____________ Preliminary subdivision suitability report No.; ____________ 
                           (3-5 lots) 
b.  ____________ Water table verification No.; ____________ 
                           (2 lots) 
35.  ____________ Either of the following: 
a.  ____________ A letter to the planning board indicating the subdivider's intent to complete the required improvements prior to endorsement and recording; or 
b.  ____________ A letter to the planning board requesting that the amount of security sufficient to cover the cost of required improvements be established by the Board. 
36.  ____________ Certificate of the tax collector showing that all taxes due on the parcel being developed have been paid for a period of five years prior and that there are no outstanding municipal liens on the parcel. 
E. - Final plat checklist minor land development projects and minor subdivisions for a conventional development. 
This checklist shall be used for conservation developments, rural residential compounds and conventional developments having five or fewer lots or dwelling units and for which the creation or extension of a public or private street may or may not be involved. 
The applicant shall submit to the administrative officer copies of final site plans and supporting materials as indicated below: 
Plat plans to be recorded 
One copy of the final plat plan drawn on Mylar to a scale of one inch to 40 feet. The scale may be modified with the permission of the administrative officer. In addition, at least five black line copies shall also be submitted. Each sheet shall be no larger than 24 inches by 36 inches, and a sufficient number of sheets shall be included to clearly show all of the information required. Sheets shall be numbered sequentially (e.g., sheet 1 of 3, 2 of 3, etc.). Plans shall also be submitted on CD in AutoCAD, .dwg, GIS shapefile or .dxf file format as a PDF. The following information shall be shown on the plans: 
1.  ____________ Name of the proposed subdivision. 
2.  ____________ Notation that the subdivision is located in the Town of Exeter, RI. 
3.  ____________ Name and address of property owner and applicant. 
4.  ____________ Name, address and telephone number of engineer or land surveyor. 
5.  ____________ Date of plan preparation, with revision date(s) (if any). 
6.  ____________ Graphic scale and true north arrow. 
7.  ____________ Plat and lot number(s) of the parcel being subdivided. 
8.  ____________ Zoning district(s) of the parcel being subdivided - If more than one district, zoning boundary lines must be shown. 
9.  ____________ Perimeter boundary lines of the subdivision, drawn so as to distinguish them from other property lines. 
10.  ____________ Location and dimensions of existing property lines, easements and rights-of-way within or immediately adjacent to the parcel being subdivided. 
11.  ____________ Location, width and names of proposed and existing streets within and immediately adjacent to the parcel being subdivided. 
12.  ____________ Names of abutting property owners and property owners immediately across any adjacent streets. 
13.  ____________ Location of proposed permanent bounds. 
14.  ____________ Location of all interior lot lines and street lines with accurate dimensions indicated. 
15.  ____________ Location and number of all proposed lots, with accurate areas indicated. 
16.  ____________ Location and notation of type of proposed easement(s) or existing easement(s) to remain (if any) with accurate dimensions and areas indicated. 
17.  ____________ Notation of special conditions of approval imposed by the planning board (if any). 
18.  ____________ Notation of any permits and agreements with state and federal reviewing agencies (if any). 
19.  ____________ Certification by a professional land surveyor that all interior and perimeter lot lines and street lines of the land being subdivided have been designed to a minimum of a class I survey and to conform to "Procedural and Technical Standards For the Practice of Land Surveying in the State of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations" as Prepared by the Rhode Island Society of Professional Land Surveyors, Inc., May 1992, as amended. 
20.  ____________ Note on Plan: "The town currently has a Growth Management Ordinance in effect which may impact the ability to obtain building permits for lots shown on this plan." 
Construction record drawings 
Seven black line copies of construction plans drawn to a scale of one inch to 40 feet. The scale may be modified with the permission of the administrative officer. Each sheet shall be no larger than 24 inches by 36 inches, and a sufficient number of sheets shall be included to clearly show all of the information required. Sheets shall be numbered sequentially (e.g., sheet 1 of 3, 2 of 3, etc.). 
21.  ____________ Final construction plans as listed in the preliminary plat checklist, including plans of any additional improvements as required by the planning board as a condition of approval. 
22.  ____________ Certification (stamp) of a registered professional engineer that the construction drawings are correct. 
23.  ____________ Proposed street plan and profiles drawn at a scale of 1? = 40' horizontal and 1? = 4' vertical if required by the planning board. 
24.  ____________ Street cross-sections, if required by the planning board. 
25.  ____________ Proposed landscaping plan, if required by the planning board. 
26.  ____________ Soil erosion and sediment control plan (if required). 
27.  ____________ Proposed street trees. 
Supporting materials 
28.  ____________ Two original signed copies of all legal documents describing the property, including proposed homeowners association by-laws, easements and rights-of-way, dedications, restrictions, or other required legal documents. 
Specify: _____
_____
_____
_____ 
29.  ____________ Deed transferring land proposed for dedication to the town or other qualified group or agency for open space purposes (if necessary). 
30.  ____________ Written confirmation from the state department of environmental management pursuant to the RIDEM rules and regulations governing the enforcement of the Freshwater Wetlands Act, and any subsequent amendments thereto, that plans of the proposed development, including any required off-site construction, have been reviewed and indicating that the Wetlands Act either does not apply to the proposed site alteration or that approval has been granted for the proposed site alteration. 
31.  ____________ In lieu of item 4 above, an affidavit signed by a qualified wetlands biologist stating that there are no freshwater wetlands present on or within 200 feet of the property being subdivided. 
32.  ____________ A physical alteration permit (PAP) issued by the state department of transportation for any connection to or construction work within a state highway or other right-of-way (if necessary). 
33.  ____________ Certificate of the tax collector showing that all taxes due on the parcel being developed have been paid for a period of five years prior to filing of the final plat and that there are no outstanding municipal liens on the parcel. 
34.  ____________ 911 emergency numbers. Proof of notification to police, fire, ambulance and the planning board with proposed new road names, if any, and all new house numbers assigned to each building lot or dwelling. 
Payment of Required Fees 
Payment of the following fees or posting of financial guarantees, if required, to be prior to endorsement by the planning board and recording of final plans: 
35.  ____________ Administrative fee. See section 3.3.B. 
36.  ____________ Final plat recording fee. 
Amount _____ 
37.  ____________ Financial guarantees. 
Initial amount _____ 
Date set by planning board _____ 
38.  ____________ Fees in-lieu-of land dedication (if required). 
Amount _____ 
39.  ____________ Project review inspection fee. See section 3.3. 
Amount _____ 
40.  ____________ Maintenance bond for acceptance of public improvements (if applicable). 
Amount _____ 
Date of council acceptance _____ 
Description _____ 
Date of expiration of maintenance bond _____ 
F. - Master plan checklist for major land conventional developments and for major conventional subdivisions 
The applicant shall submit to the administrative officer at least two black line full-scale copies (24" x 36") and eight reduced copies (11"x 17") of master plan maps as required below. The scale of all plans shall be sufficient to clearly show all of the information required and shall be subject to the approval of the administrative officer. Plans shall include a certification that all plans and improvements conform to all existing and amended standards of the State of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations, Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Board of Registration of Land Surveyors. At a minimum, the following information shall be provided: 
Master plan drawing(s) 
A map or plan of the development parcel showing the following information: 
1.  ____________ Name and address of the proposed development. 
2.  ____________ Name and address of property owner and applicant. 
3.  ____________ Name, address and telephone number of person or firm preparing master plan. 
4.  ____________ Date of plan preparation, with revision date(s) (if any). 
5.  ____________ Graphic scale and true north arrow. 
6.  ____________ Plat and lot number(s) of the land being subdivided. 
7.  ____________ Zoning district(s) of the land being subdivided. If more than one district, zoning boundary lines must be shown. 
8.  ____________ Perimeter boundary lines of the development, drawn so as to distinguish them from other property lines. 
9.  ____________ Area of the development parcel and proposed number of buildable lots, dwellings or other proposed improvements. 
10.  ____________ Location and dimensions of existing property lines within or adjacent to the development parcel, easements and rights-of-way. 
11.  ____________ Location, width and names of existing streets within and immediately adjacent to the development parcel. 
12.  ____________ Names of abutting property owners and property owners immediately across any adjacent streets. 
13.  ____________ Location of wooded areas and notation of existing ground cover. 
14.  ____________ Location of wetlands, watercourses or coastal features present on and/or within 200 feet of the property being subdivided. 
15.  ____________ Areas of agricultural use. 
16.  ____________ Existing topography with minimum contour intervals of two feet. 
17.  ____________ Location and approximate size of existing buildings or significant aboveground structures on or immediately adjacent to the development. 
18.  ____________ Proposals [for] locations of wells and ISDS systems. 
19.  ____________ Provisions for collecting and discharging storm water. 
20.  ____________ Location of historic cemeteries on or immediately adjacent to the development (if any). 
21.  ____________ Location of any unique natural and/or historic features, including stonewalls. 
22.  ____________ Notation on plan if the development parcel(s) are located within any of the following areas: 
a.  ____________ Natural heritage areas (RIDEM) 
b.  ____________ Groundwater protection overlay district (town) 
23.  ____________ Proposed improvements including streets, lots, lot lines, with approximate lot areas and dimensions. Proposed lot lines shall be drawn so as to distinguish them from existing property lines. 
24.  ____________ Base flood elevation data. 
25.  ____________ Identified wellhead protection areas within 500 feet of the development site. 
Supporting materials 
The applicant shall submit to the administrative officer 15 copies of a project description and impact statement providing a general description of the existing physical environment and existing use(s) of the property along with a general description of the uses and type of development proposed by the applicant (see section 3.4). 
26.  ____________ Application fee; project review fee where required in accordance with section 3.3.C. 
27.  ____________ An aerial photograph or a copy of an existing aerial photograph of the proposed development parcel and surrounding area. 
28.  ____________ A copy of the soils map of the development parcel and surrounding area, and a general analysis of soil types and suitability for the development proposed. If any prime agricultural soils are within the development parcels, the soils map shall be marked to show the location of said prime agricultural soils. 
29.  ____________ An estimate of the approximate population of the proposed development. 
30.  ____________ An estimate of the number of school-aged children to be housed in the proposed development. 
31.  ____________ Fiscal impact statement. 
33.  ____________ Proposed phasing, if any. 
34.  ____________ Project description and impact statement (see section 3.4). 
35.  ____________ A vicinity (locus) map, drawn to a scale of one inch = 400 feet or as necessary to show the area within one-half mile of the development parcel showing the locations of all streets, existing lot lines, and zoning district boundaries. Significant public facilities shall be identified. 
36.  ____________ An area context map to shown the proposed developed site and the 500 feet immediately surrounding the site. The [sic] map shall contain information on all significant topographic, natural and built features. 
37.  ____________ Certificate of the tax collector showing that all taxes due on the parcel being developed have been paid for a period of five years prior and that there are no outstanding municipal liens on the parcel. 
38.  ____________ Initial written comments on the master plan from the following agencies: 
Local agencies: 
A. ____________ Town engineer (consulting) Date: _____ B. ____________ Public works director Date: _____ C. ____________ Conservation commission Date: _____ D. ____________ Fire districts (2) Date: _____ F. ____________ 911 supervisor Date: _____ G. ____________ Other (specify) _____ Date: _____  
Adjacent communities, if applicable (specify): 
A. ____________ Date: _____ B. ____________ Date: _____ C. ____________ Date: _____ D. ____________ Date: _____ E. ____________ Date: _____  
State agencies: 
A. ____________ Environmental management Date: _____ B. ____________ Transportation Date: _____ C. ____________ Other (specify) _____ Date: _____  
Federal agencies: 
A. ____________ U. S. Army Corps Engineers Date: _____ B. ____________ FEMA Date: _____ C. ____________ Soil Conservation Service Date: _____  
G. - Preliminary plan checklist for major land development projects and major conventional subdivisions. 
Preliminary plat map(s) 
    The applicant shall submit to the administrative officer at least two black line full-scale copies (24" x 36") and eight reduced copies (11"x 17") of the preliminary site plans drawn to a scale of one inch to 40 feet. The scale may be modified with the permission of the administrative officer. Each sheet shall be no larger than 24 inches by 36 inches, and a sufficient number of sheets shall be included to clearly show all of the information required. Sheets shall be numbered sequentially (e.g., sheet 1 of 3, 2 of 3, etc.). Plans shall include a certification that all plans and improvements conform to all existing and amended standards of the State of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations, Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Board of Registration of Land Surveyors, in accordance with a class 1 survey. 
[All maps] 
All maps required by this checklist shall show the following information: 
1.  ____________ Name of the proposed development, including phase number. 
2.  ____________ Name and address of property owner and applicant. 
3.  ____________ Name, address and telephone number of engineer or land surveyor. 
4.  ____________ Date of plan preparation, with revision date(s) (if any). 
5.  ____________ Graphic scale and true north arrow. 
6.  ____________ Plat and lot number(s) of the parcel being developed. 
7.  ____________ Zoning district(s) of the parcel being developed. If more than one, administrative, zoning boundary lines must be shown. 
8.  ____________ Perimeter boundary lines of the development or phase, drawn so as to distinguish them from other property lines. 
9.  ____________ Location and dimensions of existing streets within and immediately adjacent to the parcel being subdivided. 
10.  ____________ Location, width and names of existing streets within and immediately adjacent to the parcel being subdivided. 
11.  ____________ Names of abutting property owners and property owners immediately across any adjacent streets. 
[Existing conditions map] 
An existing conditions map(s) to show the following: 
12.  ____________ Date of the existing conditions shown. 
13.  ____________ Area of the parcel being developed. 
14.  ____________ Name, address and telephone number of engineer or land surveyor. 
15.  ____________ Areas of agricultural use (if any). 
16.  ____________ Location of any unique natural and/or historic features, including stonewalls. 
17.  ____________ Location of wetlands, watercourses or water features present on or within 200 feet of the property being subdivided. 
18.  ____________ Existing topography with minimum contour intervals of two feet. 
19.  ____________ Location and approximate size of existing buildings or significant aboveground structures on or immediately adjacent to the development. 
20.  ____________ Location and dimension of all existing utilities within and immediately adjacent to the development, including electric, phone, cable TV, fire alarm, utility poles, storm water drainage facilities or other existing above [ground] or underground utilities. 
21.  ____________ Location of historic cemeteries on or immediately adjacent to the development (if any). 
22.  ____________ Base flood elevation data. 
23.  ____________ Certification by a registered land surveyor, and/or a professional engineer, that the subdivision plan and a perimeter survey of the land being developed has been performed and conforms to the survey requirements of these regulations, for a class 1 survey. 
[Proposed conditions map] 
A proposed conditions map(s) to show the following: 
24.  ____________ Proposed improvements including streets; lot lines shall be drawn so as to distinguish them from existing lot lines. 
25.  ____________ Location and dimension of all proposed utilities within and immediately adjacent to the development, including electric, phone, cable TV, fire alarm, utility poles, storm water drainage facilities or other proposed above [ground] or underground utilities. 
26.  ____________ Grading plan to show proposed contours at two-foot intervals for all grading proposed for on[site] and off-site street construction, drainage facilities and upon individual lots if part of proposed development improvements. 
27.  ____________ Landscaping plan to show all significant proposed clearing of land, removal of existing vegetation and/or landscaping on street rights-of-way and upon individual lots if part of proposed development improvements. 
28.  ____________ Soil erosion and sediment control plan. 
29.  ____________ Proposed street plan and profiles drawn at a scale of one inch = 40 feet horizontal and one inch = four feet. 
30.  ____________ Proposed street cross sections. 
31.  ____________ Proposed street names. 
32.  ____________ Proposed sidewalks or bike paths. 
33.  ____________ Proposed street trees, if required by the planning board. 
34.  ____________ Proposed drainage plan and drainage calculations prepared by a registered professional engineer. 
35.  ____________ Location, dimension and area of any land proposed to be set aside as open space. 
36.  ____________ Location of proposed stump dumps. 
Supporting materials 
37.  ____________ Application fee. 
38.  ____________ Project review fee where required in accordance with section 3.3.C. 
39.  ____________ Written confirmation from the state department of environmental management pursuant to the state department of environmental management Rules and Regulations Governing the Enforcement of the Freshwater Wetlands Act, and any subsequent amendments thereto, that plans of the proposed development, including any required off-site construction, have been reviewed and indicating that the Wetlands Act either does not apply to the proposed site alteration or that approval has been granted for the proposed site alteration. 
40.  ____________ A physical alteration permit (PAP) issued by the state department of transportation for any connection to or construction work within a state highway or other right-of-way (if necessary). 
41.  ____________ Preliminary development suitability determination by the department of environmental management for the use of individual sewage disposal systems (if proposed). 
42.  ____________ The names and addresses of owners of all properties, agencies or communities requiring notification as required by these regulations. 
43.  ____________ Copies of return receipts for certified mail notices. 
44.  ____________ Draft copies of all legal documents describing the property, proposed easements and rights-of-way, dedications, restrictions, or other required legal documents. 
Specify _____ 
45.  ____________ Either of the following: 
a.  ____________ A letter stating it is the intent of the applicant to complete the required improvements prior to the planning board's endorsement of the final plans; or 
b.  ____________ A letter requesting the security sufficient to cover the cost of required improvements be set by the planning board. 
Initial amount set by the board ____________ ; 
Date ____________ . 
46.  ____________ Certificate of the tax collector showing that all taxes due on the parcel being developed have been paid for a period of five years prior and that there are no outstanding municipal liens on the parcel. 
47.  ____________ Final written comments on the preliminary plan by the following: 
A. ____________ Town engineer (consulting) Date: _____ B. ____________ Public works director Date: _____ C. ____________ Conservation commission Date: _____ D. ____________ Fire districts (2) Date: _____ E. ____________ 911 Supervisor Date: _____ F. ____________ Other (specify) _____ Date: _____  
H. - Final checklist for major land development projects and major subdivisions. 
The applicant shall submit to the administrative officer copies of final site plans and supporting materials as indicated below: 
Plat plans to be recorded 
One copy of the final plat plan drawn on Mylar to a scale of one inch to 40 feet. The scale may be modified with the permission of the administrative officer. In addition, five black line copies shall also be submitted. Each sheet shall be no larger than 24 inches by 36 inches, and a sufficient number of sheets shall be included to clearly show all of the information required. Sheets shall be numbered sequentially (e.g., sheet 1 of 3, 2 of 3, etc.). Plans shall also be submitted on CD in AutoCAD, .dwg, GIS shapefile or .dxf file format as a PDF. The following information shall be shown on the plans: 
1.  ____________ Name and address of the proposed development. 
2.  ____________ Notation that the subdivision is located in the Town of Exeter, RI. 
3.  ____________ Name and address of property owner and applicant. 
4.  ____________ Name, address and telephone number of engineer or land surveyor. 
5.  ____________ Date of plan preparation, with revision date(s) (if any). 
6.  ____________ Graphic scale and true north arrow. 
7.  ____________ Plat and lot number(s) of the parcel(s) being developed. 
8.  ____________ Zoning district(s) of the parcel(s) being developed. If more than one district, zoning boundary lines must be shown. 
9.  ____________ Perimeter boundary lines of the subdivision or land development project, drawn so as to distinguish them from other property lines. 
10.  ____________ Location and dimensions of existing property lines, easements and rights-of-way within or immediately adjacent to the parcel being subdivided. 
11.  ____________ Location, width and names of proposed and existing streets within and immediately adjacent to the parcel being developed. 
12.  ____________ Names of abutting property owners and property owners immediately across any adjacent streets. 
13.  ____________ Location of proposed permanent bounds. 
14.  ____________ Location of all interior lot lines and street lines with accurate dimensions indicated. 
15.  ____________ Location and number of all proposed lots, with accurate areas indicated. 
16.  ____________ Location and notation of type of easement(s) or existing easement(s) to remain (if any) with accurate dimensions and areas indicated. 
17.  ____________ Location and notation of type of proposed open space areas. 
18.  ____________ Notation of special conditions of approval imposed by the planning board (if any). 
19.  ____________ Notation of any permits and agreements with state and federal reviewing agencies (if any). 
20.  ____________ Phasing schedule (if any). 
21.  ____________ Certification by a professional land surveyor that all interior and perimeter lot lines and street lines of the land being subdivided have been designed to conform to a minimum of a class I survey, including the location of all proposed permanent monuments, and are certified as being correct. 
22.  ____________ Note on plan: "The Town of Exeter currently has a Growth Management Ordinance in effect which may impact the ability to obtain building permits for lots shown on this plan." 
Construction record plans 
Two black line copies of construction plans drawn to a scale of one inch to 40 feet. The scale may be modified with the permission of the administrative officer. Each sheet shall be no larger than 24 inches by 36 inches, and a sufficient number of sheets shall be included to clearly show all of the information required. Sheets shall be numbered sequentially (e.g., sheet 1 of 3, 2 of 3, etc.). 
23.  ____________ Final construction plans as listed in the preliminary plat checklist, including plans of any additional improvements as required by the planning board as a condition of approval. 
24.  ____________ Certification by a registered professional engineer that the plans are correct. 
25.  ____________ Proposed street plan and profiles drawn at a scale of 1? = 40' horizontal and 1? = 4' vertical if required by the planning board. 
26.  ____________ Street cross-sections, if required by the planning board. 
27.  ____________ Proposed landscaping plan, if required by the planning board. 
28.  ____________ Soil erosion and sediment control plan (if required). 
29.  ____________ For phased projects, as-built drawings for the previous phase (if applicable). 
30.  ____________ Proposed street trees. 
Supporting materials 
31.  ____________ Certificate of the tax collector showing that all taxes due on the parcel being subdivided have been paid for a period of five years prior to filing of the final plat and that there are no outstanding municipal liens on the parcel. 
32.  ____________ Two original signed copies of all legal documents describing the property, creating a Homeowners' Association, proposed easements and rights-of-way, dedications, restrictions or other required legal documents. 
Specify: _____
_____
_____
_____ 
33.  ____________ Two signed copies of an irrevocable offer to convey to the town all public streets and/or other public improvements, accompanied by a metes and bounds description of said areas 
34  ____________ Deed transferring land proposed for dedication to the town or other qualified group or agency for open space purposes 
35.  ____________ 911 emergency numbers. Proof of notification to police, fire, ambulance and the planning board with proposed new road names, if any, and all new house numbers assigned to each building lot or dwelling. To be shown on plans with a square box. 
Payment of required fees 
Payment of the following fees or posting of financial guarantees, if required, to be prior to endorsement by the planning board and recording of final plans: 
36.  ____________ Administrative fee. See section 3.3.B. 
37.  ____________ Final plat recording fee - Amount _____ 
38.  ____________ Performance bond or other financial guarantees: 
a.  Initial amount _____ ; 
b.  Date set by planning board _____ ; 
c.  Date of expiration of surety _____ . 
39.  ____________ Fees in-lieu-of land dedication (if required): 
a.  Amount _____ . 
40  ____________ Inspection fee - Amount: _____ . 
41  ____________ Maintenance bond for acceptance of public improvements (if applicable): 
a.  Amount ____________ ; 
b.  Date of maintenance bond expiration _____ ; 
c.  Date of planning board approval of public improvements _____ ; 
d.  Description _____ ; 
e.  Date of recommendation of acceptance from planning board to the town council _____ ; 
f.  Date of council acceptance of public improvements _____ . 
I. - Pre-application and concept review checklist conservation development projects. 
The submission materials for the pre-application meeting consist of the following maps, at a minimum, which correspond to steps 1-3 of the conservation development design process: The applicant shall submit to the administrative officer at least two black line full-scale copies (24" x 36") and eight reduced copies (11"x 17") of pre-application maps required below. The scale of all plans shall be as indicated below and shall be sufficient to clearly show all of the information required. The scale may be modified with the permission of administrative officer. 
At a minimum, the following information shall be provided: 
1.  Site base map; 
2.  Existing resources and site analysis map (see section 5.16); 
3.  Site context map (see section 5.6); 
4.  Potential site conservation areas map; 
5.  Sketch plan overlay sheet. 
Base map 
The base map shows the principal existing features of the site, including parcel boundaries, roads, structures, water bodies and vegetation. It should be drawn at a scale sufficient to clearly show all of the information required - depending on the size and complexity of the property usually one inch = 100 feet or 1? = 50'. Much of this information could be shown based on the USGS maps and/or orthophotos available from RIGIS. 
1.  ____________ Name of the proposed subdivision. 
2.  ____________ Name and address of property owner and applicant. 
3.  ____________ Name, address and telephone number of the person or firm preparing the pre-application plan(s). 
4.  ____________ Date of plan preparation, with revision date(s) (if any). 
5.  ____________ Graphic scale and true north arrow. 
6.  ____________ Plat and lot numbers(s) of the land being subdivided. 
7.  ____________ Zoning district(s) of the land being subdivided; if more than one district, zoning boundary lines shall be shown. 
8.  ____________ Perimeter boundary lines of the subdivision, drawn so as to distinguish them from other property lines. 
9.  ____________ Location of existing streets, property lines, easements, and rights-of-way within and immediately adjacent to the parcel(s) being developed. 
10.  ____________ Area in acres of the parcel. 
11.  ____________ Location and approximate size of existing structures. 
12.  ____________ Known surface waters including rivers, streams, lakes, ponds and wetlands; it is not necessary to field verify wetlands at this stage. 
Step 1: Existing resources and site analysis maps. 
During site analysis, information about natural and cultural factors is collected and mapped, creating an objective basis of facts to inform discussions and support fair decisions. In this first step, the focus is on the site itself, its features and capabilities. The site analysis process is described in detail in section 5.4, step 1 of these regulations. The number of site analysis maps required will vary with the complexity of each site. The following maps should be prepared as separate overlays, which can be combined in different ways using geographic information system technology (GIS) to better understand the interaction of the various site features and resource types. GIS maps are recommended. For further information and illustrated examples regarding suggested GIS maps refer to RIDEM Conservation Development Manual 2003. 
Topography and slopes 
The form of the land is fundamental to understanding both natural systems and suitability for construction. USGS topographic maps provide ten-foot contours (elevation lines); these can be traced manually or digitized for use as an overlay. In addition, a slope map provides a general assessment of development suitability, or potential hazards, based on slope. 
13.  ____________ Existing topography with ten-foot contour lines. 
14.  ____________ Slope map, with slopes grouped according to five categories based on development suitability: 0-3 percent, 3-8 percent, 8-15 percent, 15-25 percent, and over 25 percent. Steeper slopes should be shown in progressively darker colors or shades of gray. 
15.  ____________ Existing drainage and drainage structures, such as culverts and pipes, etc. 
Natural resource inventory 
Unique features and local priorities for natural resources can be found in the comprehensive plan. Smaller parcels in particular may contain only a portion of a resource area or buffer zone, which may be shown more clearly on a separate map showing the site within a larger district or watershed. Subsurface groundwater aquifers and surface water supplies should be indicated in a gradation of blue colors, tones or hatching where the surface water supply reservoir or aquifer is darkest and its watershed or recharge areas are progressively lighter. Farmland and forested land should be shown in light and dark green, respectively, with an indication of underlying soil types with hatching and/or labels. Natural heritage areas can be shown with a red outline around the designated area. 
16.  ____________ Name and location of surface watershed, water quality classification and existing condition of nearest surface water(s). See RIDEM water quality regulations. 
17.  ____________ Groundwater aquifers, recharge areas and wellhead protection areas. 
18.  ____________ State-designated Natural Heritage Sites. 
19.  ____________ Un-fragmented forest tracts. 
20.  ____________ Prime farmland soils. 
21.  ____________ Land in active agricultural use. 
22.  ____________ State, regional, or community greenways and greenspace priorities. 
23.  ____________ 100-year floodplains as shown on federal flood protection maps. 
Cultural resource inventory 
State and local records of historic features can be transferred to a base map by hand or as GIS layers. Site-level features, such as stonewalls, agricultural elements, historic houses and outbuildings, and other landscape features can be located on RIGIS orthophotos or transferred to an overlay map based on a site walk. Scenic roads and areas are identified in state and local plans, and specific views on the parcel can be identified with arrows and text description. 
24.  ____________ State or locally designated historic sites, districts, cemeteries or landscapes. 
25.  ____________ Archaeological sites. 
26.  ____________ Scenic road corridors and state-designated scenic areas. 
27.  ____________ Approximate location of stonewalls, structures, outbuildings, roads or trails, and other historic features on the parcel. 
Recreational resource inventory 
Trails and recreational areas can be identified based on site observation, USGS maps, and aerial photography. Regional trails, boat launches and recreational sites may be found on RIGIS, and in the comprehensive plan or other greenspace plans, which indicate existing and potential trails and recreation areas within the town. Trails should be graphically separated into existing (solid line) and potential (dashed line), and colored green for hiking, red for biking, blue for boating, etc. 
28.  ____________ Existing hiking, biking, and bridle trails within and adjacent to site. 
29.  ____________ Boat launches, lake and stream access points, beaches and water trails. 
30.  ____________ Existing play fields and playgrounds adjacent to the site. 
Utilities and infrastructure (if available) 
Utility information available on RIGIS is 14 years old, and therefore lacking more recent extensions. The comprehensive plan contains more recent maps of utilities, and the town department of public works and public utility companies maintain the most up-to-date records. A quick field survey of manholes and utility poles can often provide a good approximation of available utilities. 
31.  ____________ Size and approximate location of public or private water lines. 
32.  ____________ Size and approximate location of public or private sewer lines. 
33.  ____________ Gas service. 
34.  ____________ Electrical service. 
35.  ____________ Telephone, cable, and other communication services. 
36.  ____________ Width and surfacing material of existing road(s) at access points. 
Step 2: Site context map. 
In step 2, attention shifts to what's around the site in the larger context of the neighborhood and town. Objective data is collected for natural, cultural and recreational resource systems that surround the site, as well as the social structure and visual character of the neighborhood. The contextual analysis process is described in detail in section 5.6 and in section 5.4, step 2 of these regulations. It can include many of the same features and resources mapped for the site analysis, but this time with a focus on the area surrounding the site. 
Using 1997 RIGIS orthophotos, or more recent aerial photography if available, show the area within 1 or 2 miles of the site at a scale of one inch equals 400 feet. Outline the parcel boundary. Surrounding parcels, ten-foot contours, surface waters and wetlands from RIGIS may be overlaid with the photograph if available. Resources, which extend over large areas, such as public drinking water supply watersheds, groundwater aquifers, wellhead protection areas, and agricultural districts, may also be shown more effectively at the context scale than on the site analysis maps in step 1. A USGS map should be submitted with the parcel boundary outline. This will show many key features surrounding the 
Step 3: Potential conservation areas. 
Based on the data mapped as part of the analysis of the site and its context in steps 1 and 2, respectively, an assessment map of potential conservation areas shows that part of the site which must be protected by law, that which cannot be built on because of physical constraints, or which represents an important resource or neighborhood feature to be protected. Together, these represent the most logical potential conservation areas. While the first two steps consist of a straightforward inventory of resources, opportunities and constraints, for step 3 planners must reach a consensus about which areas have high value for conservation. Designation of potential conservation areas is described in detail in section 5.4, step 3 of these regulations. 
Graphic and coloring schemes, as suggested below, can help keep this information legible as the information is combined on the maps. Separate overlays may be required to illustrate more complicated situations, but where possible try to keep these coverages on the same map. 
Non-buildable areas 
Land unsuitable for development is defined in section 1.2 of the zoning ordinance. These areas shall be shown as follows: 
37.  ____________ Freshwater wetlands, surface waters and vernal pools, including local and state regulated setbacks. Surface waters can be mapped in blue, with wetlands in blue/green and setback lines in darker blue/green. 
38.  ____________ Land located in any floodway. 
39  ____________ Existing utility easements and power line right-of-ways. 
40.  ____________ Unique sites having historical, archaeological or values protected by local, state or federal regulations. 
Since soil conditions are fundamental both to natural resources and construction suitability, the statewide soil survey available on RIGIS can yield an approximate idea of areas where construction will be difficult or impossible. The soils data also shows where development may be most appropriate, particularly for on-site wastewater treatment systems. The applicant must show soils as a function of the soil properties, not the individual soil type. Several ways of grouping and assessing soils have been prepared by state agencies to aid in this assessment. RIGIS provides a grouping scheme based on water table, slope, bedrock, and miscellaneous severe constraints. The cooperative extension service at the University of Rhode Island has developed a grouping scheme based on hydrological characteristics, from well-drained soils with a deep water table to hydric soils that are essentially wetlands. (A comparison of these methods may be found at the Rhode Island Cooperative Extension's web site www.uri.edu/ce/wq/mtp/rapid/sscomp.html.) The extent of hazard or constraint will depend to some degree on local conditions and availability of public sewer and water, etc. Items to be identified as potential conservation areas will therefore need to be identified in consultation with town staff or the planning board. 
Partially constrained areas 
41  ____________ Slopes in excess of 15 percent - can be mapped in yellow. 
42.  ____________ 100-year flood plains - can be indicated with blue cross-hatching. 
43.  ____________ Hydric soils and soils with seasonal high water table less than 3.5 feet or slowly permeable "hardpan" soils - can be shown with orange cross-hatching (primarily a constraint on the construction of septic systems). 
Important natural, cultural, and recreational resource areas 
Identify the resources in each category, which are the most important to protect, based on an assessment of the natural, cultural and recreational resources mapped for step 1; these can be indicated with transparent tones and/or written annotations on the map. 
44.  ____________ Natural resource areas - can be shown in green transparent tones. 
45.  ____________ Cultural resource areas - can be shown in red transparent tones. 
46.  ____________ Recreational resources - can be shown with solid and dashed lines, hatching for areas, and annotations, as appropriate. 
Sketch plan overlay sheet 
The site features described above have been documented by the applicant and presented to the planning board. At this point, the applicant can present initial proposals for development. To expedite this process, a conceptual sketch plan(s) for development shall be presented as overlay sheets to be superimposed on top of the base map and existing resources and site analysis maps required above (at the same scale). As an alternative, if detailed site information and surveys are not available, a separate diagrammatic sketch plan(s) may be presented. 
47.  ____________ Identification of areas proposed for development. 
48.  ____________ Location of proposed open space areas. 
49.  ____________ Initial layout of streets. 
50.  ____________ Initial number of dwelling units. 
Supplementary information 
51.  ____________ Administrative fee. 
52.  ____________ Certificate of the tax collector showing that all taxes due on the parcel being developed have been paid for a period of five years prior and that there are no outstanding municipal liens on the parcel. 
Conclusions/outcomes from pre-application review 
____________ Agreement on areas for further investigation, necessary detail of field surveys, etc. 
____________ Approximate location of natural, cultural and recreational resources and agreement on the town's priorities for resource protection in the areas of the site. 
____________ Understanding of resource systems within the site's larger context. 
____________ Preliminary location of potential conservation and open space areas. 
____________ Preliminary location potential development areas. 
____________ Agreement on type of development (conservation development, conventional development or rural residential compound). 
____________ Agreement on initial basic maximum number of units: Refer to section 5.8. 
____________ Agreement regarding the consultants, if any, the town will use to assist in the review process. Refer to section 3.3.C, project review, hearing and inspection fees. 
____________ Other 
J. - Preliminary plat checklist for minor land conservation development projects and minor conservation development subdivisions (creation or extension of a public or private street). 
This checklist shall be used for conservation developments, rural residential compounds and conventional developments having five or fewer lots or dwelling units and for which the creation or extension of a public or private street is involved. 
Each of the ten steps in the conservation development process is reflected in preliminary plan review for minor land development projects and minor subdivisions, where the creation or extension of a public or private street is involved. Many of the same maps and overlays submitted for pre-application can be reused as they are, or updated with such additional field surveys and research as may be agreed to by the applicant and the planning board during pre-application review. Looking ahead to the final plan submission the applicant may commission detailed topographic, wetlands, and boundary surveys - especially for areas of the site where development is proposed. 
The following information shall be presented in the form of a written narrative report, supplemented as necessary with drawings, sketches or plans to convey intent. The narrative report shall include reduced sets of all drawings and plans required below on 11? by 17? sheets. The number of reduced copies shall be determined by the administrative officer, based upon the required distribution to the planning board, and other municipal, public or private agencies involved in the development review process. 
Initially, the applicant shall submit to the administrative officer at least four full-scale black line copies of master plan maps required below. In addition, at least eight reduced copies of the narrative report, including reduced maps shall be submitted. 
At a minimum, the following information shall be provided: 
Base map 
Unless otherwise indicated, plans shall be drawn to a scale of either one inch = 100 feet or 1 inch = 200 feet, whichever would best fit on a standard size sheet (24 inches by 36 inches), unless otherwise approved by the administrative officer. Sheets shall be numbered sequentially (e.g., sheet 1 of 3, 2 of 3, etc.). At this stage the basic features such as roads, parcel boundaries, topography, vegetation and water features are best redrawn as a clean base map, or used as overlays to the existing resources and site analysis map. 
All sheets must contain the following basic information: 
1.  ____________ Name of the proposed subdivision or development. 
2.  ____________ Name and address of property owner and applicant. 
3.  ____________ Name, address and telephone number of engineer, land surveyor or person preparing the plan(s). 
4.  ____________ Date of plan preparation, with revision date(s) (if any). 
5.  ____________ Graphic scale and true north arrow. 
6.  ____________ Plat and lot number(s) of the land being subdivided or developed. 
7.  ____________ Zoning district(s) of the land being subdivided or developed. If more than one district, zoning boundary lines must be shown. 
8.  ____________ Perimeter boundary lines of the subdivision or development, drawn so as to distinguish them from other property lines. 
9.  ____________ Area of the parcel(s) being developed, and proposed number of buildable lots, dwellings or other proposed improvements. 
10.  ____________ Location and dimensions of existing property lines within or adjacent to the parcel(s) being subdivided or developed. 
11.  ____________ Easements and rights-of-way within or adjacent to the development parcel(s). 
12.  ____________ Location, width and names of existing streets within and immediately adjacent to the parcel(s) being developed. 
13.  ____________ Names of abutting property owners and property owners immediately across any adjacent streets. 
14.  ____________ Notation on plan if the parcel(s) being developed are located within any of the following areas: 
____________ Natural heritage areas (RIDEM); 
____________ Zoning overlay districts, if any. 
15.  ____________ Location and approximate size of existing structures. 
16.  ____________ Location of land unsuitable for development, including known surface waters including rivers, streams, lakes, ponds, wetlands and vernal pools. It is advisable to have wetland edges field surveyed and verified by the RI Department of Environmental Management at this point, especially within or adjacent to proposed development zones. 
The 10-step design review process (refer to section 5.4) 
Step 1: Existing resources and site analysis map - Refer to section 5.16. 
Topography and slopes 
After the pre-application meeting and concept review, the planning board and the applicant should agree on the necessary accuracy and detail of topographic data for the preliminary plan submission. Ten-foot contours (elevation lines) based on USGS surveys can be traced manually or digitized for use as an overlay, and may be sufficient if proposed development zones fall in areas of moderate slopes. For planning roads and building sites within areas over eight percent grade, or to discern gently-sloping areas near wetlands, vernal pools or intermittent streams, a field survey of topography to map the two-foot or five-foot contour interval may be necessary to ensure a buildable preliminary plan. This can be the basis for a more accurate slope map depicting a general assessment of development suitability, or potential hazards, based on slope or hydrologic conditions. 
17.  ____________ Topography with contour lines at ten-foot interval, or more detailed, if necessary. 
18.  ____________ Slopes grouped according to five categories based on development suitability: 0-3 percent, 3-8 percent, 8-15 percent, 15-25 percent, and over 25 percent. Steeper slopes should be shown in progressively darker colors or shades of gray. 
19.  ____________ Existing drainage and drainage structures. 
Natural resource inventory 
Based on the preliminary designation of development zones, further site investigation and surveys may be necessary to establish the limits of natural resource areas such as wetlands, streams, vernal pools, and vegetation. These overlays can be updated with the more accurate information, using the same graphic schemes as the pre-application submission. Subsurface aquifers and surface water supplies should be indicated in a gradation of colors, tone or hatching where the reservoir or aquifer is darkest and its watershed or recharge areas are progressively lighter. Farmland and forested land should be shown in light and dark green, with an indication of underlying soil types with hatching and/or labels. Natural heritage areas can be shown with a red outline around the designated area. 
20.  ____________ Public drinking supply watershed. Name and location of surface watershed and subwatershed boundaries, water quality classification and existing condition of nearest surface water(s). 
21.  ____________ Groundwater aquifers, including state-designated "groundwater reservoirs," recharge areas, wellhead protection areas and groundwater elevation, or "water table." 
22.  ____________ State-designated Natural Heritage Sites, wildlife habitat and fish presence in streams that could be affected by nearby development. 
23.  ____________ Unfragmented forest tracts. 
24.  ____________ Prime farmland soils. 
25.  ____________ Areas in active farm use, with annotations for cropland, pasturage, orchard, etc. 
26.  ____________ Large or unusual trees, shrubs or other unique vegetation. 
27.  ____________ State, Regional, or community greenways and greenspace priorities. 
28.  ____________ 100-year floodplains and base flood elevation data, as shown on FEMA maps. 
Cultural resource inventory 
Cultural features identified on the site, such as stone walls, agricultural elements, historic houses and outbuildings, and other landscape features may need to be more carefully surveyed in the field, along with other special features, views, etc. identified during the site visit and pre-application review. This is especially important if these features fall within proposed development areas, and could be incorporated into the proposed development. 
29.  ____________ State or locally-designated historic sites, districts, cemeteries, or landscapes. 
30.  ____________ Archaeological sites. 
31.  ____________ Scenic road corridors and state-designated scenic areas. 
32.  ____________ Location of stone walls, structures, outbuildings, roads or trails, and other historic features on the parcel. 
Recreational resource inventory 
Trails identified in pre-application may need to be more carefully surveyed in the field especially where they cross into proposed development areas. Trails should be graphically separated into existing (solid line) and potential (dashed line), and colored green for hiking, red for biking, blue for boating, etc. 
33.  ____________ Existing hiking, biking, and bridle trails within the site, or in the vicinity, where there is an opportunity to link the site with established trails. 
34.  ____________ Boat launches, stream access locations and water trails. 
35.  ____________ Existing play fields and playgrounds adjacent to the site. 
Utilities and Infrastructure (if available) 
Utility should be shown to the level of detail necessary for planning the most efficient connections to the development, but need not be surveyed in the field. Documentation of capacities of various services should be provided, if applicable. 
36.  ____________ Size and location of public or private water lines. 
37.  ____________ Size and location of public or private sewer lines. 
38.  ____________ Gas service. 
39.  ____________ Electrical service. 
40.  ____________ Telephone, cable, and other communication services. 
41.  ____________ Width and surfacing materials of existing road(s) at access points. 
Step 2: Site context map - Refer to section 5.6. 
Using 1997 RIGIS orthophotos, or more recent aerial photography if available, show the area within one-half mile of the development parcel at a scale of 1? = 400' or as necessary. Outline the parcel boundary. Surrounding parcels, ten-foot contours, surface waters and wetlands from RIGIS may be overlaid with the photograph if available. After pre-application review, the planning board may request that other resources be overlaid with the context map in order to better understand how the development will affect its surroundings. This may be particularly important in showing how the site fits into surrounding ecological or cultural systems. These may include regionally important surface or subsurface water supplies, large stream/wetland systems, continuous blocks of forested land, or extended areas in agricultural use. 
Step 3: Potential conservation areas. 
The pre-application review, especially step 3, the designation of potential conservation and development areas, will serve to focus the more detailed mapping of potential conservation areas during preliminary plan. More detailed assessment of soils and slope constraints should be based on the specific character of the site and the type of development proposed. Conclusions about "non-buildable" and "partially-constrained" areas of the site will thus be calibrated to fit the specific situation. At a minimum, the planning board and the applicant should agree as to the method for evaluating soil constraints, using either the RIGIS suitability model or a soil-hydrology scheme, depending on site conditions. At the same time, the planning board can identify locations where field-testing of soils and water table will be necessary and the extent of such investigation required for the preliminary plan submission. 
Non-buildable areas 
42.  ____________ Wetlands and surface waters including local and state regulated setbacks. 
43.  ____________ Surface waters - can be mapped in blue, wetlands in blue/green and setback lines in darker blue/green. 
44.  ____________ Existing land restrictions such as utility easements, power line right-of-ways, etc. 
45.  ____________ Any other land unsuitable for development, as defined in the zoning ordinance. 
Partially constrained areas (physical constraints to development) 
46.  ____________ Slopes in excess of 15 percent - can be mapped in yellow. 
47.  ____________ 100-year flood plains - can be indicated with blue cross-hatching. 
48.  ____________ Hydric soils and soils with seasonal high water table less than 3.5 feet or slowly-permeable "hardpan" soils - can be shown with orange cross-hatching. 
Important natural, cultural and recreational resource areas 
Identify the resources in each category which are the most important to protect; these can be indicated with transparent tones and/or written annotations on the map. 
49.  ____________ Natural resource areas can be shown in green transparent tones. The natural, cultural, and recreational inventories from step 1 should be used here, and supplemented as necessary with field surveys. 
50.  ____________ Cultural resource areas can be shown in red transparent tones. 
51.  ____________ Recreational resources can be shown with solid and dashed lines, hatching for areas, and annotations, as appropriate. 
Summary map 
A summary map should be prepared, combining non-buildable, partially constrained and important resource areas into a single overlay. The summary map represents a synthesis of the principal conclusions drawn from the previous maps. It therefore serves as a record of what the applicant and the planning board agree are the areas, which should be preserved as open space, and likewise clearly identifies the areas most suited for development. It also allows for an agreement on what areas of the site may need to be investigated in further detail, either to better locate the edges of a sensitive resource or to perform a more detailed survey of features, which might be incorporated in the proposed development. 
The summary map simplifies the previous overlays into three colors: 
52.  ____________ Non-buildable areas - shown in red or red hatching. 
53.  ____________ Partially-constrained areas - shown in orange or orange hatching. 
54.  ____________ Important natural, cultural and recreational resource areas - shown in green tone or line work, as appropriate. 
Step 4: Determine maximum number of units. 
The applicant and the planning board shall agree on the basic maximum number of dwelling units, if changed from the pre-application stage of review. Refer to the discussion of step 4 in section 5.4, and to section 5.8, entitled "Basic maximum number of dwelling units." 
55.  ____________ Yield plan drawings, with indication of number of units: ____________ . 
Step 5: Locate development areas and explore conceptual alternatives. 
Development of a conceptual neighborhood layout can provide a framework to tie the proposed community together into a unified whole, and to link it with the larger neighborhood of which it is a part. Based on the results of steps 1-3, the applicant prepares a sketch plan overlay sheet to overlay the existing resources and site analysis maps showing the potential development areas, for the general layout of the proposed development. Refer to section 5.5 entitled sketch plan overlay sheet. The focus of this sketch plan is to demonstrate how the development areas will avoid or minimize impacts to the potential conservation areas as shown on the summary map in step 3. The plan should also demonstrate how the proposals would fit into the context as described in step 2. The sketch plan overlay sheet shall be prepared for review by the planning board during the site visit. 
56.  ____________ Potential development areas - show as a tone or boundary line. 
57.  ____________ Conceptual alternatives - specify number and variables, if possible. 
58.  ____________ Describe overall themes and organizing principles. 
59.  ____________ Describe house types and/or architectural themes. 
Step 6: Locate house sites. 
Once a preferred concept is in place, attention turns to selecting house sites that provide high value to potential buyers, with opportunities for creative design, privacy, attractive views, and yard space. Potential house sites are also evaluated for potential access, drainage, availability of utilities, and suitability for wells and septic systems. The process of locating house sites should be documented by describing the potential of proposed locations to avoid or minimize impacts to the resources identified in steps 2 and 3, as well as the visual effect from within and outside the development, and livability for future residents. 
A site visit is required at this point and prior to establishing final locations to verify that locations avoid or minimize impacts to the conservation areas identified in steps 2 and 3. Refer to section 6.4.D. 
60.  ____________ Development suitability - annotate plans to indicate site scale differences in microclimate (such as north-facing areas sheltered from the summer sun but affected by winter winds, or southern exposures good for solar heating), soils, hydrology, or special features affecting construction, such as unique trees or stone walls to be preserved. 
61.  ____________ Proposals, if any, for connection with existing water supply and sanitary sewer systems. If wells and ISDS are proposed, a general description of their location shall be provided. Location of water table test holes and soil percolation tests, with test hole data, if available. 
62.  ____________ Views and visual character of house sites - describe with arrows and annotation. 
63.  ____________ Yard spaces and activity areas - distinguish public and private areas, annotate potential uses. 
64.  ____________ Indicate site access, service and parking alternatives. 
65.  ____________ Indicate how the house sites will be connected to or benefit from the dedicated open space. 
Step 7: Lay out streets, trails and other infrastructure. 
The layout of streets and trails is based on providing efficient access to the preferred house sites, organized by the overall design concept or theme. Several alternatives may need to be explored to find the best balance of community design with physical goals of minimizing pavement and limiting disturbance of the site. 
66.  ____________ Alternatives for location and alignment of proposed roads and pedestrian system. 
67.  ____________ Cross-section of proposed streetscape, including buildings, street trees, plantings, fences, curbs, sidewalks and trails, etc. on both sides of the street, along with the width of pavement and shoulders, if any. 
68.  ____________ Alternatives for storm water treatment and management with an emphasis on maintaining the natural hydrology, and encouraging the infiltration of precipitation as close to the point of origin as possible. Refer to step 7 in section 5.4, and to section 7.3.C. for further information regarding alternative storm water treatment methods. The most recent edition of the Rhode Island Storm Water Design and Installation Standards Manual should also be consulted. 
69.  ____________ Concept for lighting of streets and homes, placement of utilities including transformer boxes and other access points. 
Step 8: Design open space. 
Proposed uses and design guidelines for open space areas to be preserved by the project should be carefully planned to take advantage of existing natural, cultural and historical features and the potential for active agriculture and forestry, and active or passive recreation. The design of open space should flow directly from its proposed use - farming, storm water management, habitat protection, recreation, etc. - and respond to the needs of the community. 
70.  ____________ Map the proposed open space and indicate the proposed uses and design criteria. 
71.  ____________ Show proposed recreational trails and any potential links to other trails, natural features or amenities on the site or in the context area, and sidewalk connections to other neighborhoods, schools, etc. Recreational trails should be developed at the time the subdivision is built and a bond or other surety can be held, as is done with subdivision roads, to insure the trails are built properly and do not readily erode. 
72.  ____________ Show proposed facilities for active sports, playgrounds, stream fishing access, etc. 
73.  ____________ Plan for active agriculture, or forestry. 
74.  ____________ Conceptual management criteria, including protection of the natural and cultural resources identified in step 3. 
Step 9: Draw in the lot lines. 
As one of the last steps in the design process, the location of lot lines should flow logically from the location of resources, proposed house sites, and existing features of the site. Lot lines should reflect logical boundary locations in the field, such as drainages, stonewalls, and tree lines. Easements for utilities and trails are also set down to preserve access to important corridors. If the best locations for lot lines are still unclear at the preliminary plan stage, criteria or guidelines for their placement should be described. 
Depending on the size of individual lots, building envelopes may be necessary to ensure that houses are built in the desired area of each lot. This can take the form of a "build-to line" showing where the front wall of each house should be placed, a "limit of disturbance line" showing the area that should not be altered, or a building envelope zone, within which the builder can vary the final location and orientation of the house and appurtenances. 
75.  ____________ Alternatives for location of lot lines. 
76.  ____________ Criteria or statement of design intent for locating lot lines. 
77.  ____________ Location of rights-of-way, utility or trail easements. 
78.  ____________ Building envelopes or build-to lines. 
Step 10: Establish ownership and maintenance of open space. 
In the final step of the process, the applicant should suggest the alternatives for ownership and maintenance of designated open space areas. This may only be conceptual during preliminary plan stage, with the goal of revealing opportunities for ownership that may take advantage of unique site features, or which makes a particularly good fit with one of the design alternatives under consideration. 
79.  ____________ Open space use plan. See section 5.12.G. 
80.  ____________ Maintenance alternatives, including potential funding sources. 
81.  ____________ Show potential open space to be preserved, conservation easements or other restrictions. 
Conclusions/outcomes from preliminary plan review 
Following certification of a complete preliminary plan submission, the town has 95 days to approve the preliminary plan as submitted, deny the plan, or approve with conditions. As this formal approval proceeds, it is critical to the ongoing design process that the applicant and the town reach a clear and mutual understanding about the character of the site and the best way to develop it. Whether incorporated into the written approvals or not, these agreements record the conclusions of the preliminary plan review and establish review criteria for the final plan: 
The review and approval of the final plan may be delegated by the planning board to the administrative officer. The board may elect, however, to conduct final plan review itself. Agreement on the basic issues listed below at the time of preliminary review, may result in expedited review of the final plan. With the majority of the planning and design issues resolved at preliminary review, the final plan review may be simply be approval of final engineering and legal details already approved in conceptual form during earlier reviews. 
    ____________ Agreement on basic maximum number of units; 
    ____________ Agreement on location and design of streets, drainage, utilities and other infrastructure elements; 
    ____________ Agreement on location of home sites, lots and lot lines; 
    ____________ Agreement on ownership, maintenance and management responsibility of open space areas; 
    ____________ Agreement on required approvals from state and other reviewing agencies. 
Supplementary information 
82.  ____________ Yield plan, modified from pre-application review (if necessary). 
83.  ____________ Preliminary grading plan in sufficient detail to show proposed contours for all grading proposed for on and off-site street construction, drainage facilities and grading upon individual lots if part of proposed subdivision improvements (if applicable). 
84.  ____________ Preliminary drainage plan and drainage calculations prepared by a registered professional engineer, if required. (three copies) 
85.  ____________ Proposed utilities plan, including sewer, water, gas, electric, phone, cable TV, fire alarm, hydrants, utility poles, or other proposed above or underground utilities, as applicable. 
86.  ____________ Location, dimension and area of any land proposed to be set aside as open space. 
87.  ____________ Base flood elevation data. 
88.  ____________ Certification by a professional land surveyor that a perimeter survey of the land being subdivided has been performed and conforms to the survey requirements to a minimum of a class I survey. 
89.  ____________ Open space use and management plan. See section 5.12.G. 
Supporting materials 
90.  ____________ Administrative fee, plus any required mailing and advertising expenses. See Section 3.3.B. 
91.  ____________ Project review fee. See section 3.3.C. 
92.  ____________ Written confirmation that the appropriate water company or district has reviewed the plan and is able to provide water service (if proposed). 
a.  Water company or district _____ ; 
b.  Date of letter _____ . 
93.  ____________ If individual sewage disposal systems are proposed, confirmation from the state department of environmental management that the soils are adequate for the use of ISDS. Either of the following: 
a.  ____________ Preliminary subdivision suitability report No.; ____________ 
                          (3-5 lots) 
b.  ____________ Water table verification No.; ____________ 
                           (2 lots) 
94.  ____________ The names and addresses of all property owners, agencies or communities requiring notification as required by these regulations. 
95.  ____________ Copies of return receipts for certified mail notices. 
96.  ____________ Certificate of the tax collector showing that all taxes due on the parcel being developed have been paid for a period of five years prior and that there are no outstanding municipal liens on the parcel. 
97.  ____________ Either of the following: 
a.  A letter to the planning board indicating the sub-divider's intent to complete the required improvements prior to endorsement and recording; or 
b.  A letter to the planning board requesting that security sufficient to cover the cost of required improvements be established by the board. 
K. - Final checklist minor land conservation development projects and minor conservation development subdivisions (creation or extension of a public or private street). 
See checklist E above. 
L. - Master plan checklist for major land conservation development projects and major conservation development subdivisions. 
Each of the ten steps in the conservation development process is reflected in master plan review. Many of the same maps and overlays submitted for pre-application can be reused as they are, or updated with such additional field surveys and research as may be agreed to by the applicant and the planning board during pre-application review. Looking ahead to preliminary and final plan submissions, the applicant may commission detailed topographic, wetlands, and boundary surveys, especially for areas of the site where development is proposed. 
The following information shall be presented in the form of a written narrative report, supplemented as necessary with drawings, sketches or plans to convey intent. The narrative report shall include reduced sets of all drawings and plans required below on 11? by 17? sheets. The number of reduced copies shall be determined by the administrative officer, based upon the required distribution to the planning board, and other agencies listed in D. Supporting materials, below. 
Initially, the applicant shall submit to the administrative officer at least four full-scale black line copies of master plan maps required below. In addition, at least eight reduced copies of the narrative report, including reduced maps shall be submitted. 
Base map 
Unless otherwise indicated, plans shall be drawn to a scale of either one inch = 100 feet or one inch = 200 feet, whichever would best fit on a standard size sheet (24 inches by 36 inches), unless otherwise approved by the administrative officer. Sheets shall be numbered sequentially (e.g., sheet 1 of 3, 2 of 3, etc.). At this stage the basic features such as roads, parcel boundaries, topography, vegetation and water features are best redrawn as a clean base map, or used as overlays to the existing resources and site analysis map. 
1.  ____________ Name of the proposed subdivision. 
2.  ____________ Name and address of property owner and applicant. 
3.  ____________ Name, address and telephone number of the person or firm preparing the master plan(s). 
4.  ____________ Date of plan preparation, with revision date(s) (if any). 
5.  ____________ Graphic scale and true north arrow. 
6.  ____________ Plat and lot numbers(s) of the land being subdivided. 
7.  ____________ Zoning district(s) of the land being subdivided. If more than one district, zoning boundary lines shall be shown. 
8.  ____________ Perimeter boundary lines of the subdivision, drawn so as to distinguish them from other property lines. 
9.  ____________ Location of existing streets, property lines, easements, and rights-of-way within and immediately adjacent to the parcel(s) being developed. 
10.  ____________ Area in acres of the parcel. 
11.  ____________ Names of abutting property owners and property owners immediately across any adjacent streets. 
12.  ____________ Location and approximate size of existing structures. 
13.  ____________ Location of land unsuitable for development, including known surface waters including rivers, streams, lakes, ponds, wetlands and vernal pools. It is advisable to have wetland edges field surveyed and verified by the state department of environmental management at this point, especially within or adjacent to proposed development zones. 
The 10-step design review process (refer to section 5.4) 
Step 1: Existing resources and site analysis map - refer to section 5.16. 
Topography and slopes 
After the pre-application meeting and concept review, the planning board and the applicant should agree on the necessary accuracy and detail of topographic data for the master plan submission. Ten-foot contours (elevation lines) based on USGS surveys can be traced manually or digitized for use as an overlay, and may be sufficient if proposed development zones fall in areas of moderate slopes. For planning roads and building sites within areas over eight percent grade, or to discern gently-sloping areas near wetlands, vernal pools or intermittent streams, a field survey of topography to map the two-foot or five-foot contour interval may be necessary to ensure a buildable master plan. This can be the basis for a more accurate slope map depicting a general assessment of development suitability, or potential hazards, based on slope or hydrologic conditions. 
14.  ____________ Topography with contour lines at ten-foot interval, or more detailed, if necessary. 
15.  ____________ Slopes grouped according to five categories based on development suitability: 0-3 percent, 3-8 percent, 8-15 percent, 15-25 percent, and over 25 percent. Steeper slopes should be shown in progressively darker colors or shades of gray. 
16.  ____________ Existing drainage and drainage structures. 
Natural resource inventory 
Based on the preliminary designation of development zones, further site investigation and surveys may be necessary to establish the limits of natural resource areas such as wetlands, streams, vernal pools, and vegetation. These overlays can be updated with the more accurate information, using the same graphic schemes as the pre-application submission. Subsurface aquifers and surface water supplies should be indicated in a gradation of colors, tone or hatching where the reservoir or aquifer is darkest and its watershed or recharge areas are progressively lighter. Farmland and forested land should be shown in light and dark green, with an indication of underlying soil types with hatching and/or labels. Natural heritage areas can be shown with a red outline around the designated area. 
17.  ____________ Public drinking supply watershed. Name and location of surface watershed and subwatershed boundaries, water quality classification and existing condition of nearest surface water(s). 
18.  ____________ Groundwater aquifers, including state-designated "groundwater reservoirs," recharge areas, wellhead protection areas and groundwater elevation, or "water table." 
19.  ____________ State-designated Natural Heritage Sites, wildlife habitat and fish presence in streams that could be affected by nearby development. 
20.  ____________ Unfragmented forest tracts. 
21.  ____________ Prime farmland soils. 
22.  ____________ Areas in active farm use, with annotations for cropland, pasturage, orchard, etc. 
23.  ____________ Large or unusual trees, shrubs or other unique vegetation. 
24.  ____________ State, Regional, or community greenways and greenspace priorities. 
25.  ____________ 100-year floodplains and base flood elevation data, as shown on FEMA maps. 
Cultural resource inventory 
Cultural features identified on the site, such as stone walls, agricultural elements, historic houses and outbuildings, and other landscape features may need to be more carefully surveyed in the field, along with other special features, views, etc. Identified during the site visit and pre-application review. This is especially important if these features fall within proposed development areas, and could be incorporated into the proposed development. 
26.  ____________ State or locally-designated historic sites, districts, cemeteries, or landscapes. 
27.  ____________ Archaeological sites. 
28.  ____________ Scenic road corridors and state-designated scenic areas. 
29.  ____________ Location of stone walls, structures, outbuildings, roads or trails, and other historic features on the parcel. 
Recreational resource inventory 
Trails identified in pre-application may need to be more carefully surveyed in the field especially where they cross into proposed development areas. Trails should be graphically separated into existing (solid line) and potential (dashed line), and colored green for hiking, red for biking, blue for boating, etc. 
30.  ____________ Existing hiking, biking, and bridle trails within the site, or in the vicinity, where there is an opportunity to link the site with established trails. 
31.  ____________ Boat launches, stream access locations and water trails. 
32.  ____________ Existing play fields and playgrounds adjacent to the site. 
Utilities and infrastructure (if available) 
Utility should be shown to the level of detail necessary for planning the most efficient connections to the development, but need not be surveyed in the field. Documentation of capacities of various services should be provided, if applicable. 
33.  ____________ Size and location of public or private water lines. 
34.  ____________ Size and location of public or private sewer lines. 
35.  ____________ Gas service. 
36.  ____________ Electrical service. 
37.  ____________ Telephone, cable, and other communication services. 
38.  ____________ Width and surfacing materials of existing road(s) at access points. 
Step 2: Site context map - refer to section 5.6. 
Using 1997 RIGIS orthophotos, or more recent aerial photography if available, show the area within one-half mile of the development parcel at a scale of 1? = 400' or as necessary. Outline the parcel boundary. Surrounding parcels, ten-foot contours, surface waters and wetlands from RIGIS may be overlaid with the photograph if available. After pre-application review, the planning board may request that other resources be overlaid with the context map in order to better understand how the development will affect its surroundings. This may be particularly important in showing how the site fits into surrounding ecological or cultural systems. These may include regionally important surface or subsurface water supplies, large stream/wetland systems, continuous blocks of forested land, or extended areas in agricultural use. 
Step 3: Potential conservation areas. The pre-application Review, especially step 3, the designation of potential conservation and development areas, will serve to focus the more detailed mapping of potential conservation areas during master plan. More detailed assessment of soils and slope constraints should be based on the specific character of the site and the type of development proposed. Conclusions about "non-buildable" and "partially-constrained" areas of the site will thus be calibrated to fit the specific situation. At a minimum, the planning board and the applicant should agree as to the method for evaluating soil constraints, using either the RIGIS suitability model or a soil-hydrology scheme, depending on site conditions. At the same time, the planning board can identify locations where field-testing of soils and water table will be necessary, and the extent of such investigation required for the master plan submission. 
Non-buildable areas 
39.  ____________ Fresh water wetlands and surface waters including local and state regulated setbacks, verified by the state department of environmental management. 
40.  ____________ Surface waters - can be mapped in blue, wetlands in blue/green and setback lines in darker blue/green. 
41.  ____________ Existing land restrictions such as utility easements, power line right-of-ways, etc. 
42.  ____________ Any other land unsuitable for development, as defined in the zoning ordinance. 
Partially constrained areas (physical constraints to development) 
43.  ____________ Slopes in excess of 15 percent - can be mapped in yellow. 
44.  ____________ 100-year flood plains - can be indicated with blue cross-hatching. 
45.  ____________ Hydric soils and soils with seasonal high water table less than 3.5 feet or slowly-permeable "hardpan" soils - can be shown with orange cross-hatching. 
Important natural, cultural and recreational resource areas 
Identify the resources in each category, which are the most important to protect; these can be indicated with transparent tones and/or written annotations on the map. 
46.  ____________ Natural resource areas can be shown in green transparent tones. The natural, cultural, and recreational inventories from step 1 should be used here, and supplemented as necessary with field surveys. 
47.  ____________ Cultural resource areas can be shown in red transparent tones. 
48.  ____________ Recreational resources can be shown with solid and dashed lines, hatching for areas, and annotations, as appropriate. 
Summary map 
A summary map should be prepared, combining non-buildable, partially constrained and important resource areas into a single overlay. The summary map represents a synthesis of the principal conclusions drawn from the previous maps. It therefore serves as a record of what the applicant and the planning board agree are the areas, which should be preserved as open space, and likewise clearly identifies the areas most suited for development. It also allows for an agreement on what areas of the site may need to be investigated in further detail, either to better locate the edges of a sensitive resource, or to perform a more detailed survey of features which might be incorporated in the proposed development. 
The summary map simplifies the previous overlays into three colors: 
49.  ____________ Non-buildable areas - shown in red or red hatching. 
50.  ____________ Partially-constrained areas - shown in orange or orange hatching. 
51.  ____________ Important natural, cultural and recreational resource areas - shown in green tone or line work, as appropriate. 
Step 4: Determine maximum number of units. 
The applicant and the planning board shall agree on the basic maximum number of dwelling units, if changed from the pre-application stage of review. Refer to the discussion of step 4 in section 5.4, and to section 5.8, entitled "Basic maximum number of dwelling units." 
52.  ____________ Yield plan drawings, with indication of number of units: ____________ . 
Step 5: Locate development areas and explore conceptual alternatives. 
Development of a conceptual neighborhood layout can provide a framework to tie the proposed community together into a unified whole, and to link it with the larger neighborhood of which it is a part. Based on the results of steps 1-3, the applicant prepares a sketch plan overlay sheet to overlay the existing resources and site analysis maps showing the potential development areas, and at least three conceptual alternatives, where applicable, for the general layout of the proposed development. Refer to section 5.5 entitled sketch plan overlay sheet. The focus of this sketch plan is to demonstrate how the development areas will avoid or minimize impacts to the potential conservation areas as shown on the summary map in step 3. The plan should also demonstrate how the proposals would fit into the context as described in step 2. The sketch plan overlay sheet shall be prepared for review by the planning board during the site visit. 
53.  ____________ Potential development areas - show as a tone or boundary line. 
54.  ____________ Conceptual alternatives - specify number and variables, if possible. 
55.  ____________ Describe overall themes and organizing principles. 
56.  ____________ Describe house types and/or architectural themes. 
Step 6: Locate house sites. 
Once a preferred concept is in place, attention turns to selecting house sites that provide high value to potential buyers, with opportunities for creative design, privacy, attractive views and yard space. Potential house sites are also evaluated for potential access, drainage, availability of utilities, and suitability for wells and septic systems. The process of locating house sites should be documented by describing the potential of proposed locations to avoid or minimize impacts to the resources identified in steps 2 and 3, as well as the visual effect from within and outside the development, and livability for future residents. 
A site visit is required at this point and prior to establishing final locations to verify that locations avoid or minimize impacts to the conservation areas identified in steps 2 and 3. Refer to section 6.4.D. 
57.  ____________ Development suitability - annotate plans to indicate site scale differences in microclimate (such as north-facing areas sheltered from the summer sun but affected by winter winds, or southern exposures good for solar heating), soils, hydrology, or special features affecting construction, such as unique trees or stone walls to be preserved. 
58.  ____________ Proposals, if any, for connection with existing water supply and sanitary sewer systems. If wells and ISDS are proposed, a general description of their location shall be provided. Location of water table test holes and soil percolation tests, with test hole data, if available. 
59.  ____________ Views and visual character of house sites - describe with arrows and annotation. 
60.  ____________ Yard spaces and activity areas - distinguish public and private areas, annotate potential uses. 
61.  ____________ Indicate site access, service and parking alternatives. 
62.  ____________ Indicate how the house sites will be connected to or benefit from the dedicated open space. 
Step 7: Lay out streets, trails and other infrastructure. 
The layout of streets and trails is based on providing efficient access to the preferred house sites, organized by the overall design concept or theme. Several alternatives may need to be explored to find the best balance of community design with physical goals of minimizing pavement and limiting disturbance of the site. 
63.  ____________ Alternatives for location and alignment of proposed roads and pedestrian system. 
64.  ____________ Cross-section of proposed streetscape, including buildings, street trees, plantings, fences, curbs, sidewalks and trails, etc. on both sides of the street, along with the width of pavement and shoulders, if any. 
65.  ____________ Alternatives for storm water treatment and management with an emphasis on maintaining the natural hydrology, and encouraging the infiltration of precipitation as close to the point of origin as possible. Refer to step 7 in section 5.4, and to section 7.3.C. for further information regarding alternative storm water treatment methods. The most recent edition of the Rhode Island Storm Water Design and Installation Standards Manual should also be consulted. 
66.  ____________ Concept for lighting of streets and homes, placement of utilities including transformer boxes and other access points. 
Step 8: Design open space. 
Proposed uses and design guidelines for open space areas to be preserved by the project should be carefully planned to take advantage of existing natural, cultural and historical features and the potential for active agriculture and forestry, and active or passive recreation. The design of open space should flow directly from its proposed use - farming, storm water management, habitat protection, recreation, etc. - and respond to the needs of the community. 
67.  ____________ Map the proposed open space and indicate the proposed uses and design criteria. 
68.  ____________ Show proposed recreational trails and any potential links to other trails, natural features or amenities on the site or in the context area, and sidewalk connections to other neighborhoods, schools, etc. Recreational trails should be developed at the time the subdivision is built and a bond or other surety can be held, as is done with subdivision roads, to insure the trails are built properly and do not readily erode. 
69.  ____________ Show proposed facilities for active sports, playgrounds, stream fishing access, etc. 
70.  ____________ Plan for active agriculture, or forestry. 
71.  ____________ Conceptual management criteria, including protection of the natural and cultural resources identified in step 3. 
Step 9: Draw in the lot lines. 
As one of the last steps in the design process, the location of lot lines should flow logically from the location of resources, proposed house sites, and existing features of the site. Lot lines should reflect logical boundary locations in the field, such as drainages, stonewalls, and tree lines. Easements for utilities and trails are also set down to preserve access to important corridors. If the best locations for lot lines are still unclear at the master plan stage, criteria or guidelines for their placement should be described. 
Depending on the size of individual lots, building envelopes may be necessary to ensure that houses are built in the desired area of each lot. This can take the form of a "build-to line" showing where the front wall of each house should be placed, a "limit of disturbance line" showing the area that should not be altered, or a building envelope zone, within which the builder can vary the final location and orientation of the house and appurtenances. 
72.  ____________ Alternatives for location of lot lines. 
73.  ____________ Criteria or statement of design intent for locating lot lines. 
74.  ____________ Location of rights-of-way, utility or trail easements. 
75.  ____________ Building envelopes or build-to lines. 
Step 10: Establish ownership and maintenance of open space. 
In the final step of the process, the applicant should suggest the alternatives for ownership and maintenance of designated open space areas. This may only be conceptual during master plan stage, with the goal of revealing opportunities for ownership that may take advantage of unique site features, or which makes a particularly good fit with one of the design alternatives under consideration. 
76.  ____________ Open space use plan. See section 5.12.G. 
77.  ____________ Maintenance alternatives, including potential funding sources. 
78.  ____________ Show potential open space to be preserved, conservation easements or other restrictions. 
Conclusions/outcomes from master plan review 
Following certification of a complete master plan submission, the town has 120 days to approve the master plan as submitted, deny the plan, or approve with conditions. As this formal approval proceeds, it is critical to the ongoing design process that the applicant and the town reach a clear and mutual understanding about the character of the site and the best way to develop it. Whether incorporated into the written approvals or not, these agreements record the conclusions of the master plan review and establish review criteria for the preliminary plan: 
____________ Agreement on areas for further investigation, soil tests, borings, necessary detail of field surveys, etc. To be done for the preliminary plan submission. 
____________ Agreement on location and function of natural, cultural and recreational resources. 
____________ Agreement on function and value of resource systems within the site's larger context. 
____________ Agreement on location of potential conservation and development areas. 
____________ Agreement on basic maximum number of units 
____________ Agreement on design and uses of open space areas, trail connections, and other shared amenities. 
____________ Agreement on location and design of streets, home sites and other elements. 
____________ Agreement on criteria for establishing lot lines, pending further site surveys and analysis. 
____________ Agreement on ownership, maintenance and management responsibility of open space areas. 
____________ Agreement on relevant town goals for the area. 
Supplementary information 
79.  ____________ An estimate of the approximate population of the proposed subdivision. 
80.  ____________ An estimate of the number of school-aged children to be housed in the proposed subdivision. 
81.  ____________ Fiscal impact statement, if required. 
82.  ____________ Proposed phasing, if any. 
Supporting materials 
83.  ____________ Administrative fee. See section 3.3.B. 
84.  ____________ Project review fee. See section 3.3.C. 
85.  ____________ The names and addresses of owners of all property owners, agencies or communities requiring notification as required by these regulations. 
86.  ____________ Certificate of the tax collector showing that all taxes due on the parcel being developed have been paid for a period of five years prior and that there are no outstanding municipal liens on the parcel. 
87.  ____________ Initial written comments on the master plan from the following agencies: 
(Provided by the administrative officer) 
Local Agencies: 
A. ____________ Town engineer (consulting) Date: _____ B. ____________ Public works director Date: _____ C. ____________ Conservation comm. Date: _____ D. ____________ Fire districts(2) Date: _____ E. ____________ 911 supervisor Date: _____ F. ____________ Other (specify) _____ Date: _____  
Adjacent communities (specify): 
A. _____ Date: _____ B. _____ Date: _____ C. _____ Date: _____ D. _____ Date: _____ E. _____ Date: _____  
State agencies: 
A. ____________ Environmental management Date: _____ B. ____________ Transportation Date: _____ C. ____________ Other (specify) _____ Date: _____  
Federal agencies: 
A. ____________ U.S. Army Corps Engineers Date: _____ B. ____________ FEMA Date: _____ C. ____________ Soil conservation service Date: _____  
M. - Preliminary checklist for major land conservation development projects and major conservation development subdivisions. 
Under state law, submission requirements for preliminary plan are determined by each town, but should include the following, as listed under section 45-23-41: 
"...engineering plans depicting the existing site conditions, engineering plans depicting the proposed development project, a perimeter survey, all permits required by state or federal agencies prior to commencement of construction, including permits related to freshwater wetlands, the coastal zone, floodplains, preliminary suitability for individual septic systems, public water systems, and connections to state roads." 
Preliminary plan review is thus concerned with the details of engineering and permitting necessary to ensure construction of the plans set down by the master plan. Barring surprises that turn up in more detailed surveys of the site, the conclusions reached in master plan will not change much, but they will need to be developed in more detail to explain exactly how each feature of the proposed development will be constructed. Under section 45-23-44, state law lists requirements towns may adopt for physical design: 
"Such requirements may include, but shall not be limited to, requirements and policies for rights-of-way, open space, landscaping, connections of proposed streets and drainage systems with those of the surrounding neighborhood, public access through property to adjacent public property, and the relationship of proposed developments to natural and man-made features of the surrounding neighborhood." 
Section 45-23-45 expands this list to include standards for public design and improvements, including "...specifications for rights-of-way, streets, sidewalks, lighting, landscaping, public access, utilities, drainage systems, fire protection, and soil erosion control." What these requirements and standards imply is that the focus on community context and the environment that was so important to the development of the design during pre-application and master plan should not be lost as the project proceeds into preliminary and final plan. Rather, as each aspect of engineering and construction is worked out, the master plan can and should continually be the basis of decision making, and the means by which each of the various aspects of construction, drainage, and environmental protection are coordinated into a unified whole. 
At the conclusion of master plan all ten steps of the conservation development design process have been completed. The purpose of the preliminary plan stage is to do the detailed engineering and any remaining site analysis to determine that the master plan works. If not done previously, further site surveys may be required for a thorough assessment of whether there are additional natural or physical constraints, such as vernal pools or presence of ledge, that will require the master plan to be revised. 
The following checklist repeats those elements of the master plan submission that are necessary to describe the basic information about the project and summarize existing conditions on the site. The preliminary plan submission will include these maps, and additional plans describing proposed conditions, as well as supporting materials necessary to record review and approvals by various state and local boards and officials. 
Preliminary plat application submission requirements 
Initially, the applicant shall submit to the administrative officer at least four full-scale black line copies of all information required below. In addition, at least eight reduced copies of the narrative report, including reduced maps shall be submitted. 
Base information 
Unless otherwise indicated, plans shall be drawn to a scale of one inch to 40 feet. Each sheet shall be no larger than 24 inches by 36 inches, and a sufficient number of sheets shall be included to clearly show all of the information required. Scale and sheet size may be modified with permission of the administrative officer. Sheets shall be numbered sequentially (e.g., sheet 1 of 3, 2 of 3, etc.). The information below should appear on all sheets. 
1.  ____________ Name of the proposed subdivision, including phase number. 
2.  ____________ Name and address of property owner and applicant. 
3.  ____________ Name, address, and telephone number of engineer, land surveyor, and landscape architect. 
4.  ____________ Date of plan preparation, with revision dates. 
5.  ____________ Graphic scale and true north arrow. 
6.  ____________ Plat and lot numbers(s) of the land being subdivided or developed. 
7.  ____________ Names of abutting property owners and property owners immediately across any adjacent streets, with plat/lot numbers. 
8.  ____________ Boundary lines of the parcel, with dimensions and bearings, drawn so as to distinguish them from other property lines. 
9.  ____________ Zoning district(s) of the land being subdivided or developed. If more than one district, zoning boundary lines must be shown 
10.  ____________ Certification by a registered land surveyor that a perimeter survey of the land being subdivided has been performed and conforms to the survey requirements to a minimum of a class I survey. 
11.  ____________ Location of public rights-of-way and/or easements. 
12.  ____________ Area of the parcel(s) being developed and proposed number of buildable lots, dwellings or other proposed improvements. 
13.  ____________ Location, width and names of existing streets within and immediately adjacent to the parcel being subdivided. 
Existing conditions plan(s) 
14.  ____________ Streams and water bodies. 
15.  ____________ Wetland lines with regulated setbacks, including areas within 200 feet of the perimeter of the project site. 
16.  ____________ Existing topographic contours for all areas proposed for development or site alteration, at intervals of two feet in elevation. 
17.  ____________ Boundaries of wooded areas with notation of species of existing vegetation. 
18.  ____________ Large or unusual trees, shrubs or other unique vegetation. 
19.  ____________ Prime farmland soils and areas in active or recent agricultural use, with notation of use and condition. 
20.  ____________ Location and approximate dimensions of existing buildings or significant above ground structures on or immediately adjacent to the subdivision. 
21.  ____________ Location and dimension of all existing utilities within and adjacent to the subdivision, including sewer, water, gas, electric, phone, cable TV, fire alarm, hydrants, utility poles, storm water drainage facilities or other above or underground utilities. 
22.  ____________ Location of any unique natural and/or historic features, including stone walls, cemeteries, and archaeological sites. 
23.  ____________ Base flood elevation data and floodplain lines. 
24.  ____________ Notation on plan if the subdivision is located within or contains any of the following areas: 
a.  ____________ Natural heritage areas (RIDEM); 
b.  ____________ Area of planning concern (town); 
c.  ____________ Groundwater protection overlay district; 
d.  ____________ Public drinking supply watershed; 
e.  ____________ Groundwater aquifers, state-designated "groundwater reservoirs," recharge areas and wellhead protection areas; 
f.  ____________ State, regional, or local greenways and greenspace priorities. 
Proposed design conditions plan(s) 
25.  ____________ Proposed improvements, including streets, sidewalks, trails, or bike paths, lots, lot lines, with approximate lot areas and dimensions shown. Proposed lot lines shall be drawn so as to distinguish them from existing property lines. 
26.  ____________ Proposed building envelopes or build-to lines shall be shown, if applicable. 
27.  ____________ Grading plan showing existing and proposed contours at two-foot intervals for all grading proposed for on and offsite construction, streets, drainage facilities, and grading on individual lots if part of the proposed subdivision improvement. 
28.  ____________ Storm water management plan and drainage calculations prepared by a registered professional engineer. The storm water management plan should emphasize infiltration and the low impact design, and how the selected management techniques will be operated and maintained during and after construction. 
29.  ____________ Utilities plan, including sewer, water, gas, electric, phone, cable TV, fire alarm, hydrants, utility poles, or other proposed above or underground utilities as applicable. (three copies) 
30.  ____________ Landscaping plan, to show all significant proposed clearing of land, removal of existing vegetation, re-vegetation and/or landscaping on street right-of-way and upon individual lots, if part of proposed subdivision improvements. Include proposed street tree plantings, with species and size indicated. All proposed plantings should use only non-invasive plants (see URI Cooperative Extension's "Sustainable Plant List". 
31.  ____________ Location, dimension and area of any land proposed to be set aside as open space 
32.  ____________ Open space use and management plan. See section 5.12.G. 
33.  ____________ Limit of disturbance line/ limit of clearing, with method of tree protection if applicable. 
34.  ____________ Location of proposed stump dumps. 
35.  ____________ Soil erosion and sediment control plan, including inspection and maintenance provisions. 
36.  ____________ Construction plans for access road(s) or routes(s), temporary parking and storage areas, location of construction trailers, and stockpiles of soil, stone, or waste materials. 
37.  ____________ Proposed street plans and profiles drawn at a scale of 1? = 40' horizontal and 1? = 4' vertical. 
38.  ____________ Proposed street cross section(s) with location of utilities indicated. 
39.  ____________ Proposed street names. 
40.  ____________ Yield plan, if modified from the master plan stage of review. 
41.  ____________ Other(s). 
Supporting materials 
42.  ____________ Administrative fee. See section 3.3.B. 
43.  ____________ Project review fee. See section 3.3.C 
44.  ____________ Written confirmation from the state department of environmental management pursuant to the RIDEM Rules and Regulations Governing the Enforcement of the Freshwater Wetlands Act, and any subsequent amendments thereto, that plans of the proposed subdivision, including any required offsite construction, have been reviewed and indicating that the Wetlands Act either does not apply to the proposed site alteration or that the approval has been granted for the proposed site alteration. 
45.  ____________ In lieu of item 2 above, an affidavit signed by a qualified professional (a wetlands biologist, registered professional engineer or registered landscape architect) stating that there are no freshwater wetlands present or within 200 feet of the property being subdivided. 
46.  ____________ Written confirmation that the appropriate water company or district has reviewed the plan and is able to provide water service (if proposed). 
a.  Water company or district: _____ ; 
b.  Date of letter: _____ . 
47.  ____________ Written confirmation that the department of public works has reviewed and approved the plans for proposed sewer service, storm water management, erosion and sediment control, road construction and indicating any bond or surety amounts to be posted by the applicant. 
48.  ____________ Written confirmation that the fire chief has reviewed and approved all plans and proposed improvements (dry hydrants etc.) for fire protection. 
49.  ____________ If individual sewage disposal systems are proposed, confirmation from the state department of environmental management that each proposed lot is suitable to support an on-site wastewater treatment system. For subdivisions of three lots or more, provide a preliminary subdivision suitability determination 
50.  ____________ A physical alteration permit (PAP) issued by the state department of transportation for any connection to or construction work within a state highway or other right-of-way, if applicable. 
51.  ____________ Certificate of the tax collector showing that all taxes due on the parcel being subdivided have been paid and that there are no outstanding municipal liens on the parcel. 
52.  ____________ The names and addresses of all property owners, agencies or communities requiring notification as required by these regulations. 
53.  ____________ Copies of return receipts for certified mail notices. 
54.  ____________ Either of the following: 
a.  ____________ A letter to the planning board stating it is the intent of the applicant to complete the required improvements prior to endorsement of the final plat; or, 
b.  ____________ A letter to the planning board requesting that security sufficient to cover the cost of required improvements be established by the board according to the regulations. 
55.  ____________ Owner authorization form. 
56.  ____________ Subdivision notification form. 
57.  ____________ Water quality certification for construction activities that may temporarily affect surface waters in the vicinity of the site work to be performed (if applicable). 
58.  ____________ Certificate of the tax collector showing that all taxes due on the parcel being developed have been paid for a period of five years prior and that there are no outstanding municipal liens on the parcel. 
59.  ____________ Any permits required under federal statute, including Section 404 Clean Water Act for Fill of Wetlands and Waters of the U.S. issued by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
60.  ____________ Final written comments on the preliminary plan by the following: 
            (Provided by the administrative officer) 
A. ____________ Town engineer (consulting) Date: _____ B. ____________ Public works director Date: _____ C. ____________ Conservation comm. Date: _____ D. ____________ Fire districts(2) Date: _____ E. ____________ 911 supervisor Date: _____ F. ____________ Other (specify) _____ Date: _____  
61.  ____________ Draft copies of all legal documents describing the property, proposed easements and rights-of-way, dedications, restrictions, or other required legal documents. 
62.  ____________ Proposed ownership scheme for open space areas, with draft legal documentation, such as homeowner's association bylaws. 
63.  ____________ Plan location and draft legal language of proposed conservation easements or restrictions to be applied to open space areas. 
64.  ____________ Open space use and management plan, including standards and methods, specific responsibilities, and funding sources. 
N. - Final major land conservation development projects and major conservation development subdivisions. 
See checklist H above. 
(Ord. of 8-19-08) 
O. - Pre-Application and concept review checklist Planned Village Development (PVD). 
    The submission materials for the pre-application meeting consist of the following maps. The applicant shall submit to the administrative officer 12 black line copies and one electronic copy of pre-application maps required below. The scale of all plans shall be as indicated below and shall be sufficient to clearly show all of the information required. 
    At a minimum, the following information shall be provided: 
1.  Site context map. 
2.  Existing conditions map. 
3.  Sketch plan overlay sheet. 
Site context map 
1.  ____________ USGS quadrangle map showing the site boundary and the area within one mile of the site at a scale of 1 inch = 400 feet. 
2.  ____________ Most recent aerial photograph showing the site boundary and the area within one mile of the site at a scale of 1 inch = 400 feet. Surrounding parcels, 10' contours, surface waters and wetlands from RIGIS may be overlaid with the photograph if available. 
3.  ____________ Resources, which extend over large areas, such as public drinking water supply watersheds, groundwater aquifers, wellhead protection areas, and agricultural districts, shall also be shown. 
Existing conditions map 
    The base map shows the principal existing features of the site, including parcel boundaries, roads, structures, water bodies and vegetation. It should be drawn at a scale sufficient to clearly show all of the information required - depending on the size and complexity of the property usually 1 inch = 100 feet or 1 inch = 50 feet. The purpose of the pre-application review is to facilitate an informed discussion of the site and development concept prior to the development of engineering or scientific analyses. Therefore, applicants are encouraged to review existing sources of information including, but not limited to available RIGIS data, aerial photography, USGS mapping, existing plans for establishing or maintaining green space, and the local Comprehensive Plan. Approximate locations of important site features may be transferred by a hand drawn approach to the required plans below (not field surveyed). 
1.  ____________ Name of the proposed subdivision. 
2.  ____________ Name and address of property owner and applicant. 
3.  ____________ Name, address and telephone number of the person or firm preparing the pre-application plan(s). 
4.  ____________ Date of plan preparation, with revision date(s) (if any). 
5.  ____________ Graphic scale and true north arrow. 
6.  ____________ Plat and lot numbers(s) of the land being subdivided. 
7.  ____________ Zoning district(s) of the land being subdivided; if more than one district, zoning boundary lines shall be shown. 
8.  ____________ Perimeter boundary lines of the subdivision or land development project, drawn so as to distinguish them from other property lines. 
9.  ____________ Location of existing streets, property lines, easements, and rights-of-way within and immediately adjacent to the parcel(s) being developed. 
10.  ____________ Area in acres of the parcel(s). 
11.  ____________ Location and approximate size of existing structures. 
12.  ____________ Known surface waters including rivers, streams, lakes, ponds and wetlands; it is not necessary to field verify wetlands at this stage. 
13.  ____________ Slopes that meet or exceed 25 percent. 
14.  ____________ Existing drainage and drainage structures, such as culverts and pipes, etc. 
15.  ____________ Name and location of surface watershed, water quality classification and existing condition of nearest surface water(s). See RI DEM Water Quality Regulations. 
16.  ____________ Groundwater aquifers, recharge areas and wellhead protection areas. 
17.  ____________ State-designated Natural Heritage Sites. 
18.  ____________ Approximate boundaries of existing forested areas. 
19.  ____________ Soils map (separate sheet) showing any prime farmland soils and all soils grouped by depth to groundwater. 
20.  ____________ Land in active agricultural use. 
21.  ____________ State, regional, or community greenways and green space priorities. 
22.  ____________ 100-year floodplains as shown on federal flood protection maps. 
23.  ____________ State or locally designated historic sites, districts, cemeteries or landscapes. 
24.  ____________ Archaeological sites. 
25.  ____________ Scenic road corridors and state-designated scenic areas. 
26.  ____________ Approximate location of stonewalls, structures, outbuildings, roads or trails, and other historic features on the parcel. 
27.  ____________ Existing hiking, biking, and bridle trails within and adjacent to site. 
28.  ____________ Pond, lake and stream access points, beaches and water trails-as applicable. 
29.  ____________ Existing recreational fields and playgrounds adjacent to the site. 
Sketch plan overlay 
    A conceptual sketch plan(s) for development shall be presented as an overlay to be superimposed on top of the base map and existing resources and site analysis maps required above (at the same scale). As an alternative, if detailed site information and surveys are not available, a separate diagrammatic sketch plan(s) may be presented. 
30.  ____________ Identification of areas proposed for development 
31.  ____________ Location of any proposed open space or recreation areas 
32.  ____________ Two or more conceptual layouts of streets 
33.  ____________ Estimated number of dwelling units 
34.  ____________ Estimated square footage of non-residential development 
Supplementary information 
35.  ____________ Administrative fee 
Conclusions/outcomes from pre-application review 
____________ Agreement on areas for further investigation, necessary detail of field surveys, etc. 
____________ Approximate location of natural, cultural and recreational resources and agreement on the town's priorities for resource protection in the areas of the site. 
____________ Understanding of resource systems within the site's larger context. 
____________ Preliminary location of potential conservation and open space areas. 
____________ Preliminary location potential development areas. 
____________ Agreement on general use profile (commercial, residential, institutional, etc.). 
____________ Agreement on initial basic maximum number of units: Refer to section 5.8. 
____________ Agreement regarding the consultants, if any, the town will use to assist in the review process. Refer to section 3.3.C - Project review, hearing and inspection fees. 
____________ Other. 
(Amend. of 6-25-13) 
P. - Master plan submittal checklist for Planned Village Development (PVD). 
    The applicant shall submit to the administrative officer 12 copies plus one electronic copy of master plan maps required below. The scale of all plans shall be sufficient to clearly show all of the information required and shall be subject to the approval of the administrative officer. Plans shall include a certification that all plans and improvements conform to all existing and amended standards of the State of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations, Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Board of Registration of Land Surveyors and the Exeter Village Design Manual. At a minimum, the following information shall be provided: 
All maps and plans. All maps and plans required by this checklist shall show the following information: 
1.  ____________ Name of the proposed subdivision. 
2.  ____________ Name and address of property owner and applicant. 
3.  ____________ Name, address and telephone number of the person or firm preparing the pre-application plan(s). 
4.  ____________ Date of plan preparation, with revision date(s) (if any). 
5.  ____________ Graphic scale and true north arrow. 
6.  ____________ Plat and lot numbers(s) of the land being subdivided. 
7.  ____________ Zoning district(s) of the land being subdivided; if more than one district, zoning boundary lines shall be shown. 
8.  ____________ Perimeter boundary lines of the subdivision or land development project, drawn so as to distinguish them from other property lines. 
9.  ____________ Location of existing streets, property lines, easements, and rights-of-way within and immediately adjacent to the parcel(s) being developed. 
10.  ____________ Area in acres of the parcel(s). 
Existing conditions map. A map or plan of the development parcel showing the following information: 
11.  ____________ Location and approximate size of existing structures. 
12.  ____________ Known surface waters including rivers, streams, lakes, ponds and wetlands; it is not necessary to field verify wetlands at this stage. 
13.  ____________ 100-year floodplains as shown on federal flood protection maps. 
14.  ____________ Existing topography at two-foot contour intervals. 
15.  ____________ Slopes that meet or exceed 15 percent, but are less than 25 percent, represented with light gray shading and labels. 
16.  ____________ Slopes that meet or exceed 25 percent represented with darker gray shading and labels. 
17.  ____________ Existing drainage and drainage structures, such as culverts and pipes, etc. 
18.  ____________ Name and location of surface watershed, water quality classification and existing condition of nearest surface water(s). See RI DEM Water Quality Regulations. 
19.  ____________ Groundwater aquifers, recharge areas and wellhead protection areas. 
20.  ____________ State-designated Natural Heritage Sites. 
21.  ____________ Approximate boundaries of existing forested areas. 
22.  ____________ Land in active agricultural use. 
23.  ____________ State, regional, or community greenways and green space priorities. 
24.  ____________ State or locally designated historic sites, districts, cemeteries or landscapes. 
25.  ____________ Archaeological sites. 
26.  ____________ Scenic road corridors and state-designated scenic areas. 
27.  ____________ Approximate location of stonewalls, structures, outbuildings, roads or trails, and other historic features on the parcel. 
28.  ____________ Existing hiking, biking, and bridle trails within and adjacent to site. 
29.  ____________ Boat launches, lake and stream access points, beaches and water trails. 
30.  ____________ Existing recreational fields and playgrounds adjacent to the site. 
Conceptual development plan 
31.  ____________ Illustrations of street cross-section types that are proposed for the different areas of the development. Examples of different street cross-section types are provided in Appendix A of these regulations. 
32.  ____________ Illustrations of intersection configurations that are proposed for the development. Examples of different intersection configurations are provided in Appendix A of these regulations. 
33.  ____________ Illustrations of lot types that are proposed for different areas within the development. Examples of different lot types that may be proposed are provided in Appendix A of these regulations. 
34.  ____________ Site plan depicting required improvements including streets, lots, lot lines, with approximate lot areas and dimensions. Proposed lot lines shall be drawn so as to distinguish them from existing property lines. The location of different street, lot, and intersection types as identified in requirements 31 through 33 above shall be called out in the site plan. A sample site plan is provided in Appendix A of these regulations. 
35.  ____________ Conceptual location of any trails, greenways, recreational areas, or other public space. 
36.  ____________ Proposals [for] locations of wells and OWTS systems. 
37.  ____________ Conceptual grading plan with provisions for collecting, treating, conveying, and discharging stormwater. 
Supporting materials 
    The applicant shall submit to the administrative officer 12 copies plus one electronic copy of a project description and impact statement providing a general description of the existing physical environment and existing use(s) of the property along with a general description of the uses and type of development proposed by the applicant (see section 3.4). 
38.  ____________ Application fee; project review fee where required in accordance with section 3.3.C. 
39.  ____________ An aerial photograph or a copy of an existing aerial photograph of the proposed development parcel and surrounding area. 
40.  ____________ A copy of the soils map of the development parcel and surrounding area, and a general analysis of soil types and suitability for the development proposed. If any prime agricultural soils are within the development parcels, the soils map shall be marked to show the location of said prime agricultural soils. 
41.  ____________ A PVD Yield Plan estimate as described in the Zoning Ordinance and the number of housing units proposed beyond the PVD Site Yield. Global for Site Plan 
42.  ____________ Where applicable, identification of the development rights that will be purchased and calculations demonstrating that the proposed number rights to be purchased is adequate. 
43.  ____________ Where applicable, calculations for fee-in-lieu of the required purchase of development rights. 
44.  ____________ An estimate of the approximate population of the proposed development. 
45.  ____________ An estimate of the number of school-aged children to be housed in the proposed development. 
46.  ____________ Fiscal impact statement. 
47.  ____________ Proposed phasing, if any. 
48.  ____________ Project description and impact statement (see section 3.4). 
49.  ____________ A vicinity (locus) map, drawn to a scale of 1 inch = 400 feet or as necessary to show the area within one-half mile of the development parcel showing the locations of all streets, existing lot lines, and zoning district boundaries. Significant public facilities shall be identified. 
50.  ____________ Certificate of the tax collector showing that all taxes due on the parcel(s) have been paid and that there are no municipal liens on the parcel(s). 
51.  ____________ An area context map to shown the proposed developed site and the 500 feet immediately surrounding the site. The map shall contain information on all significant topographic, natural and built features. 
52.  ____________ Initial written comments on the master plan from the following agencies if applicable: 
Local agencies: 
A. ____________ Town engineer (consulting) Date: ____________ B. ____________ Public works director Date: ____________ C. ____________ Conservation commission Date: ____________ D. ____________ Fire districts (2) Date: ____________ F. ____________ 911 Supervisor Date: ____________ G. ____________ Other (specify) ____________ Date: ____________  
Adjacent communities (specify): 
A. ____________ Date: ____________ B. ____________ Date: ____________ C. ____________ Date: ____________ D. ____________ Date: ____________ E. ____________ Date: ____________  
State agencies: if applicable 
A. ____________ Environmental management Date: ____________ B. ____________ Transportation Date: ____________ C. ____________ Other (specify) ____________ Date: ____________  
Federal agencies: if applicable 
A. ____________ U. S. Army Corps Engineers Date: ____________ B. ____________ FEMA Date: ____________ C. ____________ Soil Conservation Service Date: ____________  
(Amend. of 6-25-13) 
Q. - Preliminary plan submittal checklist for Planned Village Development (PVD). 
    The applicant shall submit to the administrative office[r] 12 copies plus one electronic copy of the preliminary site plans drawn to a scale of 1 inch = 40 feet. The scale may be modified with the permission of the administrative officer. Each sheet shall be no larger than 24 inches by 36 inches, and a sufficient number of sheets shall be included to clearly show all of the information required. Sheets shall be numbered sequentially (e.g., sheet 1 of 3, 2 of 3, etc.). Plans shall include a certification that all plans and improvements conform to all existing and amended standards of the State of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations, Board of Registration for Professional Engineers, Landscape Architects, and Board of Registration of Land Surveyors, in accordance with a Class 1 survey. 
    All plans and maps. All plans and maps required by this checklist shall show the following information: 
1.  ____________ Name of the proposed development, including phase number. 
2.  ____________ Name and address of property owner and applicant. 
3.  ____________ Name, address and telephone number of engineer or land surveyor. 
4.  ____________ Date of plan preparation, with revision date(s) (if any). 
5.  ____________ Graphic scale and true north arrow. 
6.  ____________ Plat and lot number(s) of the parcel being developed. 
7.  ____________ Zoning district(s) of the parcel being developed. If more than one, administrative, zoning boundary lines must be shown. 
8.  ____________ Perimeter boundary lines of the development or phase, drawn so as to distinguish them from other property lines. 
9.  ____________ Location and dimensions of existing streets within and immediately adjacent to the parcel being subdivided. 
10.  ____________ Location, width and names of existing streets within and immediately adjacent to the parcel being subdivided. 
11.  ____________ Names of abutting property owners and property owners immediately across any adjacent streets. 
12.  ____________ Certification by a registered land surveyor, and/or a professional engineer, that the subdivision plan and a perimeter survey of the land being developed has been performed and conforms to the survey requirements of these regulations, for a Class 1 survey. 
Existing conditions. An existing conditions map(s) to show the following: 
13.  ____________ Location and approximate size of existing structures. 
14.  ____________ State verified location of surface waters including rivers, streams, lakes, ponds and wetlands including location of surveyed flags and setbacks within state jurisdiction. 
15.  ____________ 100-year floodplains as shown on federal flood protection maps. 
16.  ____________ Existing topography at two-foot contour intervals. 
17.  ____________ Slopes that meet or exceed 15%, but are less than 25%, represented with light gray shading and labels. 
18.  ____________ Slopes that meet or exceed 25% represented with darker gray shading and labels. 
19.  ____________ Existing drainage and drainage structures, such as culverts and pipes, etc. 
20.  ____________ Name and location of surface watershed, water quality classification and existing condition of nearest surface water(s). See RI DEM Water Quality Regulations. 
21.  ____________ Groundwater aquifers, recharge areas and wellhead protection areas. 
22.  ____________ State-designated Natural Heritage Sites. 
23.  ____________ Approximate boundaries of existing forested areas. 
24.  ____________ Land in active agricultural use. 
25.  ____________ State, regional, or community greenways and green space priorities. 
26.  ____________ State or locally designated historic sites, districts, cemeteries or landscapes. 
27.  ____________ Archaeological sites. 
28.  ____________ Scenic road corridors and state-designated scenic areas. 
29.  ____________ Location of stonewalls, structures, outbuildings, roads or trails, and other historic features on the parcel. 
30.  ____________ Existing hiking, biking, and bridle trails within and adjacent to site. 
31.  ____________ Boat launches, lake and stream access points, beaches and water trails. 
32.  ____________ Existing recreational fields and playgrounds adjacent to the site. 
33.  ____________ Location and dimension of all existing utilities within and immediately adjacent to the development, including electric, phone, cable TV, fire alarm, utility poles, storm water drainage facilities or other existing above [ground] or underground utilities. 
34.  ____________ Location of historic cemeteries on or immediately adjacent to the development (if any). 
35.  ____________ Base flood elevation data. 
Proposed conditions. Proposed conditions plans shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the planning board that all standards for development and site improvements applicable in the zoning ordinance and these regulations are met. Plans shall show the following as applicable: 
36.  ____________ All proposed conditions plans. 
a._____  Location of proposed right of way limits, curbing, edge of pavement and sidewalks. 
b._____  Location of proposed driveways and parking areas. 
c._____  Location of any proposed or retained structures. 
d._____  Lot lines drawn so as to distinguish them from existing property lines. 
e._____  Proposed street names. 
37.  ____________ General site features and layout. 
a._____  Illustrations of street cross-section types that are proposed for the different areas of the development. Examples of different street cross-section types are provided in Village Design Manual of these regulations. 
b._____  Illustrations of intersection configurations that are proposed for the development. Examples of different intersection configurations are provided in the Village Design Manuel of these regulations. 
c._____  Illustrations of lot types that are proposed for different areas within the development. Examples of different lot types that may be proposed are provided in Village Design Manual of these regulations. 
d.____.  Site plan depicting required improvements including streets, lots, lot lines, with approximate lot areas and dimensions. Proposed lot lines shall be drawn so as to distinguish them from existing property lines. The location of different street, lot, and intersection types as identified in requirements 37.a through 37.c above shall be called out in the site plan. A sample site plan is provided in the Village Design Manuel of these regulations. 
38.  ____________ Detailed site layout. 
a._____  Location and dimension of all proposed utilities within and immediately adjacent to the development, including electric, phone, cable TV, fire alarm, utility poles, stormwater treatment facilities or other proposed aboveground or underground utilities. 
b._____  Grading to show proposed contours at two-foot intervals for all proposed on-site and off-site street construction, and upon individual lots if part of proposed development improvements. 
c._____  Proposed drainage plan and drainage calculations prepared by a registered professional engineer. 
d._____  Location of wastewater treatment facilities as submitted to the Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management. 
39.  ____________ Landscaping plan. 
a._____  All significant proposed clearing of land, removal of existing vegetation and/or landscaping on street rights-of-way and upon individual lots if part of proposed development improvements. 
b._____  Identification (name, variety, and size) and location of all species selected for installation. 
c._____  Location of any vegetated areas or individual specimen(s) to be preserved and identification of the protective measures taken to ensure their survival through construction. 
d._____  Location of proposed stump dumps. 
40.  ____________ Circulation plan. 
a._____  Proposed street plan and profiles drawn at a scale of 1 inch = 40 feet horizontal and 1 inch = 4 feet vertical. 
b._____  Proposed network of sidewalks, bike paths and/or trails showing points of connection to public gathering places, housing centers, commercial or mixed use centers, recreational areas, and/or conservation areas. 
c._____  Proposed location for any pedestrian or bicycle amenities such as benches, bike racks, and shade trees. 
d._____  Locations and illustrations for all non-residential signs in the proposed development. 
41.  ____________ Location, dimension and area of any land proposed to be set aside as open space. 
42.  ____________ Soil erosion and sediment control plan. 
43.  ____________ Architectural plans. 
a._____  Architectural elevations for all building types in the proposed development. 
b._____  Site plan showing the location of each building type provided in 43.a. 
c._____  One street level rendering for each street in the proposed development. 
Supporting materials 
44.  ____________ Application fee; project review fee where required in accordance with section 3.3.C. 
45.  ____________ Written confirmation from the state department of environmental management pursuant to the state department of environmental management Rules and Regulations Governing the Enforcement of the Freshwater Wetlands Act, and any subsequent amendments thereto, that plans of the proposed development, including any required off-site construction, have been reviewed and indicating that the Wetlands Act either does not apply to the proposed site alteration or that approval has been granted for the proposed site alteration. 
46.  ____________ Where applicable, confirmation of the development rights that will be purchased and calculations demonstrating that the proposed number of development rights to be purchased are adequate. Confirmation will require a notarized letter from the holder of development rights confirming that (s)he is willing to sell development rights to the applicant for the proposal. 
47.  ____________ Where applicable, calculations for fee-in-lieu of the required purchase of development rights. 
48.  ____________ A physical alteration permit (PAP) issued by the state department of transportation for any connection to or construction work within a state highway or other right-of-way (if necessary). 
49.  ____________ Preliminary development suitability determination by the department of environmental management for the use of OWTS (if proposed). 
50.  ____________ The names and addresses of owners of all properties, agencies or communities requiring notification as required by these regulations. 
51.  ____________ Copies of return receipts for certified mail notices. 
52.  ____________ Draft copies of all legal documents describing the property, proposed easements and rights-of-way, dedications, covenants, maintenance agreements, restrictions, or other required legal documents. 
53.  ____________ Either of the following: 
a._____  A letter stating it is the intent of the applicant to complete the required improvements shown on the plan prior to the planning board's endorsement of the final plans; or 
b._____  A letter requesting the security sufficient to cover the cost of required improvements shown on the plan be set by the planning board. 
Initial amount set by the board ____________ 
Date ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
54.  ____________ Final written comments on the preliminary plan by the following: 
A. ____________ Town engineer (consulting) Date: ____________ B. ____________ Public works director Date: ____________ C. ____________ Conservation commission Date: ____________ D. ____________ Fire districts (2) Date: ____________ E. ____________ 911 Supervisor Date: ____________ F. ____________ Other (specify) ____________ Date: ____________  
(Amend. of 6-25-13) 
R. - Final major land development checklist for Planned Village Development (PVD). 
    The applicant shall submit to the administrative officer copies of final site plans and supporting materials as indicated below: 
Plat plans to be recorded 
    One copy of the final plat plan drawn on Mylar to a scale of 1 inch to 40 feet. The scale may be modified with the permission of the administrative officer. In addition, five black line copies shall also be submitted. Each sheet shall be no larger than 24 inches by 36 inches, and a sufficient number of sheets shall be included to clearly show all of the information required. Sheets shall be numbered sequentially (e.g., sheet 1 of 3, 2 of 3, etc.). The following information shall be shown on the plans: 
1.  ____________ Name and address of the proposed development. 
2.  ____________ Notation that the subdivision is located in the Town of Exeter, RI. 
3.  ____________ Name and address of property owner and applicant. 
4.  ____________ Name, address and telephone number of engineer or land surveyor. 
5.  ____________ Date of plan preparation, with revision date(s) (if any). 
6.  ____________ Graphic scale and true north arrow. 
7.  ____________ Plat and lot number(s) of the parcel(s) being developed. 
8.  ____________ Zoning district(s) of the parcel(s) being developed. If more than one district, zoning boundary lines must be shown. 
9.  ____________ Perimeter boundary lines of the subdivision or land development project, drawn so as to distinguish them from other property lines. 
10.  ____________ Location and dimensions of existing property lines, easements and rights-of-way within or immediately adjacent to the parcel being subdivided. 
11.  ____________ Location, width and names of proposed and existing streets within and immediately adjacent to the parcel being developed. 
12.  ____________ Names of abutting property owners and property owners immediately across any adjacent streets. 
13.  ____________ Location of proposed permanent bounds. 
14.  ____________ Location of all interior lot lines and street lines with accurate dimensions indicated. 
15.  ____________ Location and number of all proposed lots, with accurate areas indicated. 
16.  ____________ Location and notation of type of easement(s) or existing easement(s) to remain (if any) with accurate dimensions and areas indicated. 
17.  ____________ Location and notation of type of proposed open space areas. 
18.  ____________ Notation of special conditions of approval imposed by the planning board (if any). 
19.  ____________ Notation of any permits and agreements with state and federal reviewing agencies (if any). 
20.  ____________ Phasing schedule (if any). 
21.  ____________ Certification by a professional land surveyor that all interior and perimeter lot lines and street lines of the land being subdivided have been designed to conform to a minimum of a Class I Survey, including the location of all proposed permanent monuments, and are certified as being correct. 
22.  ____________ Note on Plan: "The Town of Exeter currently has a Growth Management Ordinance in effect which may impact the ability to obtain building permits for lots shown on this plan". 
Construction drawings 
    Seven black line copies of construction plans drawn to a scale of 1 inch to 40 feet. The scale may be modified with the permission of the administrative officer. Each sheet shall be no larger than 24 inches by 36 inches, and a sufficient number of sheets shall be included to clearly show all of the information required. Sheets shall be numbered sequentially (e.g., sheet 1 of 3, 2 of 3, etc.). 
23.  ____________ Final construction plans as listed in the preliminary plat checklist, including plans of any additional improvements as required by the planning board as a condition of approval. 
24.  ____________ Certification by a registered professional engineer that the plans are correct. 
25.  ____________ Proposed street plan and profiles drawn at a scale of 1" = 40' horizontal and 1" = 4' feet vertical if required by the planning board. 
26.  ____________ Street cross-sections, if required by the planning board. 
27.  ____________ Proposed landscaping plan, if required by the planning board. 
28.  ____________ Soil erosion and sediment control plan (if required). 
29.  ____________ For phased projects, as-built drawings for the previous phase (if applicable). 
30.  ____________ Proposed street trees. 
Supporting materials 
31.  ____________ Certificate of the tax collector showing that all taxes due on the parcel being subdivided have been paid for a period of five years prior to filing of the final plat and that there are no outstanding municipal liens on the parcel. 
32.  ____________ Two original signed copies of all legal documents describing the property, creating a homeowners' association, proposed easements and rights-of-way, dedications, restrictions or other required legal documents. 
Specify: 
33.  ____________ Two signed copies of an irrevocable offer to convey to the town all public streets and/or other public improvements, accompanied by a metes and bounds description of said areas. 
34.  ____________ Deed transferring land proposed for dedication to the town or other qualified group or agency for open space purposes. 
35.  ____________ 911 Emergency numbers. Proof of notification to police, fire, ambulance and the planning board with proposed new road names, if any, and all new house numbers assigned to each building lot or dwelling. To be shown on plans with a square box. 
Payment of required fees 
    Payment of the following fees or posting of financial guarantees, if required, to be prior to endorsement by the planning board and recording of final plans: 
36.  ____________ Administrative fee. See section 3.3.B. 
37.  ____________ Final plat recording fee - Amount ____________ . 
38.  ____________ Performance bond or other financial guarantees. 
a.  Initial amount ____________ . 
b.  Date set by planning board ____________ / ____________ / ____________ . 
c.  Date of expiration of surety ____________ / ____________ / ____________ . 
39.  ____________ Fees in-lieu-of land dedication (if required). 
a.  Amount ____________ . 
40.  ____________ Inspection fee - Amount ____________ . 
41.  ____________ Maintenance bond for acceptance of public improvements (if applicable). 
a.  Amount ____________ . 
b.  Date of maintenance bond expiration ____________ / ____________ / ____________ . 
c.  Date of planning board approval of public improvements ____________ / ____________ / ____________ . 
d.  Description ____________ / ____________ / ____________ . 
e.  Date of recommendation of acceptance from planning board to the town council ____________ / ____________ / ____________ . 
f.  Date of council acceptance of public improvements ____________ / ____________ / ____________ . 
(Amend. of 6-25-13) 
SECTION 13.0. - CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 13.1. - General construction specifications for subdivisions and land development projects, Town of Exeter, R.I. 
A.  Streets. 
1.  Dimensions. All streets constructed within a land development or subdivision shall conform to the design standards as listed in section I3.A.6 of these regulations. 
2.  Notification and inspections. The public works director of the town shall be notified one week before the commencement of the total project and 24 hours before each of the street construction phases identified and enumerated below. Authority to proceed with any succeeding phase will be granted only upon approval and acceptance in writing of the phase just completed. A decision shall be submitted within one business day for each construction phase. A copy of each acceptance shall be submitted in duplicate to the planning board. 
a.  Sub-grade preparation in compliance with item I3.A.4; 
b.  Before any base course gravel is placed in the excavated area, a sample of gravel shall be inspected to ensure the use of approved gravel; 
c.  When the base in thoroughly compacted and ready for the tack coat; 
d.  The public works director shall be notified at least 24 hours before bituminous concrete pavement is to be applied; 
e.  Before curbing or waterways are installed; 
f.  Before drainage pipes, dry wells, and other drainage structures are installed and backfilled. 
3.  Clearing. The entire right-of-way area as shown on the approved final plans shall be cleared and grubbed as required to construct roadway grading and other improvements. 
4.  Excavation. 
a.  All loam and unsanitary material shall be scraped and removed from the right-of-way area, and all excavations shall conform to the lines and grades as shown on the plan, profile and cross section. Rock, stone or ledge that require drilling or blasting shall be excavated to a depth of at least six inches below finished grade when within the street pavement area. Earth, subsoil and stones shall be excavated to a depth of at least ten inches below finished grade within the street pavement area. Where free water is encountered within three feet of finished grade, adequate drainage shall be constructed at a depth of at least four feet below finished grade. 
b.  Road grade stakes must be planted at 50-foot increments and at all radii. 
5.  Gravel foundation. 
a.  It shall be practically free of foreign materials such as loam, silt, clay and organic matter. 
b.  It shall contain no cobbles larger than four inches in diameter. 
c.  At least 40 percent by weight of the gravel shall be of sizes retained upon one-quarter-inch sieve. 
d.  The gravel base course shall have a minimum thickness of 12 inches after grading and compaction. A minimum thickness of 15 inches after grading and compaction is required when drilling or blasting is required in the excavation stage. 
e.  The base course shall be rolled to the designed grade, overlapping on successive trips by at least one-half the width of the rear wheels of the roller, with a self-propelled, three-wheel roller weighing at least ten tons. Rolling shall continue until the base course is fully compacted. Any depressions that develop due to the rolling shall be filled, rolled, and shaped until the base course is true to cross section and grade. 
6.  Surface treatment. 
a.  When the gravel base course has been finally compacted and brought to the designed grade, it shall be approved by the public works director. After approval by the public works director, a tack coat of heated asphalt oil (Mo-1) or equivalent shall be applied to the base course at a rate of 0.25 gallons per square yard. After the tack coat has been applied, it must be rolled again in preparation for the bituminous concrete pavement. All traffic shall be kept off the treated surface until the tack coat is set and the surface has been rolled. 
b.  Bituminous concrete (hot mix) pavement shall consist of two-inch binder using three-fourths-foot [inch] stone and one inch "I" type 1-1 asphalt concrete and after rolling and final compaction must have a uniform thickness of three inches. This item shall be class "I" type 1-1 asphalt concrete and after rolling and final compaction must have a uniform thickness of 21/2 inches. 
c.  Spread equipment. The spreading and finishing equipment shall be of the self-powered type and shall have a floating screen assembly controlled as to elevation strike off. The use of any spreading and finishing equipment, which causes blemishes or conditions of non-uniformity, which are not satisfactorily corrected by the scheduled operations, shall be discontinued and other satisfactory spreading and finishing equipment shall be provided by the contractor. 
d.  Compacting surface course. While hot, and as soon as it will bear the roller without displacement or hair cracking, the surface course shall be uniformly compressed by a power driven tandem roller, mechanically wetted, weighing not less than 350 pounds per lineal inch width of tread, and the roller shall weigh not less than ten tons. Rolling shall start longitudinally at the sides and proceed toward the center of the pavement, overlapping on successive trips by at least one-half of the width of the rear wheels of the roller. Rolling shall be continued until all roller marks are eliminated. The motion of the roller shall at all times be slow enough to avoid displacement of the hot mixture and to prevent adhesion of the surface mixture to the roller; the wheels shall be kept properly moistened with water or oil. 
B.  Concrete curbing. Curbing shall be installed whenever the grade is over five percent and is required for adequate gutter flow. All curbing shall be 18-inch pre-cast concrete curbing at least 60 inches long, with returns to all driveways over five percent grade. 
The trench for setting the curb shall be excavated so that it shall be 18 inches wide and its sub-grade at least 24 inches below the finished curbing grade. Upon this sub-grade, a foundation is to be made consisting of clean coarse gravel thoroughly rammed so that it will be at least six inches when compacted. Upon this foundation the curbing is to be laid, the joints made as close as possible and all spaces under the curb filled with gravel and tamped so that the curbing will bear throughout its entire length and be at the line and grade required. 
The trench on each side of the curbing is then to be filled to the sub-grade of the roadway and the sidewalk, respectively, with clean coarse gravel laid in four-inch layers, each layer thoroughly rammed and tamped under and around the curbing. Clean gravel is then to be rammed against and up to a point six inches below the top of the curbing on the sidewalk side. Bituminous concrete curbing laid with an extruding machine, the shape of the extruded curb is to be approved by the public works director prior to the start of the curbing work. The contractor must protect the new work until the asphalt has taken its permanent set. 
Any damaged curb must be removed and replaced prior to the acceptance of the development. 
C.  Sidewalk areas. Where no paved sidewalks are to be constructed, the area between the curb line and the street right-of-way line shall be loamed to a depth of four inches and uniformly seeded with suitable grass seed. Where sidewalks are to be constructed, the location and construction of such sidewalks must be approved by the public works director. 
Trimming and fine grading shall consist of loam and seeding, trimmings, dressings of all shoulders, ditches and side slopes, whether in excavation or embankment, and the work shall be performed in a neat and workmanlike manner to the lines and grades of the typical sections shown on the plans and as the public works director may direct. 
D.  Drainage, culverts and bridges; general criteria. All necessary drainage structures, culverts, and bridges shall conform to the "State Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction," latest published edition by the State of Rhode Island, Department of Public Works, Division of Roads and Bridges, and shall be used as a guide in the case of any questions or disputes that may arise during the construction of a project. 
Storm drains, culverts and related installations, including catch basins, gutters and manholes, shall be installed as necessary to provide adequate disposal of surface water from all streets within the subdivision and adjacent land as shown on plan. Proper connection shall be made with any existing drains in adjacent streets or easements. Where property adjacent to the project site is not developed, provision shall be made for the proper projection of the drainage system by continuing appropriate drains to the exterior boundaries of the development at such size and grade as will allow for such projection. 
In no case shall pipe of less than 12-inch diameter be used for storm drainage, and it shall be larger when deemed necessary by the public works director. The developers shall show the size and location of existing storm drain facilities that the proposed new development will tie into and shall plot these on the preliminary and final plans submitted to the planning board for approval. Such subdivision shall have a storm water drainage system capable of accommodating the maximum storm water flow from higher regions of the drainage area or watershed in which the development is located. The system shall be based on a hydraulic study. Complete runoff computations for designing pipe sizes will be submitted. These computations will be based on the Burkli-Zeigler or Rational formula and will be based on a storm frequency of 15 years. 
1.  Maximum groundwater levels. If the groundwater or spring groundwater elevation in any portion of a new road, or contributing runoff to a new road, is less than seven feet below the finished grade of the nearest street, no road shall be constructed in such area unless satisfactory sub-drainage facilities are constructed to lower such groundwater to acceptable levels. 
2.  [Contours or grades.] No natural contours or grades in a development shall be altered so as to reduce the suitability of the soil for proper sub-drainage. Additional percolation tests may be required in areas where the contours or grades have been altered. 
3.  Pipe culverts and drains. Pipe for the construction of culverts and drains shall be not less than 12 inches in diameter and shall be reinforced concrete. All pipes shall be laid true to line and grade as shown on plans. Each section of pipe shall have a full firm bearing throughout its lengths. All joints shall be made of Portland cement mortar or shall be of acceptable ring type joints. All pipes shall have at least two feet, six inches of cover above the top of the pipe. 
4.  Catch basins and manholes. Catch basins and manholes shall be built to the lines, grades, dimensions and designs shown on the plans and as directed, with the necessary approved frames, grating, curb inlets and covers, and shall be constructed of clay brick masonry, concrete brick masonry, or pre-cast concrete masonry and shall not be less than four feet in diameter at a point 21/2 feet below the bottom of the frame. Catch basins shall be placed on the street, so that the greatest gutter length of water will have to flow over the surface and shall not be over 300 feet, or as demonstrated otherwise by a hydraulic study. Whenever grade is five percent and over on each side of the catch basin, high capacity frame and grate will be required. Catch basins and manholes shall have concrete bottoms. Manholes are required at all points in the main drains where there is a change of grade or a change in line; also at all points where feeder pipes enter the main drain. 
5.  Concrete headwalls. Concrete headwalls or flare ends shall be constructed at the open ends of any drainpipe where the same serve as outlets to the drainage system. These headwalls shall be of the shape and size as directed by the public works director. 
6.  Gutter flow. Surface drainage in gutters shall be limited to a flow not to exceed five inches in depth in the case of concrete curb or two inches in the case of bituminous berm, at the curb, based on the individual condition of road grade, runoff factor, rainfall intensity and tributary area and inlet capacity. 
7.  Catch basins. No more than two catch basins shall be interconnected before being connected to a manhole. 
8.  Lot drainage. Lot drainage shall be as required and specified by the planning board. 
9.  Valley gutters. Valley gutters will be permitted at "T" intersections where they will be parallel to the centerline of the through road and shall be installed only after design approval by the public works director. In general, the crown of the intersection road shall be gradually eliminated starting from a point about 30 feet back from the flow line of the through street. At other than "T" intersections, valley gutters will be permitted only when warranted by limited traffic use as approved by the public works director. 
10.  Brooks, ditches and streambeds. Existing brooks, natural waterways and dry streambeds shall be maintained for drainage purposes or provisions for needed drainage shall be installed at the developer's expense. A right-of-way or public utility easement of sufficient minimum width to include a 12-foot access strip in addition to the width of the ditch, brook or stream bed, as measured from bank top to bank top, shall be required by the town for drainage purposes. Such right-of-way or public utility easement shall be shown on the drainage plan and on the final plan, with proper bearings and distances indicated. 
11.  Drainage structures on state land. Drainage structures, which are located on state highway rights-of-way shall be submitted to the appropriate highway engineer's office, and a letter of approval from that office shall be filed with the planning board and the public works director. 
12.  Crossing a brook, stream or other natural waterway. Whenever it is required or necessary that a developer cross any brook stream or other natural waterway with construction of any type, a culvert or bridge completely spanning such brook, stream or other natural waterway shall be used. Based on terrain of the upstream or downstream conditions, the culvert shall be designed to pass any portion of the runoff of any flood frequency storm up to, and including a 100-year flood frequency storm, and the design and specifications of the same shall be approved by the public works director. 
13.  Easement and rights-of-way for watercourses. Where a development road drains into a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream, a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse shall be provided, together with access strips. Such right-of-way or public utility easement shall be shown on the drainage plan and on the final plan with proper bearing and distance indicated. 
14.  Fees for downstream improvements. Whenever a development will increase the burden on downstream drainage facilities or watercourses, either by increasing surface water runoff or otherwise, the developer shall make the necessary improvements, to the satisfaction of the public works director, or shall pay a sum of money to the town to be used for future improvement of such facilities or watercourses. Said sum of money shall be computed on the basis of the projected costs of the anticipated downstream improvement and the proportionate burden contributed by the development. 
15.  Barricades, guardrails and fences. The developer shall provide guardrails in areas where the street embankment exceeds five feet. In addition, the board may require fencing around easements, drainage areas, waterways, walkways and other such facilities where deemed necessary to promote public safety. 
E.  Permanent monument. 
1.  Materials. Permanent monuments shall be granite or pre-cast reinforced cement concrete, which shall conform in size and shape to the specifications below: 
2.  Dimensions. 
a.  Monuments shall be 36 inches in length and four inches square in cross section. 
b.  A drill-hole one-half inch in diameter and three-quarters of an inch deep shall be placed and centered on the top surface of the monument. 
c.  Monuments shall be installed at all points indicated on the final plat. 
3.  Setting monuments. All monuments installed adjacent to a highway shall be installed so that the top surface of the monuments shall be one inch above the finished grade of the sidewalk area at the property line. All other monuments not adjacent to a highway shall be installed so that the top surface is level with the finished grade of the surrounding land. 
Sec. 13.2. - Erosions and sediment control standards. 
    The following standards are established to ensure the control of erosion and sediment thereby ensuring a stable soil during and following development. These standards shall be applied to the following uses and developments: Subdivisions; land development projects; industrial developments, including factories, warehouses, storage facilities, landfills, gravel banks, and associated roads and parking lots; [and] business developments, including shopping centers, supermarkets, department stores, trailer parks, and associated roads and parking lots. 
A.  General requirements. 
1.  For qualifying tracts, no changes shall be made in the contour of the land; no grading, excavating, removal or destruction of the topsoil, trees or other vegetative cover of the land shall be commenced until such time that a plan for minimizing erosion and sedimentation has been approved by the planning board and Southern Rhode Island Conservation District or there has been a determination by the board that such plans are not necessary. 
2.  No development qualifying tract or land development plan shall be approved unless the following requirements have been met: 
a.  There has been a plan, approved by the planning board that provides for minimizing erosion and sedimentation consistent with this section, and an improvement bond or other acceptable securities are deposited with the town in the form of an escrow guarantee which will ensure installation and completion of the required improvements; or 
b.  There has been a determination by the planning board that a plan for minimizing erosion and sedimentation is not necessary. 
c.  Measures used to control erosion and reduce sedimentation shall, as a minimum, meet the standards and specifications of the Southern Rhode Island Conservation District. The town engineer, or other officials as designated, shall ensure compliance with the appropriate specifications, copies of which are available from the district or the town clerk of the town. 
B.  Performance principles. The following measures are effective in minimizing erosion and sedimentation and shall be included where applicable in [the] control plan: 
1.  Stripping of vegetation, re-grading, or other development shall be done in such a way that will minimize erosion. 
2.  Development plans shall preserve salient natural features, keep cut and fill operations to a minimum and ensure conformity with topography so as to adequately handle the volume and velocity of surface water runoff, and create the least erosion potential. 
3.  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected, and supplemented. 
4.  In the disturbed area the duration of exposure shall be kept to a practical minimum. 
5.  Disturbed soils shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable within the year. 
6.  Temporary vegetation and/or mulching, or both, shall be used to protect exposed critical areas during development. 
7.  The permanent (final) vegetation and structural erosion control and drainage measures shall be installed as soon as practical in the development. 
8.  Provisions shall be made to effectively accommodate the increased runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after development. Where necessary, the quantity of surface water runoff will be temporarily stored. 
9.  Sediment carried by runoff water shall be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. 
C.  Grading for drainage. In order to provide more suitable sites for building and other uses, improve surface drainage, and control erosion, the following requirements shall be met: 
1.  All lots, tracts or parcels shall be graded to provide proper drainage away from buildings and dispose of it without pending, and all land within a qualifying tract, subdivision, or land development shall be graded to drain and dispose of surface water without pending, except where approved by the board. 
2.  All drainage provisions shall be of such design to adequately handle the surface runoff and carry it to the nearest suitable outlet such as a curbed street, storm drain, or natural watercourse. Where drainage swales are used to divert surface waters away from buildings they shall be seeded or planted or lined as required and shall be of such slope, shape and size as to conform with the requirements of the town. 
3.  Concentration of surface water runoff shall be permitted only in swales, watercourses, diversions or holding ponds. 
4.  Excavations and fills: 
a.  Cut and fill slopes shall not be steeper than two horizontal to one vertical unless stabilized by a retaining wall or cribbing, except as approved by the board. 
b.  Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent surface water from damaging the cut face to excavations or the sloping surface of fills. 
c.  Cut or fills shall not endanger adjoining property. 
d.  Fill shall be placed and properly compacted so as to minimize sliding or erosion. 
e.  Fill shall not encroach on natural watercourses or constructed channels. 
f.  Fill placed adjacent to natural watercourses or constructed channels shall have suitable protection against erosion during [the] period of flooding. They may include: riprap, gabions, retaining walls and vegetative stabilization. 
g.  Grading will not be done in such a way so as to divert water onto the property of another landowner without the written approval of the board and the landowner, and without appropriate legal documentation, if necessary. 
h.  During grading operations, necessary measures for dust control will be exercised. 
i.  Provision will be made for the installation of culverts or bridges to permit grading equipment to cross over live streams. 
D.  Responsibility. 
1.  Whenever sedimentation is caused by stripping vegetation, re-grading or other development, it shall be the responsibility of the person, corporation or other entity causing such sedimentation to remove it from all adjoining surfaces, drainage systems and watercourses and to repair any damage caused by the sediment or its removal at his expense as quickly as possible. 
2.  Maintenance of all drainage facilities and watercourses within any qualifying tract, subdivision or land development is the responsibility of the developer until they are accepted by the town or some other official agency, after which they become the responsibility of the town or accepting agency. 
3.  After the required state and town permits are obtained, it is the responsibility of any person, corporation, or other entity doing any act on or across a communal stream, watercourse or swale or upon the floodplain or right-of-way thereof, to maintain, as nearly as possible, in its present state, the stream, watercourse, swale, floodplain or right-of-way during the pending activity and to return it to its original or equal condition after such activity is completed. 
4.  Maintenance or drainage facilities of watercourses originating and completely located on private property is the responsibility of the owner to their point of open discharge at the property line or at a communal watercourse within the property. 
5.  No person, corporation, or other entity shall block, impede the flow of, alter, construct any structure or deposit any material or thing, or commit any act which will effect normal or flood flow in any communal stream or watercourses without having obtained prior approval and/or permit from the department of natural resources and the planning board. 
6.  Where a subdivision, qualifying tract or land development is traversed by a watercourse, there shall be provided a drainage easement or right-of-way conforming substantially with the line of such watercourse, and of such width as will be adequate to preserve natural drainage. 
7.  Each person, corporation, or other entity which makes any surface changes shall or may be required to: 
a.  Collect on-site surface runoff and safely dispose of it at the point of discharge into the common natural watercourse of the drainage area. 
b.  Handle existing and potential off-site runoff through the development by design to adequately handle storm runoff from a fully developed area upstream. 
c.  Pay his proportionate share of the total of off-site improvements to the common natural watercourse, based on fully developed drainage area. 
d.  Provide and install, at the developer's expense, and in accordance with town and district requirements, all drainage and erosion control improvements (temporary and permanent) as required by the erosion and sediment control regulations. 
8.  The town will assume the responsibility for maintaining an open and free-flowing condition in all minor streams, watercourses and drainage systems which are constructed and/or improved in accordance with town design criteria and which are, in the town's discretion, necessary for proper drainage. In such cases, adequate rights-of-way must exist or be acquired. 
9.  The planning board shall require: 
a.  Developers to make off-site improvements to the common natural watercourse except those required for existing state roads. 
b.  Acquisition of easements for such common natural watercourse improvements. 
c.  Supervision of such improvements to completion by a designated town official. 
E.  Compliance with regulations, procedures and specifications. 
1.  The planning board, in its consideration of all preliminary plans of subdivision, business developments, industrial developments, qualifying tracts and/or land developments shall condition its approval upon the execution of erosion and sediment control measures as contained in these regulations. 
2.  Specifications. The installation and design of the required erosion and sediment control measures shall be in accordance with the standards and specifications of the Southern Rhode Island Conservation District. 
a.  Copies of the standards and specifications for erosion and sediment control can be obtained from the Southern Rhode Island Conservation District or at the town clerk's office. 
b.  Many of the standards and specifications contained in the district standards and specifications handbook will be based on the types of soil existing in the area of development. 
c.  The standards and specifications will vary according to the soil types, conditions and slopes that exist on the development site. 
3.  Final plans for minimizing erosion and sedimentation as approved will be incorporated into the agreement and bond requirements as required in these regulations. 
4.  The approval of plans and specifications for the control of erosion and sedimentation shall be concurrent with the approval of the final plans of the subdivision, qualifying tracts, or land development, and become a part thereof. 
5.  At the time that a building permit is applied for, a review shall be conduct[ed] by the building inspector and director of public works, or other designated town official, to ensure conformance with the plan as approved. During the construction, further consultant technical assistance will be furnished, if necessary by the Southern Rhode Island Conservation District. During this development phase, the town's consulting engineer or other designated town official shall inspect the development site and enforce compliance with the approved plans. 
6.  In the event the developer proceeds to clear and grade prior to recording the approved plans or without satisfying conditions specified, the town may revoke the approval of the preliminary plan and have all activity on the tract or parcel of land cease or be stopped by order of the court. 
Sec. 13.3. - Standards for the installation of fire water tanks. 
A.  It is required that all new subdivisions and land development projects consisting of five or more homes shall install underground firewater tanks for fire protection as follows: 
1.  An underground water tank with minimum capacity of 10,000 gallons for fire protection is required for each five homes. Pre-cast reinforced concrete is the preferred construction material. The plans and specifications for the materials, location, and installation of the tank must be approved by the fire chief and the planning board before installation. 
2.  All tanks shall be installed in accordance with the National Fire Protection Association Standard, "Suburban Water Supplies," as amended. 
3.  Year-round access to water tanks and/or ponds is required. Access areas shall be paved where necessary. 
4.  An existing pond may be used in place of a water tank if prior approval is granted by the fire chief. The installation of a dry hydrant shall be in accordance with NFPA Standard, as amended. 
5.  A water tank or pond may be located within the ten-foot right-of-way, or elsewhere, as determined by the fire chief. Regardless of location, the developer shall grant an easement to the town for purposes of access to the tank or pond. 
6.  Before surface treatment is commenced, the appropriate tank or pond must be completed, in service, and approved by the fire chief. 
7.  A copy of the final plat plans must be submitted to the fire chief for his records. 
8.  Additional and/or larger water tanks may be required by the fire chief using the guidelines of the fire flow formula or NFPA, as amended. 
9.  Location of the underground water tanks and/or ponds in any subdivision or land development project of five or more homes shall be the responsibility of the fire chief and his determination shall be forwarded to the town planning board in writing. 
10.  The developer shall provide a certified check or cash as a financial guarantee, in an amount determined by the fire chief sufficient to assure the satisfactory completion, maintenance, and operation of the water tanks and improvements required by this section for five years. The financial guarantee shall be provided before approval of the final plans by the planning board. The fire chief may fix the guarantee in a reasonable amount in excess of the estimated costs to anticipate for economic or construction conditions. 
B.  It is required that the following new subdivisions and land development projects with a total of 5,000 square feet or greater; detention and correctional facilities with a total of 5,000 square feet or greater; business/industrial/storage/mixed occupancy with a high hazard with a total of 5,000 square feet or greater as defined in NFPA 101, Life Safety Code, 1994 edition, or as amended, shall install underground fire water tanks for fire protection as follows: 
1.  The number and size of water tanks will be determined by the fire chief using the guidelines of the fire flow formula or NFPA Standard, as amended, and in any case shall be a minimum of 10,000 gallons. 
2.  The plans and specifications for the materials, location, and installation of the tank(s) must be approved by the fire chief and planning board before installation. 
3.  All tanks shall be installed in accordance with National Fire Protection Association Standard, "Suburban Water Supply," as amended. 
4.  Year-round access to the water tanks is required. Access areas shall be paved where necessary. A copy of the final plat plans must be submitted to the fire chief for his records. 
5.  Location of the water tanks in any land development projects shall be the responsibility of the fire chief and his determination shall be forwarded to the town planning board in writing. 
6.  The developer shall provide a certified check or cash as a financial guarantee, in an amount determined by the fire chief sufficient to assure the satisfactory completion, maintenance, and operation of the water tanks and improvements required by this section for five years. The financial guarantee shall be provided before approval of the final plans by the planning board. The fire chief may fix the guarantee in a reasonable amount in excess of the estimated costs to anticipate for economic or construction conditions. 
7.  Maintenance and upkeep of the water tanks are to be the responsibility of the property owner. 
8.  Ponds or alternate water supply on site may be used, if approved by the fire chief and meets NFPA Standard, as amended. 
9.  A water tank or pond may be located within the ten-foot right-of-way, or elsewhere, as determined by the fire chief. Regardless of location, the developer shall grant an easement to the town for purposes of access to the tank or pond. 
C.  An exception may be made to the requirements of section III if a class A, supervised fire alarm system installed and operated in accordance with Rhode Island Life Safety Codes, is installed. Whether a Class A supervised fire alarm system may be substituted for the fire water tanks required in section 3(B) is at the discretion of the fire chief. 

Figure 1. Cul-de-Sac Turnaround Detail 
APPENDIX C - PUBLIC LAWS AFFECTING THE TOWN[1] 
Public Laws Chapter Year Description 2167 1949 Amends ch. 1574 of the Public Laws of 1917, an act to authorize the town to hold taxpayers town meetings 2480 1950 Amends ch. 314 of the general laws relative to elective meetings 2775, 2776 1951 Authorizes town to issue bonds for school purposes 160, 161 1958 Provides for development and improvement of Exeter School 2-3 1964 Time of poll closing 80 1965 Authorizes formation of regional school district representing Town of Exeter and West Greenwich 164 1966 Authorizes Exeter-West Greenwich Regional School District to issue bonds for school construction 15, 16 1967 Amends chapter 1574 of Public Laws, 1917, as amended by chapter 2167 of Public Laws, 1949, validating holding of town meetings 69, 70 1967 Allows for regulation of activities on Boone Lake 206, 207 1967 Allows for regulation of trailers by town 226, 227 1967 Allows for regulation of vehicle tracks and amusement parks by town 254, 255 1968 Enables town council to exempt certain property from taxation 95 1969 Allows for regulation of trailers by town 93, 94 1969 Authorizes town to hold taxpayer town meetings 190 1973 Authorizes town to regulate, control and license earth removal 191 1973 Sets parking fees to be charged by state department of natural resources at all state beaches and allots distribution of fees 66 1976 Authorizes town to control, regulate and license camping and trailer parks 56, 57 1976 Provides for tax exemption for elderly 86 1978 Freeze of the tax rate and valuation for the elderly 32 1978 Authorizes town to establish permanent police force 189, 190 1980 Freezing of tax rates and valuation for the elderly 406 1980 Freezing of tax rates and valuation for the elderly  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is a chronological list of the Public Laws of Rhode Island specifically concerning the Town of Exeter, as adopted by the Rhode Island legislature. 

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances of the town used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the codification and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code  3- 4-46(Ord.) ch. 9, § 1 2-31  4- 2-62(Ord.) 1-3 18-51-18-53 4 18-55 5 18-53, 18-54 6, 7 18-56, 18-57  5-29-67(Ord.) 1 50-31 1(A)-1(D) 50-32-50-35  4-22-68(Ord.) 6 14-71, 14-72 6(b), (c) 14-1 11- 4-68(Ord.) 1 18-57 2 18-31 18-57  7-13-70(Ord.) 1-6 6-111-6-116 7 6-117, 6-118 10 6-119 11 6-91  8- 3-70(Ord.) 1, 2 18-111, 18-112 3 18-113, 18-114 4-7 18-115-18-118 9 18-119 10A 18-120 11 18-121 1971-1  9- 1-71 1-4 18-161-18-164 5 18-141  1- 3-72(Ord.) 1, 2 46-161, 46-162  3- 1-82(Ord.) 1-4 42-51-42-54  4- 2-84(Ord.) 1 38-51 2-9 38-71-38-78  7- 7-86(Ord.) 1 26-31 2-5 26-61-26-64 6 26-35 7-9 26-65-26-67 10 26-36 11 26-34 12 26-32 15 26-33  6- 1-92(Ord.) I 34-31 II 34-33 III.A-III.E 34-126-34-130 IV 34-76 34-78 34-102, 34-103 IV(5) 34-77 V 34-101 34-104-34-106 VI 34-151-34-157 VII, VIII 34-34, 34-35 IX 34-32  8- 3-92(Ord.) 1-8       Added 14-31 10-28-92(Ord.) VI 34-151-34-157 11- 2-92(Ord.) 1 10-1 2 10-36 3 6-31 10-171 4 6-56 10-172 5 6-57 10-173 6 6-58 10-174 7 6-59 7(a), 7(b) 10-131, 10-132 7(c) 10-135 7(d) 10-136, 10-137 7(e) 10-138 7(f) 10-136 7(g) 10-139 7(h)-(j) 10-140 7(k) 10-141 8 6-60 
10-133 9 10-134 10 10-71 11 10-36 10-74 11(a), 11(b) 10-72, 10-73 11(d) 10-96 12-14 10-37-10-39 15 10-2  6- 7-93(Ord.) 1 34-212 2 34-211 3 34-213 4 34-262 5 34-214 6 34-261 7 34-191 11- 3-93(Ord.) 1-9 22-31-22-39 11-13 22-40-22-42  3-23-94(Ord.) II 34-237 V-VIII 34-288-34-291 IX 34-237  3-24-94(Ord.) I 34-236 III, IV 34-286, 34-287 10- 3-94(Ord.) 1, 2 30-31, 30-32 3-5 30-81-30-83 6, 7 30-33, 30-34 8-11 30-84-30-87 12, 13 30-56, 30-57 15 30-58 16, 17 30-88, 30-89 18 30-59 19 30-90  4- 3-95(1)(Ord.) 1-4 14-51  4- 3-95(2)(Ord.) VI 34-156, 34-157 VI.A, B 34-151 VI.C-VI.F 34-152-34-155 12- 4-95(Ord.) 30-81 96-01 10- 7-96 1-8 38-101-38-108 11- 4-96(Ord.) 1-5 2-81-2-85  6- 2-97(Ord.) 1-1-1-3 46-1-46-3 2-1-2-4 46-56-46-59 3-1 46-186 4-1(a)-4-1(g) 46-91-46-97 4-2, 4-3 46-98, 46-99 4-4(a), 4-4(b) 46-102, 46-103 4-4(c) 46-104, 46-105 4-4(d) 46-106 4-5, 4-6 46-100, 46-101 4-8 46-107  7- 7-97(Ord.) 1 2-117 2 2-119 3 2-146 4(a), (b) 2-147 4(c)-4(e) 2-175-2-177 5 2-116 5(2) 2-148 6(a)-6(d) 2-171-2-174 7(a), (b) 2-201 7(c)-7(f) 2-202-2-205 8 2-178 9-12 2-120-2-123 13, 14 2-179, 2-180 15 2-124 16 2-126 17 2-125 18 2-118  3- 2-98(1)(Ord.) 42-1  3- 2-98(2)(Ord.) 18-201-18-212 11- 2-98(1)(Ord.) App. A, § 1.5 11- 2-98(2)(Ord.) App. A, § 2.5 12-14-98(1) 10-2 12-14-98(2) 10-74 12-14-98(3) 10-173  1-25-99 App. B., § 3.3 App. B., App. B.  2- 1-99 1       Added 38-121 2       Added 38-31-38-34 8  6- 7-99 1-3 Adopt. Ord.  5-27-99       Rpld 42-51-42-54       Added 42-51-42-57  8-30-99 App. B, §§ 3.3-3.5 App. B, §§ 4.1, 4.3 App. B, App. B, B.       Added App. B, § 4.7  2- 7-00(1) 10-173  2- 7-00(2) 34-154  5-25-00(Ord.) I       Added App. A, § 1.2, 64.1 II       Added App. A, § 1.4, 4.B.C  6-22-00 App. A, § 2.4  8- 7-00(Ord.)       Rnbd App. A, art. VIII       as App. A, art. IX       Added App. A, §§ 8.1-8.8  9-14-00(Ord.) App. A, §§ 2.2 3.1, 3.3 5.1.C., E. 5.2.D 5.3.F., G. 5.4.C., E.-H. 5.5 6.2.B.7., 8., F. 7.3.A., 8.1.A. 9.1, 9.2.A. App. A, app. A, §§ 1-7       Rpld App. B, app. B 10- 2-00(1) 34-154 10- 2-00(2) 1-5       Added 42-81-42-85  6- 4-01 34-154 11- 6-00(Ord.) 1-11       Added 2-221-2-231  7-23-01 App. B, § 4.7 11- 5-01(1) 1-13       Added 14-201-14-213 11- 5-01(2) 34-154  1- 7-02(Amd.) 42-51  4-22-02 App. B, § 3.3  9- 9-02(1) 14-51  9- 9-02(2) 1-12       Added 14-231-14-242  9- 9-02(3) 1-5       Added 42-121-42-125 10- 7-02 1-5       Added 42-101-42-105 11-25-02 App. B, §§ 3.3, 5.5 App. B, §§ 6.2, 6.3 App. B, app. A, §§ 2, 3, 6  1- 6-03(1) 1       Added 2-251-2-256  1- 6-03(2) 1-3, 5, 6 App. A, § 1.4 4 App. A, § 1.2 1-3 App. A, § 5.1  1- 6-03(3) App. A, § 1.4 App. A, § 2.5.3  1- 6-03(4) App. A, § 1.4  3- 3-03 1 34-126 2       Added App. A, § 1.3.F.G. 3       Added App. A, § 1.3.E.E. 4 App. A, § 1.2.73.B. 5 App. A, § 1.3.E.D. 6 App. A, § 3.5.2. 7 App. A, § 2.4.1.42  4- 8-03 App. A, § 2.4  4- 8-03(Ord.) 1       Added 2-51  5- 5-03 34-153  6- 3-03 2-147, 2-175-2-177 10- 6-03(1) 10-173 10- 6-03(2) 34-154 11- 3-03 App. A, § 2.4 12- 1-03(Ord.) 1       Added 34-56  1- 5-04(Ord.) 1-8       Added 42-151-42-158  2- 2-04(Ord.) 1-3       Added 42-181-42-183  2-24-04 App. B, § 3.3  6- 7-04 1 App. A, § 1.6  7- 6-04(Ord.) 1       Added 2-91-2-95 10- 4-04(Ord.) 1-6       Added 2-271-2-276 10-26-04(Ord.)       Rpld App. B, §§ 1.1-1.6 2.1, 2.2 3.1-3.5 4.1-4.7 5.1-5.5 6.1-6.4 7.1-7.4 8.1-8.3 8.5-8.8 9.1-9.8, 10 App. B, App. A, §§ 1-7 App. B, App. C, §§ I-III       Added App. B, §§ 1.1-1.6 2.1, 2.2 3.1-3.5 4.1-4.7 5.1-5.17 6.1-6.5 7.1-7.4 8.1-8.4 9.1-9.3 9.5-9.8 10.1-10.8 11.0, 12.0 13.1-13.3 10- 5-04 App. A, §§ 1,2 1.4, 2.4 2.5, 6.3 11- 1-04 App. A, § 2.4  3- 7-05 App. A, § 2.4.1  4- 4-05 10-2, 10-173  4- 4-05 34-153, 34-154 34-156  8-15-05 34-153  8-22-05(Ord.) 1-5 42-121-42-125  9- 6-05 App. A, § 4.1.3 12-19-05 1-5 42-121-42-125  3- 6-06 1       Rpld 2-91-2-95       Added 2-91-2-93  3- 6-06 1 App. A, § 1.2 2 App. A, § 2.4 3       Added App. A, § 1.4.B.D.8  5- 1-06 App. A, § 4.1  5- 1-06 App. A, § 6.8  7- 5-06(Amd.)       Rpld 42-121-42-125  8- 7-06 34-153, 34-154 34-156  8- 7-06 1 App. A, § 1.2 2 App. A, § 2.4 3       Added App. A, § 4.6  9- 5-06 10-2, 10-173  9- 5-06       Added App. A, § 1.4.E 10- 2-06 10-2, 10-173 10- 2-06 18-114  5- 7-07       Rpld App. A, § 1.2.3.1 1.4.B.D.8-20 2.4.37  6- 4-07 App. A, § 2.4       Added App. A, § 1.2.43.5  9- 4-07       Added 34-153(6)  9- 4-07 1 App. A, 1.2 2       Added App. A, § 9.1-9.4       Rnbd App. A, Art. IX       as App. A, Art. X 11- 5-07 1       Added 42-191-42-198  4- 7-08 App. A, §§ 1.2, 2.4.2  5-12-08       Added Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 4, §§ 2-101-2-107  7- 7-08 1 42-192  2- 2-09 1 2-271-2-276  3- 2-09       Added Ch. 22, Art. III, §§ 22-43-22-50  3- 2-09 1-5       Added Ch. 42, Art. IX, §§ 42-211-42-215  4- 6-09       Rpld 18-111 18-112-18-114 8-116(b) 18-118 App. A, § 2.4.1 App. A, § 1.2  5-12-08       Added 42-59, 42-60  8-19-08 App. B, § 12 10- 4-10       Added 22-51-22-56 12- 6-10       Added 23-1-23-63 12- 6-10       Added App. A, § 4.8 12- 5-11(Amd.) 50-32  2- 6-12(Amd.)       Added 18-258-18-274  5-22-12(Ord.) 1 10-1 10-36  9-27-12(Ord.) Exh. 1 App. A, § 1.2 App. A, § 1.3.a       Added App. A, § 2.1.11 App. A, § 2.4       Added App. A, §§ 10.1-10.3 11- 5-12(Ord.)       Dltd 14-201-14-213       Added 14-201-14-213 12- 3-12(Ord.)       Added 6-120-6-124  3- 4-13(Ord.) 10-2  6-25-13(Amd.)       Added App. B, §§ 6.6-6.10       Added App. B, § 12, O-R  8- 4-14(Amd.) 34-33 34-34(c) 34-76(a) 34-78(b), (d)       Dltd 34-76(d)       Dltd 34-101-34-106 34-127(1), (2)       Added 34-127(12)       Dltd 34-129 34-130(e), (h) 34-152-34-154       Dltd 34-155 34-156       Added 34-158 10- 6-14(Amd.) 1       Added App. A, § 1.2.43       Rnbd App. A, § 1.2.43-1.2.119       as App. A, § 1.2.44-1.2.120 2 App. A, § 2.4 12- 1-14(Ord.) 10-173(b) 12- 7-15(Ord.)       Added App. A, § 11.1 App. A, § 2.4.1  4- 7-16(Ord.)       Added 42-231 7- 5-16(1)(Ord.) 34-153, 34-154 7- 5-16(2)(Ord.) 38-106  1- 3-17(Amd.)       Added 2-277-2-283  2-20-17(Amd.) App. B, § 2.2 App. B, § 3.3 App. B, § 4.7 App. B, § 6.3  3- 6-17(Amd.)       Added 42-232-42-236  6- 5-17(Amd.) 2-251-2-256 8- 7-17(1)(Amd.) 14-231-14-243 8- 7-17(2)(Amd.) 38-106 10- 2-17(Amd.) App. A, § 2.4.1       Added App. A, §§ 12.1-12.11  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the General Laws of Rhode Island. 
G.L. 1956 
Section Section  
this Code 2-1-14 App. A, § 1.2 2-1-20 App. A, § 1.2 3-1-1 6-32 4-3-22-43-3-24 1-10 4-4-1 et seq. Ch. 10 4-4-18 Ch. 10 4-13-1 Ch. 10 10-2 10-74 4-13-1 et seq. Ch. 10 Ch. 10, Art. III 4-13-4 Ch. 10, Art. III, Div. 2 4-13-26- 
4-13-32 Ch. 10, Art. III, Ch. 10, Art. IV 4-13-39 10-2 10-74 4-16-1 et seq. Ch. 10 4-19-1 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. III 4-19-17 Ch. 10, Art. V tit. 5 Ch. 18 5-6-1 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. II 5-11-1 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. VI 5-11-1-5-11-3 18-261 tit. 5, ch. 22 6-21 5-53.1-1 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. VI 18-267 5-20-1 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. II 5-21-1-5-21-8 Ch. 18, Art. II 5-21-2(b) 18-54 5-21-4 18-55 5-22-1 et seq. Ch. 6 5-22-5 Ch. 6, Art. III, Div. 2 5-24-1 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. IV 6-28-1 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. VI 11-31-1 6-60 11-31-1 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. II ch. 11-47 18-208 18-211 11-47-39 18-201 18-205 12-44-4 46-99 18-9-4 2-222 18-9-13 2-226 19-1-6 Ch. 18, Art. III, Div. 2 21-28.6-3 App. A, § 12.1 21-28.6-12 App. A, § 12.1 23-18.8-1 et seq. Ch. 34 
Ch. 34, Art. III 
34-212 23-18.9-1 et seq. Ch. 34 Ch. 34, Art. II 34-212 23-18.9-1(b)(1) 34-262 23-19.1-1 et seq. Ch. 34 Ch. 34, Art. III 34-32 34-127 34-211 34-236 23-19.2-8 Ch. 14, Art. II tit. 23, ch. 27.3 App. A, § 8.5 23-27.3-1 et seq. Ch. 14 Ch. 14, Art. II 23-27.3 22-54(a) 23-27.3-3, 
23-27.3-5 Ch. 14, Art. II 23-27.3-100.1 App. A, § 12.8 23-27.3-113.1 Ch. 14, Art. II, Div. 2 23-27.3-106.1 22-54 23-27.3-118.0 Ch. 14, Art. II, Div. 2 ch. 23-28 App. A, § 4.5 23-28.1-1 App. A, § 12.8 23-28.5-1 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. II 24-3-1 et seq. Ch. 38 Ch. 38, Art. II 24-4-1 et seq. Ch. 38, Art. II 24-5-1 et seq. Ch. 38, Art. II 24-6-1 et seq. Ch. 38, Art. II 24-7-1 et seq. Ch. 38 24-14-1- 
24-14-12 Ch. 18, Art. II tit. 31 Ch. 46 31-1 et seq. 46-1 31-1-2 et seq. 46-1 31-12-11, 
31-12-12 Ch. 46 31-12-12 46-59 31-12-13 Ch. 46 46-58 31-13-3 Ch. 46 31-13-10 46-3 31-13-11 46-2 31-21-1 et seq. Ch. 46, Art. III 31-21-4 46-98 31-21-10.1 46-102 31-44-1 et seq. Ch. 26 tit. 34, ch. 39 App. B, § 5.12 App. B, § 6.9 36-14-1 et seq. Char. §§ 101-1010 Char. § 903 38-2-1 et seq. Char. §§ 101-1010 Char. § 901 40.1-24-1 App. A, § 1.2 tit. 42, ch. 46 App. B, § 6.4 42-14.2-1- 
42-14.2-21 Ch. 18, Art. II 42-46-1 et seq. Char. §§ 101-1010 Char. § 902 42-72.1 App. A, § 1.2 42-128-8.1(d) App. A, § 1.2 42-128-8.1(d)(1) App. A, §§ 1.2, 1.4 43-3-3 1-2 43-3-6 1-2 43-3-11- 
43-3-13 1-2 43-3-16 1-2 tit. 44 18-267 Ch. 42 44-3-3 Ch. 42 44-3-3-44-3-31 Ch. 42, Art. II, Div. 2 44-3-4 42-101 44-3-16(f) Ch. 42, Art. II, Div. 2 44-5-1 et seq. Ch. 42 44-5-3 et seq. Ch. 42 44-5-15, 44-5-16 42-52 44-7-5 2-83 tit. 45 Ch. 2 tit. 45, ch. 24 App. A, § 1.2 App. A, §§ 1.1-7.8 tit. 45, ch. 45-22.4 14-232 45-2-2 Ch. 42 45-4-1 Char. § 604 
Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 2 45-6-1 14-31 45-6-2 1-15 45-6-7 1-1 45-21.3-1 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. II 45-22-2- 
45-22-4 App. B, § 2.2 45-22.2 App. A, § 1.1, App. A, § 1.2 45-22.2-1 et seq. App. B, § 10.7 45-22.2-4 App. A, § 1.2 App. B, § 2.2 45-22.2-4(24) App. A, § 1.4 45-22.2-4(33) App. A, § 1.4 45-22.2-8 App. A, § 1.4 45-22.2-9 App. A, § 1.4 45-22.2-12 App. A, § 1.4 Tit. 45, Ch. 23 App. A, § 1-4 ch. 45-23 et seq. 38-106 45-23-25- 
45-23-74 App. B, § 1.2 App. B, § 1.6 App. B, § 2.2 45-23-30 App. B, § 1.6 45-23-36 App. A, § 1.4 45-23-40 App. A, § 1.4 45-23-41 App. A, § 1.4 45-23-42 App. A, § 1.4 45-23-44 App. B, § 12.0 45-23-45 App. B, § 12.0 45-23-51 App. B, § 12.0 45-23-51 App. B, § 8.2 45-23-53(B), (C) App. B, § 6.5 45-23-60(5) App. A, § 1.4 45-23.1 et seq. Ch. 38, Art. II, Div. 3 45-23.1-1 et seq. Ch. 38, Art. II 38-101 45-23.1-5 38-108 45-24-27 et seq. App. B, § 10.7 45-24-30 14-232 App. A, § 1.5 45-24-31 14-208 45-24-41 App. A, §§ 1.2, 1.4 45-24-42 App. A, § 1.2 45-24-47 App. A, § 1.4 App. B, § 1.3 45-24-53(E) App. B, § 8.3 45-24.1-7.1, 
45-24.1-7.2 App. A, § 1.6 45-24.2-1 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. II 45-32-15 Ch. 38, Art. II 45-46-1 et seq. Ch. 30, Art. II Tit. 45, Ch. 53 App. A, §§ 1.4, 9.1, 9.4 45-53-3(2) App. A, § 1.4 45-53-3(5) App. A, § 1.2 45-53-4(b)(1), (2) App. A, § 1.4 45-53-5.3(6) App. A, § 1.4 45-53-11 App. A, § 1.4 45-55-1 et seq. Char. § 505 
Ch. 2, Art. IV 2-117 45-55-5 Char. § 505 46-12 22-54(a) 46-12-1(b) App. A, § 1.2 46-13-1-3 App. A, § 1.2 46-13.1 App. A, § 7.2 46-23 22-54(a) 46-23-6 22-54(a) ch. 95-218 Char. § 704 544-5-8.1 42-231  
