CODE OF ORDINANCES TOWN OF FOSTER, RHODE ISLAND 
____________ 
Published in 2005 by Order of the Town Council 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
TOWN OF 
FOSTER, RHODE ISLAND 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Peter Baribault 
Ralph Berkowitz 
John Storey 
Janet G. Dannecker 
Lynne Rider 
Harold R. Shippee, Sr. 
Town Council 
____________ 
Nicholas Gorham 
Town Solicitor 
____________ 
Ann M. Irons 
Town Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the Town of Foster, Rhode Island. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the town council. The source of each section, where available, is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code, or that adoption information was missing from the source materials. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER AND SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER AND SPECIAL ACTS INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Jan N. Shekitka, Supervising Editor, and Robert MacNaughton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Anne Irons, Town Clerk, and Nicholas Gorham, Town Solicitor, Deborah McLaren, Admininistrative Clerk, Gail Sherman, Administrative Clerk, and Warren Derchaarme and Steven Fucso, Planning Board Members, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the town readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the town's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Foster, Rhode Island. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Foster, Rhode Island. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Foster, Rhode Island. 2005. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date Adopted Include/Omit Supp. No. Ord. of  3- 2-2009 Include 2 Ord. of 10- 8-2009 Include 2 Ord. of  9- 9-2010 Include 2 Ord. of  3-18-2012 Include 2 Ord. of  8-23-2012 Include 2 Ord. of  7-11-2013 Include 2 Ord. of  6-25-2015(1) Include 2 Ord. of  6-25-2015(2) Include 2 Ord. of  7-23-2015 Include 2 Ord. of  8-27-2015(1) Include 2 Ord. of  8-27-2015(2) Include 2 Ord. of  8-27-2015(3) Include 2 Ord. of  1-14-2016(1) Include 2 Ord. of  1-14-2016(2) Include 2 Ord. of  1-14-2016(3) Include 2 Ord. of  1-14-2016(4) Include 2 Ord. of  4-28-2016 Include 2 Ord. of  5- 3-2016 Include 2 Ord. of  7-12-2016 Include 2 Ord. of  3-24-2005 Include 3 Ord. of  3-10-2016 Include 3 Ord. of  5-25-2017 Include 3 Revised Charter 
Pages - Include 3  
PART I - CHARTER AND SPECIAL ACTS 
Subpart A - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed in this Part is the Home Rule Charter of the Town of Foster, Rhode Island, approved by the electors on November 2, 1976. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference- Powers of town include those conferred or imposed by charter, G.L. 1956, § 45-2-1; special charters to control, G.L. 1956, § 45-5-18. 

PREAMBLE AND INCORPORATION 
    The people of the Town of Foster in the State of Rhode Island in order to secure for themselves the right of self-government in all local matters, pursuant to the power granted by the provisions of Article XXVIII of the Article of Amendment to the Constitution of the State of Rhode Island, and all other powers, hereby adopt and establish this Charter. 
    The inhabitants of the Town of Foster in the State of Rhode Island, within the corporate limits as now established or as hereafter established in the manner provided by law, shall continue to be a municipal body politic and corporate, under the name of the Town of Foster and the provisions of this Charter. 
ARTICLE I. - POWERS OF THE TOWN 

Section 1.01. - Powers of the Town. 
A.  Powers. The Town shall have all powers possible for a Town to have under the constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Charter. 
B.  Property. The Town may acquire property within or without its corporate limits for any municipal purpose, in fee simple or any lesser interest or estate, by purchase, gift, devise or lease, and within its limits by condemnation, and may sell, mortgage, hold, manage and control such property as its interest may require, provided that any sale, mortgage or lease of real property must first be authorized by the financial Town meeting. 
Section 1.02. - Construction. 
    The powers of the Town under this Charter shall be construed liberally in favor of the Town, and the specific mention of particular powers in the Charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general power stated in this article. 
Section 1.03. - Intergovernmental relations. 
    The Town may exercise any of its powers or perform any of its functions and may participate in the financing thereof, jointly or in cooperation, by contract or otherwise, with any one or more states or civil divisions or agencies thereof, or the United States or any agency thereof. 
ARTICLE II. - TOWN COUNCIL 

Section 2.01. - Composition, Election and Terms. 
(a)  Composition. There shall be a Town Council of five members elected at large by the qualified electors of the Town for a term of two years. 
(b)  Election and Terms. The terms of the Council Members shall begin at the regular December meeting of the council on the first Thursday after the first Monday in December immediately following the approval of the minutes by the out-going council as the first order of business. Prior to this meeting the outgoing council shall meet in work sessions with the in-coming council to plan an orderly transition. 
(c)  Following the election of Council Members in the November General Election and until such a time as the newly elected council takes office as provided in Section 2.01.b, the agenda of council meetings and decisions of the Council shall be limited to the approval of payroll warrants, general warrants and other such obligations that routinely come before the Council and which are required for the day to day operation of the town or to provide for the citizens of the town during natural disasters, civil disturbances and other similar emergencies. This section shall not apply if all five incumbent council members are re-elected in the General Election. 
(Ref. of 11-6-2012) 
Section 2.02. - Compensation and Expenses. 
    The Councilmembers shall receive such salaries and expenses as shall be fixed by the financial Town meeting. Councilmembers shall receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of office. 
Section 2.03. - President and Vice-President. 
    The Council shall elect from among its members a president and a vice-president each of whom shall serve at the pleasure of the Council. The president shall preside at all meetings of the Council and shall be recognized as the head of the Town government. The vice-president shall act as president during the absence or disability of the president. 
Section 2.04. - General Powers and Duties. 
    All powers of the Town shall be vested in the Council, except as otherwise provided by law or this charter, and the Council shall provide for the exercise thereof and for the performance of all duties and obligations imposed on the Town by law. 
Section 2.05. - Prohibitions. 
    Except where authorized by law, no member of the Council shall hold any other Town office or employment in any position for which the Town Council has appointive power, during the term for which the member was elected to the Council. (G.L. 1956, § 17-1-5.1) 
Section 2.06. - Vacancies; Forfeiture of Office; Filling Vacancies. 
(a)  Vacancies. The office of a member of the Council shall become vacant upon the death, resignation in writing filed with the Town Clerk, removal from office in any manner authorized by law or forfeiture of office of the Councilmember. 
(b)  Forfeiture of Office. A member of the Council shall forfeit the office if the member (1) lacks at any time during the term of office any qualifications for the office prescribed by this Charter or by law, (2) violates any express provision of this Charter, (3) is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, or (4) fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the Council without being excused by the Council. (RI Constitution, Article II, Section 3) 
(c)  Filling of Vacancies. If a vacancy shall occur in the Town Council more than six months prior to the next succeeding general election, a special election shall forthwith be called by the Town Clerk in the manner prescribed by law to fill such vacancy for the remainder of the term. Vacancies occurring less than six months prior to the next general election shall be filled by the Town Council until the next general election. 
Section 2.07. - Judge of Qualifications. 
    The Council shall be the judge of the qualifications of its members and of the grounds for forfeiture of their office and for that purpose shall have power to subpoena witnesses, administer oaths and require the production of evidence. A member charged with conduct constituting grounds for forfeiture of office shall be entitled to a public hearing on demand, and notice of such hearing shall be given by one or more methods of general circulation of such notice in the Town as deemed appropriate by the Town Council at least one week in advance of the hearing. Decisions made by the Council under this section shall be subject to review by the courts. 
Section 2.08. - Clerk of the Council. 
    The Town Clerk shall be the clerk of the Council and shall keep the minutes of its proceedings, which shall be a public record, and shall perform such other duties as are assigned to the clerk by this Charter or by the Council. 
Section 2.09. - Investigations. 
    The Council may make investigations into the affairs of the Town and the conduct of any Town department, office or agency and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the Council shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable to the extent permitted by law. (RI Constitution Article 1, § 5) 
Section 2.10. - Independent Audit. 
    The Town Council shall provide for an annual financial audit to be conducted in accordance with State and Federal guidelines. 
(Ref. of 11-6-2012) 
Section 2.11. - Procedure. 
(a)  Meetings. The Council shall meet regularly at least once in every month at such times and places as the Council may prescribe by rule. Special meetings may be held on the call of the president or of three or more members and, whenever practicable, upon no less than 12 hours' notice to each member. All meetings shall be public; however, the Council may recess for the purpose of discussing in a closed or executive session limited to its own membership any matter which would tend to defame or prejudice the character or reputation of any person, provided that the general subject matter for consideration is expressed in the motion calling for such session and that final action thereon shall not be taken by the Council until the matter is placed on the agenda. 
(b)  Rules. The Council shall determine its own rules and order of business. 
(c)  Voting and Quorum. Upon the request of any Councilmember, a roll call vote shall be taken on any matter and the ayes and nays shall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting. Three members of the Council shall constitute a quorum, but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time and may compel the attendance of absent members in the manner, and subject to penalties, prescribed by the rule of the Council. No action of the Council except as otherwise provided in the preceding sentence shall be valid or binding unless adopted by the affirmative public vote of three or more members of the Council. 
Section 2.12. - Action requiring an Ordinance. 
    In addition to other acts required by law or by specific provisions of this charter to be done by ordinance, those acts of the Town Council shall be by ordinance which are for the preservation of the public peace, health, safety, comfort and welfare of the inhabitants of the Town and for the protection of persons and property. 
Section 2.13. - Introduction and Enactment of Ordinances. 
    Every proposed ordinance, except an emergency ordinance, shall be filed with the Town Clerk by a member of the Town Council not later than three days previous to the date of the Town Council meeting at which it is to be introduced. Upon receipt of a proposed ordinance, a copy thereof shall be forthwith posted in the Town Clerk's office by the Town Clerk. No ordinance, except an emergency ordinance, shall be adopted by the Town Council at the meeting at which it is introduced, but it shall be referred to a subsequent regular or special meeting, to be held not earlier than five days from the Town Council meeting at which the proposed ordinance was introduced. If requested in writing by any ten qualified voters of the Town within five days following the Town Council meeting at which the ordinance was introduced, the Town Council shall hold a public hearing on such ordinance. Such request shall be filed with the Town Clerk who shall notify the Town Council. Notice of such public hearing shall be given by one or more methods of general circulation of such notice in the Town as deemed appropriate by the Town Council. Such notice shall state the date, time and place of the hearing and a general description of the subject matter of such ordinance. Whenever other and further procedure and notice is required by the general laws for the enactment of a particular ordinance, the same shall be followed in addition to the requirements of this section. As used in this section and sections 2.14 and 2.15, [the term] "ordinance" shall include an amendment to an ordinance. 
Section 2.14. - Emergency Ordinances. 
    In an emergency affecting the public peace, health, safety, comfort and welfare of the inhabitants of the Town and for the protection of persons and property, the Council may adopt on the day of its introduction, without previous filing with the Town Clerk, an ordinance containing a declaration of the emergency, which shall take effect upon its passage. Such an emergency ordinance shall be temporary and for the period of the emergency only. 
Section 2.15. - Recording and Publication of Ordinance. 
    The Town Clerk shall record in full in a properly indexed book kept for the purpose all ordinances adopted by the Council. The Council may provide from time to time for the publication of all ordinances currently in effect. 
Section 2.16. - Town Employees. 
    The employment of all employees of the Town, and their promotion, suspension for a period of greater than three days, or discharge shall be the responsibility of the Town Council, provided that no such action shall be taken by the Town Council except with the written approval of that employee's department head. Suspension for a period of three days or less may be imposed by a department head at his sole discretion. Rates of pay and employee benefits and changes to the same shall be the sole responsibility of the Town Council within the limits of the amounts appropriated. 
Section 2.17. - Appointments. 
    All other appointments, including the appointment of Town officers not specifically listed herein, except as this Charter may otherwise prescribe, shall be made by the Town Council. 
Section 2.18. - Committees, Boards and Commissions. 
    The Town Council may establish such Committees, Boards, and Commissions to serve in an advisory capacity with or without compensation, as the Town Council may see fit; but may not establish additional departments or offices than those provided by this Charter, and no function assigned by this Charter to a particular department, office or agency may be discontinued or, unless this Charter so provides, assigned to any other. 
Section 2.19. - Resignations. 
    Except where otherwise provided in this Charter, the Town Council shall fill any vacancy caused by a resignation within 60 days, or the same shall take effect on the sixtieth day after its submission and the position will become vacant. 
Section 2.20. - Reports. 
    All Town departments, boards and committees, including the School Committee, shall make a quarterly report to the Town Council, except when more frequently required by the Town Council. 
Section 2.21. - Quarterly Meetings. 
    The Town Council shall receive at the Council meeting following the close of each quarter a written report from the Director of Administration, Director of Human Services, Director of Public Works, Chief of Police, Town Treasurer and all committee and board chairpersons, and such other persons as the Town Council may require. Each quarterly report shall summarize the activities, accomplishments, and concerns of the department director, committee or board chairperson since the last quarterly report. The report shall be in the form and include the content as prescribed by the Town Council. The Town Council shall meet once a year during the month of September with the Director of Administration, Director of Human Services, Director of Public Works, Chief of Police, and Town Treasurer. 
(Ref. of 11-6-2012) 
Section 2.22. - Tax Revaluation. 
    The Town Council shall, at intervals of ten years[,] provide for an independent revaluation and equalization of the assessment of all property situated in the Town subject to taxation. Such revaluation is to be conducted by an independent appraisal firm experienced in this field to be selected by the Town Council from a list of no less than three such firms submitted to the Council by the Tax Assessor. (G.L. 1956, § 44-5-11) 
ARTICLE III. - MODERATOR 

Section 3.01. - Election, Term and Qualification. 
    There shall be a Town Moderator who shall be elected at each general election for a term of two years and until a successor is elected and qualified. The term of office shall start on the first Thursday after the first Monday in December in even numbered years. 
(Ref. of 11-6-2012) 
Section 3.02. - Vacancies. 
    Should a vacancy occur in the Office of Moderator, the Town Council shall fill the same until the next general election following the vacancy. If the office of Moderator be vacant or the Moderator be absent on the date and hour set for any annual or special financial Town meeting, the Town Clerk shall open the meeting and the qualified electors present shall elect a Moderator to preside at such meeting. 
Section 3.03. - Financial Town Meeting. 
    The Moderator shall preside at all financial Town meetings and shall have the power to conduct, manage and regulate the business of each meeting conforming to law and Article X, section 10.02 herein, and shall maintain peace and good order therein. If any person shall conduct himself or herself in a disorderly manner in any Town meeting, the Moderator may order him or her to withdraw from the meeting, and, on refusal, may order any police officer or any constable present, or any other person, to take him or her from the meeting and confine him or her in some convenient place until the meeting shall be adjourned; and the person so refusing to withdraw shall, for each offense, be fined not exceeding $20.00. The Moderator shall have such other duties and powers as shall pertain to the office. 
(Ref. of 11-8-2016) 
Section 3.04. - Supervision of Elections. 
    The Moderator shall have the duty of supervising all elections in accordance with the provisions of the general election laws. District Clerks and Moderators shall be appointed by the Board of Canvassers in accordance with Title 17-11-6 of Rhode Island General Laws. 
(Ref. of 11-6-2012) 
Section 3.05. - Compensation. 
    The Moderator shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by the Town Council for services at financial Town meetings, and such compensation as may be fixed by the general election laws for services at elections. 
ARTICLE IV. - TOWN CLERK 

Section 4.01. - Election. 
    There shall be a Town Clerk who shall be elected at each general election for a term of two years and until a successor is elected and qualified. The term of office shall start on the first Thursday after the first Monday in December in even numbered years. 
(Ref. of 11-6-2012) 
Section 4.02. - Deputy Town Clerk. 
    There shall be a deputy Town Clerk appointed by the Town Clerk with the approval of the Town Council. The deputy Town Clerk shall have all the powers and perform all the duties which are granted to the office of Town Clerk. 
Section 4.03. - Vacancy. 
    If a vacancy shall occur in the office of the Town Clerk, the DEPUTY TOWN CLERK shall succeed to that office. 
Section 4.04. - Powers and duties. 
    The Town Clerk shall be the Clerk of the Financial Town Meeting, Clerk of the Town Council, Clerk of the Board of Canvassers, Clerk Of The Probate Court and the Recorder of Deeds. The Town Clerk shall also be the director of the department of administration. It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to: 
(a)  Make a permanent record of all proceedings and certify by his signature all actions of the aforesaid bodies; 
(b)  Be custodian of the Town Seal and of the official documents and records of the Town; 
(c)  Direct and supervise the recording of deeds, mortgages, vital statistics, licenses and permits and such other records as shall by ordinance and law be required to be kept by the Town Clerk; 
(d)  Issue marriage licenses, burial permits and such other licenses and permits as are required by ordinance and law to be issued by Town Clerks; 
(e)  As director of the Department of Administration, the Town Clerk shall be responsible for: the supervision and assignment of all clerical and office employees of the Town, to include those required by boards, committees, and commissions of the Town, setting and [sic] hours of work for such employees, receipt and distribution of all correspondence to the Town, maintenance of a central filing system for all Town agencies (except confidential police files), and assignment of Town office space, except where such space is specifically otherwise assigned by the Town Council, excepting in each case the school department; [and] 
(f)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or by law pertaining to Town Clerks, and such other duties appropriate to his office as the Town Council may require. 
Section 4.05. - Salary and Fees. 
    The Town Clerk and deputy clerk shall receive such annual salaries as shall be fixed by the financial Town meeting. All fees collected by either the Town Clerk or the deputy Town Clerk shall be transmitted to the Town Treasurer and deposited in the general funds of the Town unless otherwise directed by the laws of the state. 
Section 4.06. - Bonds. 
    The Town Clerk and deputy Town Clerk shall respectively within 15 days of the time of being sworn into office give bond to the Town Treasurer with sufficient surety in such sum as the Town Council shall prescribe for the faithful performance of the duties of said office, the cost of such bonds to be paid by the Town. 
ARTICLE V. - SCHOOL COMMITTEE 

Section 5.01. - Membership, Term of Office and Vacancies. 
    There shall be a School Committee consisting of three members who shall be elected to serve staggered four-year terms. In the November 2018 general election, the two candidates receiving the greatest number of votes will be designated Members one and two; each will serve a four-year term. The third Member elected will serve a two-year term. In 2020, there will be an election for one four-year term for Member three. In every general election held thereafter, one or two Committee positions will be open for election/re-election on an alternating schedule. 
(Ref. of 11-8-2016) 
Section 5.01a. - Nonpartisan Candidacy for School Committee. 
    Candidates for the School Committee shall file as nonpartisan candidates with the Board of Canvassers and will appear on the ballot as such. 
Section 5.02. - Vacancies. 
    Any vacancy in said committee shall be filled by the Town Council until the next general election. 
Section 5.03. - Powers and Duties. 
(a)  Procedure. The School Committee shall elect one of its members as Chairman who shall preside at meetings and sign any orders or official papers of the Committee, and shall elect a Clerk who, under the direction of the committee, shall keep a journal of the proceedings of the committee. The clerk need not be a member of the committee. Either [the] Chairman or Clerk may be removed at the pleasure of the committee. The Committee shall adopt its own rules and order of business and shall hold at least nine regular public meetings in every year, at such time and place within the Town, as the committee shall by general order fix and determine. 
(b)  Duties. The School Committee shall determine and control all policies affecting the administration, maintenance and operation of the public schools, and shall have all the powers and perform all the duties prescribed by the laws of the state. 
Section 5.04. - Compensation and Expenses. 
    The School Committee members shall receive such salaries and expenses as shall be fixed by the financial Town meeting, to be paid from the appropriation for the school department. 
Section 5.05. - Maintenance of School Buildings and Grounds. 
    The public works department, when requested by the School Committee, and with the approval of the Town Council, may be made responsible for the care and maintenance of school buildings and grounds, provided that the costs of such care and maintenance shall be charged against the appropriation for the schools. 
ARTICLE VI. - APPOINTIVE OFFICERS AND TOWN SERGEANT 

Section 6.01. - Director of Human Services. 
    There shall be a Director of Human Services appointed by the Town Council to serve at the pleasure of the Council. The Director of Human Services shall administer all welfare statutes of the state or federal government, the administration of which is delegated to the town, and shall have all powers and duties relating to low and moderate income households and those persons in need as shall by law be appropriate to his/her office. The Director of Human Services shall receive such compensation as the Town Council may fix, within the limits of the amount appropriated by the financial town meeting. 
(Ref. of 11-8-2016) 
Section 6.02. - Tax Assessor. 
(a)  Appointment. There shall be a Tax Assessor appointed by the Town Council to serve at the pleasure of the Council. 
(b)  Duties. [The duties of the Tax Assessor are as follows:] 
(1)  It shall be the duty of the Tax Assessor to fix the assessed valuation for purposes of taxation upon all real estate and taxable personal property. 
(2)  He shall apportion upon the assessed valuation the amount of tax ordered to be levied thereon. 
(3)  He shall make and prepare all regular and special assessment rolls and tax rolls for the Town in the manner prescribed by law. 
(4)  He shall perform such other duties as may be required by law. 
(c)  Compensation. The Tax Assessor shall receive such compensation as the Town Council may fix, within the limits of the amount appropriated by the financial town meeting. 
(Ref. of 11-6-2012) 
Section 6.03. - Tax Collector. 
(a)  Appointment. There shall be a Tax Collector appointed by the Town Council to serve at the pleasure of the Council. The Tax Collector's office shall be under the supervision of the Town Treasurer. 
(b)  Duties. It shall be the duty of the Tax Collector to collect and receive all taxes and special assessments for the collection of which the Town is responsible. He shall have all the powers, rights and duties prescribed by the laws of the state for Tax Collectors. 
(c)  Transfer of Funds. The Tax Collector shall periodically[,] at such times as the Town Treasurer shall direct, transfer to the Town Treasurer all Town funds collected by him. 
(d)  Bond. The Tax Collector, within 15 days of the time of being sworn into office, shall give bond to the Town in such sum and with such sureties as the Town Council shall prescribe, for the faithful performance of the duties of such office. The cost of such bond to be paid by the Town. 
(e)  Compensation. The Tax Collector shall receive such compensation as the Town Council may fix, within the limits of the amount appropriated by the financial town meeting. 
(Ref. of 11-6-2012) 
Section 6.04. - Sealer of Weights and Measures. 
    There shall be a sealer of weights and measures appointed by the Town Council to serve at the pleasure of the Council. The sealer of weights and measures shall have such powers and duties as are prescribed by law and shall receive such fees as are prescribed by law. 
Section 6.05. - Animal Control Officer. 
    There shall be an Animal Control Officer appointed by the Town Council, to serve at the pleasure of the Council, who shall be responsible for the supervision and enforcement of laws and ordinances pertaining to dogs and shall have such other powers and duties as are prescribed by law or ordinance. The Animal Control Officer shall receive such compensation as the Town Council may fix, within the limits of the amount appropriated by the Financial Town Meeting. The Town Council shall appoint one or more Appraisers of Dog Damage, one of whom may be the same person as the Animal Control Officer, who shall serve at the pleasure of the Council and who shall have such powers and duties as are prescribed by law or ordinance and shall receive such fees as are provided by law. The Animal Control Officer and any Appraiser of Dog Damage may be appointed as Town Constables under Section 6.06. 
Editor's note- Former §§ 6.06-6.11 renumbered as §§ 6.05-6.10 by direction of the city. 
Section 6.06. - Constables. 
    The Town Council shall appoint constables from among the members of the volunteer emergency service organizations so as to ensure adequate authority in cases of accident, fire, or other such incident. The Council may appoint such additional constables as it shall deem necessary. All appointed constables shall have such powers, duties, and responsibilities as may be prescribed by law. 
Editor's note- See editor's note at § 6.05. 
Section 6.07. - Building and Zoning Official. 
    There shall be a Building and Zoning Official appointed by the Town Council to serve at the pleasure of the Council who shall be responsible for the supervision and enforcement of ordinances relating to buildings, zoning, trailers, campgrounds, minimum housing and other matters which come under the official's jurisdiction pursuant to statute or ordinance. The Building and Zoning Official shall receive such compensation as the Town Council may fix, within the limits of the amount appropriated by the financial town meeting. (G.L. §§ 23-27.3-108.0, 23-27.3-108.1 and G.L. § 23-27.3, et al.) 
Editor's note- See editor's note at § 6.05. 
Section 6.08. - Probate Court. 
    There shall be a probate court as provided by statute which shall exercise the jurisdiction set forth by statute. The Town Council shall appoint a judge of the probate court for a term of two years at the first meeting following the election of the Council. The judge of the probate court shall be a member of the Bar of the State of Rhode Island who shall have been admitted to practice for at least five years at the time of appointment. The judge of probate shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by the financial Town meeting. The judge of probate shall not hold any other elected or appointed position in the Town. The Town clerk shall act as clerk of the probate court. All probate fees collected shall be promptly remitted to the Town of Foster by the clerk of the probate court. 
Editor's note- See editor's note at § 6.05. 
Section 6.09. - Town Solicitor. 
    There shall be a Town Solicitor, appointed by the Town Council, who shall serve as chief legal adviser to the Council and all Town departments, offices and agencies; shall represent the Town in all legal proceedings[;] and shall perform any other duties prescribed by this Charter or by ordinance except as the Council may otherwise provide. The Town Solicitor may appoint an assistant solicitor with the approval of the Town Council. The Assistant Solicitor shall have all the powers to perform all duties which are granted to the Office of Town Solicitor. The Town Solicitor shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed by the financial Town meeting. 
Editor's note- See editor's note at § 6.05. 
Section 6.10. - Town Sergeant. 
    There shall be a Town Sergeant who shall be elected at each general election for a term of two years and until his successor is elected and qualified. Should a vacancy occur in the office of sergeant, the Town Council shall fill the same until the next general election following the vacancy. The sergeant shall have such powers and duties as are prescribed by law and shall receive such fees as are prescribed by law and such additional compensation as may be fixed by the Town Council. 
Editor's note- See editor's note at § 6.05. 
Section 6.11. - Planning Official. 
    There shall be a Planning Official appointed by the Town Council to serve at the pleasure of the Council who shall act as Administrative Officer and staff to the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Review and shall be responsible for maintenance of the Zoning Ordinance, the Land Development and Subdivision Regulations, and the Comprehensive Community Plan; annual preparation of the Capital Program, and the Small Cities Community Development Block Grant and other applicable planning grants, in conjunction with the Treasurer; the Road and Bridge Plan in conjunction with the Director of Public Works; maintenance of the Geographic Information System (GIS) and mapping; long range and short range planning, and such other duties as may be prescribed by Rhode Island law, by town ordinance or by the Town Council or Planning Board. The Planning Official shall receive such compensation as the Town Council shall fix, within the limits of the amount appropriated by the financial town meeting. Any final administrative decision made by the Planning Official is appealable to the Zoning Board of Review. 
(Ref. of 11-8-2016) 
ARTICLE VII. - PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT 

Section 7.01. - Department Responsibilities. 
    There shall be a department of public works that shall be responsible for the building, repairing and upkeep of Town highways, bridges, other public works and Town recreation areas and the repair and upkeep of Town buildings. The department shall also be responsible for such other duties of a like nature as may be assigned to it from time to time by the Town Council. 
Section 7.02. - Director. 
    There shall be a working, properly licensed, director of the department of public works who shall be the head of the department and shall be responsible for the supervision and administration of the work of the department and shall also have all the powers, rights and duties prescribed by the laws of the state for highway surveyors. the director shall be appointed by the Town Council for a term of three years, with the first term to commence on January 2, 2017, pursuant to an employment contract setting forth the terms of his or her employment and the compensation for same. The contract shall provide for removal only in the event of the following: conviction of any felony or any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, violation of any provision of his or her contract, or violation found by the Rhode Island Ethics Commission. 
(Ref. of 11-8-2016) 
Section 7.03. - Compensation. 
    The director of the department of public works shall receive such compensation as the Town Council may negotiate by contract, within the limits of the amount appropriated by the financial town meeting, and which shall not be reduced during the period of the contract. The compensation shall be paid from the appropriation for the department of public works. 
(Ref. of 11-8-2016) 
ARTICLE VIII. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Section 8.01. - Department Responsibilities. 
    There shall be a police department that shall be responsible for the preservation of the public peace, prevention of crime, apprehension of criminals, protection of the rights of persons and property and the enforcement of the statutes of the state and the ordinances of the Town. The police department shall also be responsible for assisting other Town departments and officials in the performance of their duties whenever required. 
Section 8.02. - Chief of Police. 
    There shall be a chief of police appointed by the Town Council for a term of three years, with the first term to commence on January 1, 2007, pursuant to an employment contract setting forth the terms of his or her employment and the compensation for same, which shall not be reduced during the period of the contract; such contract shall provide for removal only in the event of conviction of any felony or any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, violation of any provision of his or her contract, violation found by the Rhode Island Ethics Committee, or disability certified by a physician selected by the Town Council. 
(Ref. of 11-6-2012) 
Section 8.03. - Compensation. 
    The chief of police shall receive such compensation as the Town Council may fix, within the limits of the amount appropriated by the financial town meeting. The compensation shall be paid from the appropriation for the police department. 
(Ref. of 11-6-2012) 
Section 8.04. - Police Officers. 
    All police officers of the Town of Foster shall comply with the laws of the state concerning standards and qualifications for police officers. 
ARTICLE IX. - PLANNING AND ZONING 

Section 9.01. - Planning Board. 
    There shall be a planning board which shall act in an advisory capacity to the Town Council in all matters concerning the physical growth and development of the Town and affecting the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the people. The planning board shall administer the subdivision ordinance of the Town as required by that ordinance. 
Section 9.02. - Membership, Terms of Office and Vacancies. 
    The planning board shall consist of seven members appointed by the Town Council from the qualified electors of the Town, each for a term of five years. One or two members shall be appointed each year at the December meeting of the Town Council. In December 2002, the Town Council will appoint three members, two for five years and one member for four years. No member shall be an elected official of the Town nor shall any member be an employee of the Town. Any vacancy which may occur in the membership of the board shall be filled by the Town Council for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Ref. of 11-8-2016) 
Section 9.03. - Zoning Board of Review. 
    There shall be a zoning board of review which shall have such powers and duties as are prescribed by the laws of the state and ordinances of the Town for such boards. The zoning board of review shall also serve as the platting board of review and shall have such powers and duties as are prescribed by the laws of the state and ordinances of the Town for such boards. 
Section 9.04. - Membership, Terms of Office and Vacancies. 
    The zoning board of review shall consist of five members appointed by the Town Council from among the qualified electors of the Town, each for a term of five years. One member shall be appointed each year at the December meeting of the Town Council. No member shall be an elected official of the Town nor shall any member be an employee of the Town. Any vacancy which may occur in the membership of the board shall be filled by the Town Council for the remainder of the unexpired term. The Town Council shall each year at its December meeting name two auxiliary members of said board who shall sit as active members whenever required. 
Section 9.05. - Conservation Commission. 
    There shall be a Conservation Commission, which shall act in an advisory capacity to the Town Council in all matters concerning the following: wetlands planning and mapping; environmental planning; open space planning; preservation of farmlands; erosion control; gravel and loam stripping control; recycling programs & practices; energy & resource conservation; renewable energy; such other areas of study as may be requested by the Planning Board. 
(Ref. of 11-8-2016) 
Section 9.06. - Membership, Terms of Office and Vacancies. 
    The conservation commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the Town Council from among the qualified electors of the Town, each for a term of three years. Members shall be appointed in December of each year. Commencing in December 1990, appointments shall be as follows: 1990, one member, 1991, three members, 1992 three members, 1993, one member, and so forth. The Town Council may also in December of each year appoint an alternate member for a term of one year, who shall serve as an active member whenever required. Any vacancy which may occur in the membership of the commission shall be filled by the Town Council for the remainder of the unexpired term. No member of the commission shall be an elected official of the Town nor shall any member be an employee of the Town. 
(Ref. of 11-6-1990) 
ARTICLE X. - FINANCIAL PROCEDURES 

Section 10.01. - Fiscal Year. 
    The fiscal year of the Town shall begin on the first day of July and end on the last day of the following June. 
Section 10.02. - Financial Town Meeting. 
    The electors of the Town shall assemble each year in Financial Town Meeting on the first Tuesday in May at 7:00 p.m. for the purpose of ordering any tax which lawfully may be ordered, making appropriations, and transacting any other business appertaining to the financial affairs of the Town which legally may come before such meeting. 
    Whenever a ballot vote is called for at any Financial Town Meeting, the vote shall consist of anonymous voting by means of printed or written ballots or by means of voting machines to preserve the privacy of any Foster residents participating in said vote. Any resident who wishes to cast a vote on a ballot vote issue must cast a ballot indicating YES or NO. If an individual chooses not to cast a ballot, they will not have voted on the issue and will not be counted in the total number of voters participating in that particular vote. Only the total number of cast ballots indicating YES or NO will be considered in determining the outcome of said vote. 
(Ref. of 11-8-2016) 
Section 10.03. - Preparation of the Budget. 
    All budget requests shall be submitted to the Council not later than March 1 each year. The Town Council shall obtain from the head of each department, office and agency estimates of its revenues and expenditures and such supporting data as it may request. In preparing the proposed budget, the Town Council shall review the estimates and may revise them as it may deem advisable. The proposed budget as prepared by the Town Council shall show all anticipated revenues and all proposed expenditures, and the total of proposed expenditures shall not be greater than the total of anticipated revenues, surplus, authorized borrowing and reserves. 
Section 10.04. - Public Hearing on Budget. 
    The Town Council shall hold a public hearing on its preliminary recommended budget, prior to its adoption, which hearing must be at least 30 days prior to the annual financial Town meeting. Sufficient copies of the budget shall be made available by the Town Clerk for the use of all offices, departments and agencies and for the use of interested persons. 
(Ref. of 11-8-1988) 
Section 10.05. - Recommended Budget. 
    The Council shall adopt a recommended budget for presentation to the Financial Town Meeting not later than 15 days preceding its date. No revenue from any source other than the Town tax levy shall be included in the budget as recommended by the Council unless the facts clearly warrant the expectation that such amount will be realized in cash during the fiscal year. Any motion to add a new line item to the budget as adopted by the Town Council for presentation to the Financial Town Meeting shall be filed with the Town Clerk no later than seven days preceding the date of the Financial Town Meeting. Any motion that has not been so filed shall not be considered or voted on at the Financial Town Meeting. 
(Ref. of 11-6-2012) 
Section 10.05.1. - New line items to budget. 
    Any motion to add a new line item to the budget as adopted by the Town Council for presentation to the Financial Town Meeting shall be filed with the Town Clerk no later than seven days preceding the date of the Financial Town Meeting. Any motion that has not been so filed shall not be considered or voted on at the Financial Town Meeting. 
(Ref. of 11-8-1988) 
Section 10.06. - Publication of the Budget. 
    A copy of the budget, as finally adopted by the financial Town meeting, shall be certified by the Town Clerk and filed in the Town Clerk's office. Sufficient copies thereof shall be made available by the Town Clerk for the use of all offices, departments and agencies, and for the use of interested persons. 
Section 10.07. - Capital Program. 
(a)  Submission to the Council. The planning board shall prepare and submit to the Council a five-year capital program at least ninety days and not more than one hundred twenty days prior to the annual financial Town meeting. 
(b)  Contents. [Contents of the capital program shall be as follows:] 
(1)  A clear, general summary of its contents. 
(2)  A list of all capital improvements which are proposed to be undertaken during the five fiscal years next ensuing, with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for such improvements. 
(3)  Cost estimates, methods of financing and recommended schedules, for each such improvement. 
(4)  The estimated annual cost for operating and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or acquired. 
The capital program may be revised and extended each year with regard to capital improvements still pending or in process of construction or acquisition. 
Section 10.08. - Public Hearing on Capital Program. 
(a)  Notice and Hearing. The Council shall give notice by one or more methods of general circulation in the Town giving a general summary of the capital program and stating the time and place where copies of the capital program are available for inspection by the public, and the time and place not less than two weeks after such notice, for a public hearing on the capital program. 
(b)  Adoption. The Council shall adopt the capital program with or without amendment after public hearing and not later than fifteen days preceding the annual financial Town meeting. 
Section 10.09. - Public Records. 
    Copies of the capital program as adopted shall be public records and shall be made available to the public in suitable places in Town. 
Section 10.10. - Capital Reserve Fund. 
    There shall be an annual addition to the amount appropriated by the financial Town meeting equivalent to two percent of the total of all other appropriations approved at the meeting, as a capital reserve fund. Such appropriation, and the addition of the same to the amount to be raised by taxation, shall be made by operation of this section of the Charter, without the necessity of any vote or any other action by the Town. Such amount and any accumulations shall be held and invested by the Town Treasurer as a separate fund, and from time to time any amount from such funds may be expended upon authorization by the annual or a special financial Town meeting for the purchase of improvements set forth in the capital program. 
Section 10.11. - Borrowing. 
    All borrowing by the Town, including borrowing in anticipation of taxes, shall require the approval of the financial Town meeting in accordance with state law. 
Section 10.12. - Accounting Control of Purchases. 
    All purchases made and contracts executed on behalf of the Town shall be pursuant to a written requisition from the head of the office, department or agency whose appropriation will be charged, and no contract or order shall be issued, or payment made to any vendor unless and until the Town Council shall certify that there is to the credit of such office, department or agency a sufficient unencumbered appropriation balance to pay for the supplies, material, equipment or contractual services for which the contract or order is to be issued. 
Section 10.13. - Emergency Appropriations. 
    To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property or the public peace, the Council may make emergency appropriations. Such appropriations may be made by emergency ordinance in accordance with the provisions of Section 2.14 of this Charter. To the extent that there are not available unappropriated revenues to meet such appropriations, the Council may by such emergency ordinance authorize the issuance of emergency notes, which may be renewed from time to time, but the emergency notes and renewals of any fiscal year shall be paid not later than the last day of the fiscal year next succeeding that in which the emergency appropriation was made. 
Section 10.14. - Lapse of Appropriation. 
    Every appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital expenditure, shall lapse at the close of a fiscal year to the extent that it has not been expended or encumbered. An appropriation for a capital expenditure shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made has been accomplished or abandoned; the purpose of any such appropriation shall be deemed abandoned if two fiscal years following the date of appropriation pass without any disbursement from or encumbrance of the appropriation. 
Section 10.15. - Administration of Budget. 
    At such time as the Town Council shall specify, each department, office or agency shall submit work programs for the ensuing fiscal year showing the requested allotments of its appropriation by periods within the year. The Town Council shall review and authorize such allotments with or without revision as early as possible in the fiscal year. The Town Council may revise such allotments during the year if it deems it desirable. 
Section 10.16. - Fees Shall be Paid to Town. 
    All fees received by any office or employee of the Town shall belong to the Town and shall be paid to the Town Treasurer at such intervals as the Town Council may require, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. 
Section 10.17. - Land Use Conveyance Tax. 
    The Town Council shall set aide, as part of each annual budget, no less than 100% of all funds collected pursuant to the Land Use Conveyance Tax which are retained by the Town of Foster as provided by State law. Except as provided for in Section 10.17(a), the funds shall be used exclusively by the Foster Land Trust for the acquisition and preservation of open space pursuant to the legislative Charter of said Land Trust. 
(a)  The operating and administrative budget of the Foster Land Trust shall be approved by the voters at the annual Financial Town Meeting. The approved amount shall be reimbursed to the Town by the Foster Land Trust from the funds designated in section 10.17. 
(Ref. of 11-6-2012) 
Section 10.18. - Special Donative Accounts. 
    The Town Council may authorize accounts to receive donations from private parties for specified public purposes (such as donations to the Recreation Committee for Little League). Such accounts shall be controlled and monitored by the Town Treasurer who may authorize persons to expend from the account on behalf of the town organization, without the necessity of the Town Council approval. 
(Ref. of 11-6-2012) 
ARTICLE XI. - TREASURER'S DEPARTMENT 

Section 11.01. - Appointment, Qualifications, Organization. 
    There shall be a Town Treasurer appointed by the Town Council for a term of three years, with the first term to commence on January 2, 2017, pursuant to an employment contract setting forth the terms of his or her employment and the compensation for same. The contract shall provide for removal only in the event of the following: conviction of any felony or any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, violation of any provision of his or her contract, or violation found by the Rhode Island Ethics Commission. 
(Ref. of 11-8-2016) 
Section 11.02. - Deputy Town Treasurer. 
    There shall be a deputy Town Treasurer appointed by the Town Treasurer with the approval of the Town Council. The deputy treasurer shall have all the powers and perform all the duties, which are granted to the office of Town Treasurer. 
Section 11.03. - Vacancy. 
    If a vacancy shall occur in the office of the Town Treasurer, the deputy Town Treasurer shall succeed to that office until such time as the Town Council shall appoint a successor. 
Section 11.04. - Powers and Duties. 
    The Town Treasurer is hereby vested and shall have and exercise all the powers and duties now and hereafter vested by law in the Town Treasurer, and he shall have and exercise all the powers and duties vested by this Charter in the Town Treasurer or that may hereafter be vested in Town Treasurers by resolution. 
Section 11.05. - Specific Powers. 
    The Town Treasurer shall: 
(1)  Cooperate with the Town Council in compiling the expenditure and revenue estimates for the budget; 
(2)  Receive all fees, rents, funds, [and] money receivable by the Town from the state or federal government, the courts and any department, office or agency of the Town, except as otherwise provided in this Charter or by law; 
(3)  Have custody of all public funds belonging to or under the control of the Town or any department, office or agency of the Town, and deposit all funds coming into his hands in such depositaries as may be designated by the Town Council, or, if no such designation shall be made, in such depositaries as he may choose, provided, however, that deposits in such depositary are insured by an agency of the United States. All interest received on deposits shall be the property of the Town and shall be accounted for and credited to the proper accounts; 
(4)  Have custody of all investments and invested funds of the Town or in the possession of the Town in a fiduciary capacity, and have the safekeeping of all bonds and notes of the Town and the receipt and delivery of Town bonds and notes for transfer, registration or exchange; 
(5)  Exercise control over all expenditures by pre-auditing all bills, invoices, payrolls or other evidence of claims or charges against the Town and seeing that budget appropriations are not exceeded by disbursements in any department, office or agency of the Town; 
(6)  Pay out funds by check, such payments being made only after compliance with the provisions of paragraph (5) above and authorization by the Town Council; 
(7)  Prescribe and maintain an accounting system for the Town and adopt and require standard accounting procedures for all departments, offices and agencies of the Town, which accounts shall include the amounts of all appropriations, and the amounts paid from each, and show in reasonable detail the person to whom and the purpose for which the payments were made, the unpaid obligations against each and the unencumbered balance; 
(8)  Prescribe uniform forms of receipts, vouchers, bills and claims to be used by all departments, offices and agencies of the Town; 
(9)  Prepare a monthly statement of all receipts and disbursements in such detail as the Town Council may require; 
(10)  Prepare as soon as possible[,] and as of the end of each fiscal year, a completed financial statement and report in accordance with state law, for submission to the Town Council and the taxpayers of the Town; [and] 
(11)  Be responsible for the administration of the Tax Collector's Office. 
Section 11.06. - Compensation. 
    The Town Treasurer shall receive such compensation as the Town Council may negotiate by contract, within the limits of the amount appropriated by the financial town meeting, and which shall not be reduced during the period of the contract. The compensation shall be paid from the appropriation for the Finance Department. 
(Ref. of 11-8-2012) 
Section 11.07. - Bonds. 
    The Town Treasurer and the deputy Town Treasurer[,] within fifteen (15) days of the time of being sworn into office, shall give bonds to the Town in such sums and with such sureties as the Town Council shall prescribe for the faithful performance of their duties, the cost of such bonds to be paid by the Town. 
Section 11.08. - Tax Collector. 
(a)  Appointment. A Tax Collector shall be appointed by the Town Council to serve at the pleasure of the Council. The Tax Collector's office shall be under the supervision of the Town Treasurer. 
(b)  Duties. It shall be the duty of the Tax Collector to collect and receive all taxes and special assessments for the collection of which the Town is responsible. He shall have all the powers, rights and duties prescribed by the laws of the state for Tax Collectors. 
(c)  Transfer of Funds. The Tax Collector shall periodically at such times as the Town Treasurer shall direct, transfer to the Town Treasurer all Town funds collected by him. 
(d)  Compensation. The Tax Collector shall receive such compensation salary as may be fixed by the financial Town meeting. 
Section 11.09. - Tax Assessor. 
(a)  Appointment. There shall be a Tax Assessor appointed by the Town Council to serve at the pleasure of the Council. 
(b)  Duties. [The duties of the Tax Assessor are as follows:] 
(1)  It shall be the duty of the Tax Assessor to fix the assessed valuation for purposes of taxation upon all real estate and taxable personal property. 
(2)  He shall apportion upon the assessed valuation the amount of tax ordered to be levied thereon. 
(3)  He shall make and prepare all regular and special assessment rolls and tax rolls for the Town in the manner prescribed by law. 
(4)  He shall perform such other duties as may be required by law. 
(c)  Compensation. The Tax Assessor shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by the financial Town meeting. 
ARTICLE XII. - BOARD OF TAX REVIEW 

Section 12.01. - Election and Term. 
    There shall be a board of tax review consisting of three members elected by the electors of the Town for staggered six-year terms. 
Section 12.02. - Vacancies. 
    Any vacancy in said board shall be filled by the Town Council until the next general election following such vacancy, at which election a member shall be elected for the remainder of such unexpired term. 
Section 12.03. - Duties. 
    The board of tax review shall hear and consider the appeal of any property owner concerning the amount of his assessed valuation as determined by the Tax Assessor. The board shall keep an accurate record of its proceedings which shall be available for public inspection. It shall be the responsibility of the board to meet monthly and to publish the place and time of its meetings. 
Section 12.04. - Correction of Assessments. 
    If it shall appear that the valuation of any property has been erroneously or incorrectly assessed, the board shall have authority to order a correction. Such determination shall be certified by the board to the assessor whose duty it shall be to make such corrections in the valuation as the board may determine. If the tax roll has been certified by the assessor, he shall transmit the findings of the board to the Council, which shall cancel, in whole or in part, the tax based on such valuation in order to effect a correction. 
Section 12.05. - Procedure. 
    The Council shall provide for the procedure of the board of tax review and for the manner of receiving, considering and disposing of appeals. 
Section 12.06. - Appeal. 
    The taking of an appeal to the board of tax review, or any action thereon[,] shall not be construed to limit or restrict the right of any taxpayer to apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for relief from any assessed valuation or tax originally determined by the Tax Assessor or subsequently by the board of review. 
Section 12.07. - Compensation. 
    The members of the board of tax review shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by the financial Town meeting. 
ARTICLE XIII. - NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS 

Section 13.01. - Town Elections. 
    The provisions of the Constitution and the general laws of the state now or hereafter in effect pertaining to elections, special, general and primary, shall govern all Town elections, so far as they may be applicable. 
Section 13.02. - Qualifications. 
    All elected officials shall be qualified electors of the Town. 
Section 13.03. - Forfeiture of Office. 
    Any elected official shall forfeit his office if he (1) lacks at any time during his term of office any qualifications for the office prescribed by this Charter or by law, (2) violates any express provision of this Charter, or (3) is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude. 
Section 13.04. - Canvassing Authority. 
    There shall be a bipartisan canvassing authority appointed by the Town Council as provided by the laws of the state, and such authority shall be vested with all the powers and duties now or hereafter vested by law in the canvassing authority. The Board of Canvassers shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed by the financial Town meeting. 
ARTICLE XIV. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 14.01. - Personal Financial Interest. 
    Any Town officer or employee who has a substantial financial interest, direct or indirect of [or] by reason of ownership of stock in any corporation, in any contract with the Town or in the sale of land, material, supplies or services to the Town or to a contractor supplying the Town shall make known that interest and shall refrain from voting upon or otherwise participating in his or her capacity as a Town officer or employee in the making of such sale or in the making or performance of such contract. Any Town officer or employee who willfully conceals such a substantial financial interest or willfully violates the requirements of this Section shall forfeit his office or position. Violation of this Section with the knowledge, express or implied, of the person or corporation contracting with or making a sale to the Town shall render the contract or sale voidable by the Town Council. 
Section 14.02. - Bidding. 
    All purchases by the Town involving any expenditure greater than $10,000.00, in the aggregate, for construction or $5,000.00 for all other purchases shall be made only after such purchases have been advertised for bids or quotations have been solicited by one or more methods requiring advertising in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town as deemed appropriate by the Town Council or School Committee. Contracts for professional engineering and architectural services are exempt here as in the General Laws of the State of Rhode Island. (See G.L. § 45-55-8.1) 
    The Town Council or School Committee shall not be bound to accept the lowest bid or quotation received but shall in each instance have reserved to itself the right to reject any or all bids. In an emergency, the Town Council or School Committee may make purchases or secure services without the necessity of bidding. In each instance labeled an Emergency, the Town Council or School Committee shall enter into its public record a statement of the emergency and the constraints forcing immediate action. 
    Other purchases of less than $10,000.00, in the aggregate, for construction projects and less than $5,000.00 for all other procurements are considered small purchases within the meaning of G.L. § 45-55-9 (Award of Municipal Contracts, Small Purchases.) These procurements may be made based upon the recommendation of a Department Head or Town Council/School Committee. 
    No procurements or contracts for services shall be artificially divided so as to constitute a small purchase avoiding the requirements of advertising and bidding. 
(Ref. of 11-8-1988; Ref. of 11-8-2016) 
Section 14.02a. - Cooperative Purchasing. 
    Any municipality or regional school district of the state may participate in state master price agreement contracts for the purchase of materials, supplies, services and equipment entered into by the purchasing agent as in the General Laws of the State of Rhode Island. (See G.L. 37-2-56) 
(Ref. of 11-8-2016) 
Section 14.03. - Removal from Office. 
(a)  All officers, commissions, boards and officials appointed by the Town Council for an indefinite term may be removed from office by the Council at any time and with or without cause and with or without a hearing except as otherwise specifically provided in this Charter. 
(b)  All officers, commissions, boards and officials appointed by the Town Council for a definite term, except those appointed to fill the unexpired term of an elected official, may be removed from office for cause by the Council upon the procedure set forth in paragraph (d) of this Section 14.03. 
(c)  All elected officers of the Town, their deputies, and those appointed to fill the unexpired term of an elected official, except for the Town Council, may be removed from office by the Town Council only in the event that such officer (1) lacks at any time during his term of office any qualifications for the office prescribed by this Charter or by law, (2) violates any express provision of this Charter, or (3) is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude. The Council shall carry out such removal upon the procedure set forth in paragraph (d) of this Section 14.03. 
(d)  Removal of a Town official under the provisions of paragraph (b) and (c) of this Section 14.03 shall be upon the following procedure: A statement of the reasons for removal shall be given in writing by the Town Council to the individual being removed. That individual may, within fifteen days of such notification, request in writing a hearing before the Town Council, such hearing to be public or private at the choice of the individual being removed. Upon receipt of a request for hearing, the Town Council shall schedule the same for a date no later than 21 days after the date of the initial notification of removal, and shall give the individual being removed notice of the time, place, and date of the hearing. At the hearing all interested parties shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the Town Council shall be rendered within ten days after the conclusion of the hearing. During the period between the initial notification of removal and the decision of the Town Council, the Town Council may suspend the individual from office. Removal proceedings hereunder shall be subject to review by the courts, and the courts may, in appropriate cases, reverse any order of suspension made by the Council for the period between the initial notification of removal and the decision of the Council. 
Section 14.04. - Charter Revision Committee. 
    The Town Council shall every fifth year after the adoption of this Charter, or more often if it is deemed necessary, appoint a study committee of five members to review this Charter. Said committee shall within six months of its appointment submit to the Town Council a report with its recommendations for amendments, additions or deletions. 
Section 14.05. - Amendments To Charter. 
    Amendments may be made to the Charter in the manner provided by the Constitution of the State. 
Section 14.06. - Separability. 
    If any provision of this Charter is held invalid, the other provisions of the Charter shall not be affected thereby. If the application of the Charter or any of its provisions to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the application of the Charter and its provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. 
ARTICLE XV. - TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 

Section 15.01. - Effective date. 
    This Charter shall be in effect on and after the first day of December 1976. 
Section 15.02. - Ordinances Pursuant to Charter. 
    The Town Council shall proceed to enact or adopt as promptly as possible all ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations which may be necessary to implement the provisions of this Charter. 
Section 15.03. - State and Town Laws and Ordinances. 
    All Town ordinances, resolutions, orders and regulations which are in force when this Charter becomes effective are repealed to the extent that they are inconsistent with or interfere with the effective operation of this Charter or of ordinances, resolutions, orders and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. To the extent that the constitution and laws of the State permit, all laws relating to or affecting the Town or its agencies, officers or employees which are in force when this Charter becomes effective [December 1, 1976,] are superseded to the extent that they are inconsistent or interfere with the effective operation of this Charter or of ordinances, resolutions, orders and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
Section 15.04. - Continuation of Ordinances. 
    All ordinances, resolutions, orders and regulations of the Town in effect at the time this Charter becomes effective [December 1, 1976,], not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter, shall continue in force until amended or repealed. 
Section 15.05. - Continuation of Government. 
    All committees, commissions, boards, departments and offices of the Town in existence at the time this Charter becomes effective [December 1, 1976,] shall continue until abolished, reorganized or superseded by this Charter or action taken under this Charter in accordance with law. 
Section 15.06. - Continuation of Administrative Personnel. 
    Any person holding an office or position in the government of the Town at the time this Charter takes effect shall retain such office or position and continue in office and in the performance of his duties until provision shall have been made in accordance with this Charter for the performance of such duties by a person or body thereunto authorized, or the discontinuance of such office, unless as otherwise provided in this Charter or by law. 
Section 15.07. - Director of Public Welfare. 
    The director of public welfare elected at the November 1976 election shall continue in office until the next general election at which time her term shall expire and the Town Council then elected shall appoint her successor in accordance with Section 6.03 [6.01] of this Charter. 
Section 15.08. - School Committee. 
    Members of the Town School Committee in office on the effective date of this Charter [December 1, 1976,] shall continue in office until the next general election at which time all terms shall expire. 
Section 15.09. - Continuation of Tax Obligations. 
    All taxes levied or assessed by the Town prior to the effective date of this Charter [December 1, 1976,] which have not been collected by the Town, shall be collected with any interest and penalties due thereon, by the Town government established by this Charter. 
Section 15.10. - Continuation of Contracts and Obligations. 
    All leases, franchises and obligations entered into by the Town or for its benefit, prior to the effective date of this Charter [December 1, 1976], shall continue in force and effect. 
Section 15.11. - Pending Actions and Proceedings. 
    No action or proceeding, civil or criminal, in law or equity, pending on the effective date of this Charter [December 1, 1976], brought by or against the Town or any office, department or agency or officer thereof shall be affected or abated by the adoption of this Charter or by anything in this Charter contained. 
Section 15.12. - Transfer of Records and Property. 
    All records, property and equipment whatsoever of any office, department or agency or part thereof, the powers and duties of which are assigned in whole or in part thereof to another office, department or agency by this Charter, shall be transferred and delivered forthwith to the office, department or agency to which such powers and duties are assigned. 
Section 15.13. - Decennial Tax Revaluation. 
    The first decennial tax revaluation called for in Section 2.22 of this Charter shall be performed in 1979. 
Section 15.14. - Continuation of the Conservation Advisory Commission. 
    The members of the present Foster conservation advisory commission shall continue in office and shall constitute the initial seven members of the conservation commission upon the adoption of the proposed amendment to the Foster Home Rule Charter establishing the conservation commission, to be voted on at referendum on November 6, 1990. New members of the conservation commission shall be added in accordance with the schedule set forth in section 9.06 of the Charter, as amended, and as such new members are appointed, the Town Council shall designate the person or persons being replaced by the newly appointed member or members. 
Subpart B - SPECIAL ACTS[1] 
LAND TRUST 

CHARTER AND SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE 
REFERENDUMS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Referendum 
Date Section  Section 
this Charter 11- 2-1976 arts. I-XV Arts. I-XV 11- 8-1988 10.04 10.05.1 14.02 11- 6-1990 9.06 11-12-2012 2.01, 2.10, 2.21, 3.01, 3.04, 4.01 6.02, 6.03, 8.02, 8.03, 9.02, 10.05,       Added 10.17, 10.18 11.06 11- 8-2016 3.03, 5.01, 6.01, 6.11, 7.02, 7.03 9.02, 9.05, 10.02, 11.01, 14.02       Added 14.02a  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is a special act relating to the town, as adopted by the General Assembly during the January 1990 session, and approved by the town electorate on November 6, 1990. Amendments to the original act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform, and the same system of capitalization and citation to state statutes as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Section 1. - Established; authority; purpose. 
    There is hereby established by the Foster Land Trust (hereinafter called the trust) a body politic and corporate and a public instrumentality. The trust shall have the authority to acquire, hold and manage real property and interest therein, including development rights, situated in the town. Such acquisition and management shall be for the purpose of protecting, managing and preserving natural areas, forest land, farm land, aquifer recharge areas, rivers and streams, swamps and marshes, wildlife habitats, walking and bicycle paths, sports and playing fields and historical sites. 
Section 2. - Administration; appointment of trustees; terms. 
    The trust shall be administered by seven (7) trustees, five (5) of whom shall be appointed by the town council, one (1) of whom shall be a member of and selected by the planning board, and (1) of whom shall be a member of and selected by the conservation commission. Each of the trustees shall be appointed for a three (3)-year term. The initial appointments by the town council shall be for a one-year term (1 trustee), two-year terms (2 trustees), and three-year terms (2 trustees) so as to stagger the terms of the trustees. The initial appointment of the planning board shall be for [a] one-year term. The initial appointment of the conservation commission shall be for a two-year term. 
Section 3. - Qualifications of trustees; compensation; election of officers; minutes of meetings. 
    Trustees shall be electors of the Town of Foster and shall hold office until appointment of a successor trustee. Trustees shall not be elected officials or salaried employees of the town. Trustees shall serve without compensation. The trustees shall annually elect a chairman and vice-chairman from their members and shall appoint a secretary who may either be a member or a nonmember. Copies of all meeting minutes shall be submitted to the town council president for distribution as he or she shall see fit and shall be filed with the town clerk. 
Section 4. - Rules; quorum; budget. 
    The trustees shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations governing the conduct of trust affairs, including the acquisition and management of its holdings, not inconsistent with the provisions of this act. All rules and regulations of the trust are subject to the approval of the Town Council President. Decision of the trustees shall be by majority of those present and voting, except that decisions on the acquisition of land, easements, rights-of-way and other uses referred to in section 1 of this trust shall be by majority vote of all trustees. The trustees shall prepare a budget that shall be submitted to the Town council for review and approval and then be presented to the financial town meeting for adoption. The funds so authorized will be paid by the Town Treasurer in accordance with the usual procedures of the town. 
Section 5. - Duties and powers. 
    The trust shall have the authority to: 
(a)  Purchase or otherwise acquire fee simple or any lesser interest in real property owned by consenting landowners, including development rights and conservation easements, or any other interest consistent with the purposes of this act; 
(b)  Accept and apply for gifts, grants or loans of funds or services from any source, public (local, state or federal) or private, and comply, subject to the provisions of this act, with any terms or conditions thereof; 
(c)  Administer and manage land and interests in land held by it in a manner consistent with the purposes of this act and with the terms of any grant or devise by which such land or interest was acquired; convey any such land or interest to a nonprofit corporation, subject to the provisions of paragraph (e) of this section 5, provided that such land shall continue to be used in a manner consistent with the purposes of this act and with the terms of any grant or devise by which such land was acquired by the trust; [and] 
(d)  Employ such persons as are necessary to acquire, manage and preserve land and interests in land held by the trust. 
(e)  Dispose of all or any portion of its real property or interest therein held by it, whenever in the opinion of the trustees said lands or properties have become unsuitable or have ceased to be used for the purpose set forth in this act. Such disposition shall be made only by a vote of the trustees in which at lease [least] five (5) members vote in favor of such a disposition and further only after having been approved by vote of the town council and or a financial town meeting in accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the Town of Foster governing disposition of land. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to authorize the sale, lease or conveyance of lands or improvements held by the trust as part of a charitable trust or acquired by gift or devise for the public use, unless authorized by the deed conveying same to the trust or by agreement entered into between the donor and the trust. 
(f)  Invest such portions of its funds as may be deemed prudent, in any investment that the Town of Foster may invest its funds in including, but not limited to, "homeowners notes," so-called through the town treasurer. 
(g)  Otherwise do all things necessary for the performance of its duties, the fulfillment of its obligation and the conduct of its business. 
Section 6. - Disposition of funds. 
    All funds collected by virtue of the town's bonding authority for the purpose of financing the activities of the trust under this act, any applicable federal or state funds, and funds received under the provisions of section 5(b) of this act shall be deposited in a fund for the trust to be established by the treasurer of the town. Additional monies or other assets received as voluntary contributions, grants or loans; funds appropriated to the trust by vote of the financial town meeting; or proceeds from disposal of real property or interests shall be deposited into said account. All expenses lawfully incurred by the trust in carrying out the provisions of this act shall be evidenced by proper vouchers and shall be paid by the treasurer of the town only upon submission of warrants duly approved by the trust and the town council. All investment income shall accrue for the benefit of the trust. Upon termination or dissolution of the trust, the title to real estate and interests thereon, all funds and other properties owned by the trust which remain after payment or making provision for payment of all bonds, notes and other obligations of the trust shall vest in the town. 
Section 7. - Use of revenues, income and real and personal property. 
    The trust and all its revenues, income and real and personal property, used by the trust for furtherance of its public purposes, shall be exempt from taxation, and the trust shall not be required to pay any tax, excise or assessment to the state of [or] any of its political subdivisions. 
Section 8. - Severability of act provisions; constitutional requirements. 
    The provisions of this act are severable, and if any provision hereof shall be held invalid in any circumstances such invalidity shall not affect any other provisions or circumstances. This act shall be construed in all respects so as to meet all constitutional requirements. In carrying out the purposes and provisions of this act, all steps shall be taken which are necessary to meet constitutional requirements whether or not such steps are required by statute. 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances contained in this chapter and in the following chapters shall be designated and cited as the "Code of Ordinances, Town of Foster, Rhode Island," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited "Foster Town Code." 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all other ordinances of the town, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the town council: 
    Charter. Reference to "this Charter" or "the Charter" shall mean the Home Rule Charter of the Town of Foster, Rhode Island, as printed in Part I of this Code. 
    Code. Reference to "the Code" or "this Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, Town of Foster, Rhode Island, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. The time in which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; and if the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday, that shall be excluded. 
    Council, town council. The words "the council" or "town council" shall mean the town council of the Town of Foster, Rhode Island. 
    County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean Providence County, Rhode Island. 
    Gender. Words used in the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
    In the town, within the town. The words "in the town" or "within the town" shall mean and include all territory over which the town now has, or shall hereafter acquire jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
    Keeper and proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or employee. 
    Land, real estate. The words "land" and "real estate" shall include rights and easements of an incorporeal nature. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Name of officer. Whenever the name of an officer is given, it shall be construed as though the words "of the Town of Foster" were added. 
    Oath, affirmation. When an oath is required or authorized by law, an affirmation in lieu thereof may be taken by a person having conscientious scruples against taking an oath. An affirmation has the same effect as an oath. 
    Or, and. The word "or" may be read as the word "and," and the word "and" may be read as the word "or," if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" shall include a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a natural person. 
    Personal property. The words "personal property" shall include every species of property except real property. 
    Plural, singular. Words importing the singular shall include the plural; words importing the plural shall include the singular. 
    Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. The word "property" shall include real, personal and mixed estates and interests. 
    Real property. The words "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Shall, may. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean that part of the street exclusively reserved for pedestrians and constructed for such purpose. 
    Signature or subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Rhode Island. 
    State law references. Whenever reference is made to the "General Laws" or "G.L. 1956," this shall mean the General Laws of Rhode Island, 1956, as amended. Whenever reference is made to "Public Laws" or "P.L.," this shall mean the Public Laws of Rhode Island. 
    Tenant or occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies, the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Town. The words "the town" or "this town" shall be construed as if the words "of Foster, Rhode Island" followed them. 
    Ways, streets, highways. The words "ways," "streets" and "highways" shall be construed as including boulevards, avenues, courts, lanes, alleys, squares, places and sidewalks, and each of these words includes every other of them. 
    Written, in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections, history notes and references. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type, the history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of the Code, and the references scattered throughout the Code shall not be deemed or taken to be a substantive part of any section nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
Sec. 1-4. - Provisions deemed continuation of prior ordinances. 
    The provisions of this Code, so far as they are in substance the same as those ordinances existing on the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal of ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinances repealed. 
Sec. 1-6. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the town council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance or resolution of the town any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code, ordinance or resolution the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense, where no specific penalty is provided therefor either in this Code or in state law, the violation of any such provision of this Code, or any such ordinance or resolution, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or imprisonment not exceeding 30 days in some jail or house of correction, and/or the violator shall be required to pay restitution in cases involving property damage or personal injury in an amount up to $2,500.00, and/or be required to provide voluntary community service for the town or its agencies for not more than ten days for any one offense, unless other penalties therefor, or penalties within other limits, are specially prescribed by statute, to be prosecuted by some officer appointed for that purpose, and to be recovered to the use of the town. Each day any violation of this Code or of any such ordinance or resolution shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to the penalty provided in subsection (a) of this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any town ordinance or resolution shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be, by the town, abated as provided by law. Each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein, or in the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission thereof from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code of ordinances by the council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section of the Code in substantially the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, Town of Foster, Rhode Island, is hereby amended to read as follows:... (Set out new provisions in full)...." 
(c)  If a new section not then existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, Town of Foster, Rhode Island, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article, chapter or other designation, as the case may be), to be numbered _____, which reads as follows:... (Set out new provisions in full)...." 
(d)  In lieu of subsection (c) of this section, when the council desires to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature embracing a subject not previously existing in the Code, which the council desires to incorporate into the Code, a provision in substantially the following language may be made a part of the ordinance: "It is the intention of the council, and it is hereby ordained, that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made part of the Code of Ordinances, Town of Foster, Rhode Island, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish such intention." 
(e)  All sections, articles, chapters or other provisions of this Code desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section number, article number, chapter or other number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by town personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following ordinances when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by the town, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the town, or any evidence of the town's indebtedness, or any contract, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or obligation assumed by the town or creating interest and sinking funds; 
(2)  Any right or franchise, permit, or other right granted by any ordinance; 
(3)  Any personnel regulations; any ordinance or resolution establishing salaries of town officers and employees or civil service rules; 
(4)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, alley or other public way in the town; 
(5)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades in the town; 
(6)  Any appropriation ordinance or any ordinance levying or imposing taxes; 
(7)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(8)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the town; 
(9)  Any ordinance establishing the official plat of the town; 
(10)  Any zoning map amendment; 
(11)  Any ordinance annexing territory or excluding territory from the town; 
(12)  Any ordinance creating special districts or assessing taxes therefor; 
(13)  Any ordinance granting specific tax exemptions; 
(14)  Any temporary or special ordinance; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by the town, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the town, or any evidence of the town's indebtedness, or any contract, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or obligation assumed by the town or creating interest in sinking funds saved from repeal, § 1-10(1); any right or franchise, permit, or other right granted by any ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-10(2); any appropriation ordinance or any ordinance levying or imposing taxes saved from repeal, § 1-10(6); building code board of review, § 10-38; law enforcement, ch. 14; recreation department, § 22-31 et seq.; planning, ch. 24; planning board, § 24-31 et seq.; administration and enforcement of soil erosion and sediment control, § 26-36 et seq.; administration of subdivision regulations, ch. 32; taxation, ch. 34; administration of zoning regulations, § 38-36 et seq.; zoning board of review, § 38-61 et seq. 
State Law reference- Towns and cities, G.L. 1956, § 45-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Procedures relating to access to public records. 
    The following procedures are adopted by the town council pursuant to the requirements of G.L. 1956, § 38-2-1 et seq. Any person seeking access to any public record which is required to be made available by G.L. 1956, § 38-2-1 et seq. shall: 
(1)  Make a written, signed request to the custodian of such records stating specifically which records are sought for inspection and/or copying. 
(2)  The custodian shall, within ten business days of such requests, either permit or deny such request; provided, however, that failure to take any action within ten days shall be deemed to be a denial. Furthermore, the person to whom the request is made may, for good cause, extend the period for permitting or denying a request to 30 days. 
(3)  The custodian shall designate the time and place at which records may be inspected or copied. In no case shall records be required to be removed from the town officers, and in no case shall records be required to be made available outside normal business hours. 
(4)  As provided by G.L. 1956, § 38-2-4, a reasonable charge shall be levied for search or retrieval of documents. Hourly costs for search and retrieval shall be $15.00 per hour, and no cost shall be charged for the first ten minutes of search or retrieval. The person making the request shall be informed at the time the request is received of the charges and shall be furnished an estimate of the cost which will be incurred. Before any copies are made, the person making the request shall pay the estimated cost, and before any copies are delivered, the person making the request shall pay any balance due after credit for the estimated cost paid. 
(5)  Any person denied the right to inspect may, within 20 days of the date of denial, petition the town council for a review as provided in G.L. 1956, § 38-2-8, and the town council shall make a decision within ten business days after the submission of the review petition. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1989(1), §§ 1-5) 
State Law reference- Public records, G.L. 1956, § 38-2-1 et seq. 
Secs. 2-2-2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TOWN COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Town councils, G.L. 1956, § 45-5-1 et seq. 

Secs. 2-31-2-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Any personnel regulations, any ordinance or resolutions establishing salaries of town officers and employees or civil service rules saved from repeal, § 1-10(3); animal control officer, § 8-31 et seq.; building inspector, § 10-2; law enforcement, ch. 14; police, § 14-2; recreation department, § 22-31 et seq.; recreation director, § 22-51 et seq. 
State Law reference- Election and qualification of officers, G.L. 1956, § 45-4-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-61. - Advertisement of job vacancies. 
    Any and all job vacancies within the town shall be properly advertised by the town clerk in a paper of general circulation. 
(Ord. of 9-21-1989, § 1) 
Sec. 2-62. - Screening of job applications. 
    After the deadline for applications, it shall be the duty of the department head to screen all applications for such position. 
(Ord. of 9-21-1989, § 2) 
Sec. 2-63. - Final interviews. 
    It shall be the duty of each department head to notify the council president of the date and time of the final interviews. The council president shall have the responsibility of having at least one councilmember present during the interview. When vacancies occur within the financial or administrative departments, the town clerk shall be present during the final interview process along with the town councilmember and department head. 
(Ord. of 9-21-1989, § 3) 
Sec. 2-64. - Final candidates. 
    It shall be the duty of the department head to submit to the town councilmembers a letter of introduction as well as a copy of the application and resume of the final candidate. 
(Ord. of 9-21-1989, § 4) 
Sec. 2-65. - Meeting with newly appointed employees. 
    It shall be the duty of the department head to have the final candidate present at the regular scheduled town council meeting, on the night of such appointment so that the entire council can meet the newly appointed employee. 
(Ord. of 9-21-1989, § 5) 
Secs. 2-66-2-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - INDEMNIFICATION OF PUBLIC OFFICERS AND OFFICIALS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Indemnification of municipal officers and employees, G.L. 1956, § 45-15-16. 

Sec. 2-86. - Application of division. 
    This division shall apply to any and all town officers and council, board and commission members and elected officials of the town and town employees. This division shall also apply to members of the town school committee. Indemnification shall be provided under this division whether or not such officers, members and officials are paid. 
(Ord. of 11-6-1986, § 2; Ord. of 5-8-2003(1)) 
Sec. 2-87. - Scope of indemnification. 
    The town shall indemnify any and all public officers and council, board and commission members, elected officials and town employees as defined herein, from all reasonable loss, expense and damage, including legal fees and court costs, expense and damage, including legal fees and court costs, if any, arising out of any claim, action, compromise, settlement or judgment by reason of any intentional tort or by reason of any alleged error or misstatement or act or omission, or neglect or violation of the rights of any person under any federal or state law, including misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance or any act, omission or neglect contrary to any federal or state law which imposes personal liability on any such officer, member, official or employee if such officer, member, official or employee, at the time of such intentional tort or act, omission or neglect was acting within the scope of his official duties. The town council may decline to indemnity any such officer, member, official or employee for any misstatement, error, act, omission or neglect if the same resulted from willful, wanton or malicious conduct on the part of such officer, member, official or employee. 
(Ord. of 11-6-1986, § 1; Ord. of 5-8-2003(1)) 
Sec. 2-88. - Legal counsel. 
    It shall be the duty of any person seeking indemnification under this division to promptly report to the town council any claim, which has been filed against him or her. The town council shall then determine if the claim is covered by the provisions of this division. If it so finds, the town council shall then refer the defense of the claim to the town solicitor at no cost to the officer, member, official or employee. The town council, in its sole discretion, may decide in a particular case to engage the services of outside counsel at no cost to the officer, member, official or employee. 
(Ord. of 11-6-1986, § 3; Ord. of 5-8-2003(1)) 
Secs. 2-88-2-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE 

Sec. 2-101. - Reserve fund. 
(a)  There is hereby created a reserve fund, which shall be administered by the town treasurer and which shall be used solely for the purpose of providing such sums as may be required to fund any unanticipated deficit caused by a revenue shortfall as identified by the town treasurer at the close of any fiscal year as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(b)  In carrying out the provisions of the above, the town treasurer shall at the end of the fiscal year transfer all surplus general funds to the reserve fund. 
(c)  Whenever the aggregate of the monies and securities held for the credit of the reserve fund exceeds ten percent of total projected fiscal year expenditures, consisting of the aggregate of (1) town's share of the expenditures for the Foster-Glocester Regional School District, (2) the expenditures for the Foster School District, and (3) the expenditures for the town municipal government minus the two percent capital investment; the excess shall be transferred to the capital reserve fund to be used solely for the purposes of reduction of town indebtedness, payment of debt service, funding of capital projects, and/or to carry out the provisions of subsection (f) below. However, there shall be no expenditures of money without passage of specific appropriation at a financial town meeting. 
(d)  At any time prior to May 1 of a fiscal year, upon notification by the town treasurer to the town council that it is indicated that total general resources will be less than the original estimates upon which current appropriations were based, the town council may submit to a special or annual town meeting a resolution for proposed appropriations from the reserve fund. The town treasurer's notification shall be based upon the revenues projected at the previous town meeting. Revenues in the reserve fund may also be appropriated in the event of an emergency, declared by the town council involving the public peace, health, safety, comfort, or welfare of the inhabitants of the town and for the protection of persons and property. Such appropriations need to be approved at a special town meeting called for that purpose. After final action by a town meeting defining the amount to be withdrawn from the reserve fund, the town treasurer shall transfer to the town's general fund the amount specified in the enacted resolution from the reserve fund. 
(e)  Whenever a transfer has been made pursuant to subsection (d) of this section, the amount of the transfer shall be returned to the reserve fund in the second fiscal year following the fiscal year in which the transfer was made, and, if necessary, in subsequent fiscal years. 
(f)  The town treasurer may make an interfund transfer under the following circumstances and on the following conditions: 
(1)  The town treasurer must make the findings that: all cash in the town general fund has been or is about to be exhausted and the anticipated cash expenditures exceed the anticipated cash available. 
(2)  The town treasurer may make the interfund transfer from the reserve fund to the town general fund and/or capital reserve fund. 
(3)  The reserve fund, from which money is transferred, must be made whole by June 30 in the same fiscal year as the transfer is made. 
(4)  The interfund transfer shall not be considered borrowing and may be made notwithstanding the provisions of article X, section 10.11 of the Charter. 
(5)  A memorandum of transfer will be transmitted to the town council president or, in his absence, to the town council vice president and a copy shall be maintained in the town treasurer's office. 
(Ord. of 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 2-102. - Other post-employment benefits trust fund. 
(a)  Establishment of fund. 
(1)  There shall be established a fund, separate and apart from the general revenues of the town, known as the "Other Post-Employment Benefits Trust Fund," hereby referred to as the "OPEB Trust Fund." This fund shall be separated into two subaccounts, town and school, for funding and reporting purposes. 
(2)  The OPEB trust fund is hereby established to provide the town with a fund into which funds shall be deposited from time to time, but at least annually, to provide funds to pay the town's liability for payment of premiums and/or related expenses in connection with medical and other benefits for its employees after retirement, which include but is not limited to medical, dental vision, life insurance, disability insurance and any other OPEB benefits, whether optional or mandatory, in effect now or to be in effect in the future, as the time of retirement. 
(3)  The OPEB trust fund shall be administered by the treasurer as hereinafter provided. Such OPEB trust fund shall consist of: 
a.  All funds appropriated or otherwise made available by the town for the purposes of meeting the current and future OPEB costs payable by the town. 
b.  Amounts contributed or otherwise made available by employees of the town for the purpose of meeting future OPEB costs payable by the town. 
c.  All interest, dividends and other income derived from the above. 
d.  Any surplus derived from the town's medical accounts as measured by the treasurer until 100 percent funded. 
e.  Any dividends derived from the town's involvement with West Bay Community Health (WBCH) as measured by the treasurer until 100 percent funded. 
(b)  Responsibilities of treasurer. The treasurer shall be responsible for the general administration, investment and maintenance of the OPEB trust fund and for the payment of insurance premiums and/or other post-employment benefits. The treasurer may, from time to time, adopt rules and regulations for its administration, and for the conduct and transaction of business affairs. The treasurer shall have such power as may be necessary to discharge his/her duties, including but not limited to the power to interpret and construe the provisions hereof, determine all questions of date or retirement, eligibility, duration of service, continuity of service, dates of birth, participation or retirement, and similar related matters subject to existing contract provisions, and his/her determination of all questions shall be binding upon all participants or any others concerned, subject to existing contract provisions. All matters falling outside of the scope of the powers and duties of the treasurer and not otherwise provided for herein shall be referred to the town council, which shall have the power to act thereon. 
(c)  Fiscal powers of the treasurer. The treasurer shall have, with respect to all monies and properties of the OPEB trust fund at any time held by him/her, power in his/her discretion to invest and reinvest in any personal property including, but not by way of limitation, common or preferred stocks, bonds, certificates of deposit, interest of participation, mutual funds, and other forms of security or investment, without being limited in any respect by statute or court rule or decision of any jurisdiction now or hereafter in force purporting to limit or otherwise affect investments by the treasurer and without regard to the proportion that such property, or properties of a similar character so held or thereafter acquired, may bear to the entire amount of the OPEB trust fund, and to make such payment from such OPEB trust fund as herein provided. 
    The treasurer shall have power and authority, in his/her discretion, to have a bank or trust company which is licensed in the state, or any other financial institution, to serve as his/her agent in keeping custody of the monies and securities in such fund, in keeping accounts and for other duties in connection with the administration of the OPEB trust fund; and he/she is further authorized, in his/her discretion, to employ such bank or trust company or financial institution as agent in the investment of the OPEB trust fund and otherwise to assist in its management, and to pay for any of such foregoing services. As such, there shall be an investment policy, adopted by the town council, governing the investment of the fund. There shall be no liability on the part of the treasurer in the management of the OPEB trust fund by such an agent selected in good faith. 
(d)  Consultants. The treasurer shall have the power at his/her discretion to employ one or more consultants, actuaries, accountants, attorneys or other professionals at such times as are necessary or advisable to assure the maintenance of the OPEB trust fund. An actuary shall perform an actuarial valuation of the town's OPEB liabilities and funding schedule, as required by and in accordance with GASB 45, for the purposes thereof, and may assist with the administration of the OPEB trust fund. The expenses of the consultants will be payable from the OPEB trust fund unless otherwise authorized by the town council or the taxpayers of the Town of Foster at a FTM (financial town meeting). 
(e)  Liability of treasurer. The treasurer shall use ordinary care and reasonable diligence in the performance of his/her duty and shall not be personally liable for any error of omission or commission unless such error results from his or her own gross negligence, willful misconduct or lack of good faith; nor shall the treasurer be personally liable for any act of any other related party. 
(f)  Encumbrances of find assets void. No part of the OPEB trust fund assets shall be subject, in any manner, to sale, transfer, alienations, pledge, assignment, attachment, or any other encumbrance, whether voluntary or involuntary, by operation of law or court order. Any attempt to sell, transfer, alienate, pledge, assign or otherwise encumber the assets of the OPEB trust fund shall be void and of no force and effect. 
(g)  Overpayments; credits; deposit of refunds. To the extent a distribution has been made from the OPEB trust fund that was based on incorrect or inaccurate information received by the treasurer at the time, or resulted in an overpayment, the treasurer shall use his/her best efforts to apply such overpayment to the next succeeding payment due or otherwise receive a credit, and deposit any refund received, into the OPEB trust fund to the extent of such overpayment. 
(h)  Statements of payments from fund; payment of expenditures. At any time, but not more frequently than weekly, the treasurer shall submit a statement or invoice for premiums and/or other allowable related costs due during such fiscal period for post-employment benefits due retired employees of the town, which statement shall include the amount to be paid from the OPEB trust fund. The treasurer shall make arrangements to withdraw from the OPEB trust fund an amount sufficient to pay such expenditures due. 
(Ord. of 8-23-2012, §§ I-VIII) 
Secs. 2-103-2-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-126-2-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FOSTER/GLOCESTER REGIONAL JUVENILE HEARING BOARD 

Sec. 2-136. - Board established; referrals. 
(a)  There is hereby established within the town and the Towns of Foster and Glocester, a regional juvenile hearing board with the powers set forth in this article and said statue for the purpose of hearing all cases referred to such board by the chief of police, or his designee, from the Towns of Foster and Glocester, involving persons under the age of 18 years, who are charged with violating the criminal laws of the state and said towns, including wayward, misdemeanor and status offenses and violations of local town ordinances and the provisions of G.L. 1956, § 16-19-1 et seq. regarding compulsory school attendance. 
(b)  Referrals to the juvenile hearing board will be made by the chief of police or his designee. Referral to said juvenile hearing board shall not be offered to any juvenile: 
(1)  Who has been charged with the crime of assault or battery, unless specifically approved by the chief of police of the Towns of Foster and Glocester; 
(2)  Who has been accused of a controlled substance offense, except for the possession of alcohol, unless specifically approved by the chief of police of the Towns of Foster or Glocester; 
(3)  Who shall have been twice previously referred to said board or who shall have been once previously referred to said board and refused or failed to abide by the sanctions imposed or to make restitution recommended by said board; or 
(4)  Who at the time of the alleged commission of such juvenile offense was within the custody and control of the family court, not to include guardianship matters. 
(c)  The board, after investigation, may refuse to hear any case in which it appears that a juvenile was wrongfully referred in violation of this ordinance and the statue. In addition, the board may refuse to hear any case in which the juvenile refuses to supply the board with requested information, fails to appear when requested or refuses to cooperate with the proceedings of the board. The board shall immediately notify the chief of police from the applicable jurisdiction, in writing, of any case it refuses to hear, and the chief of police shall take whatever further action he/she deems necessary, including referral to family court. 
(Ord. No. 00-14-1, § I, 1-6-2000) 
Sec. 2-137. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The juvenile hearing board shall hear all cases referred to it by the chief of police or his designee and shall determine whether there is reasonable cause to believe that the person so referred has committed the offense alleged and whether such person shall be disciplined as a result thereof. A further condition of referral is that the juvenile admits to his involvement in the incident and waives his rights pursuant to said statute. In making such determination, the juvenile hearing board shall not be bound by the customary rules of evidence, and may consider all probative and relevant evidence whether or not such evidence would be admissible in a court of competent jurisdiction. In those cases in which the juvenile hearing board shall determine that there is reasonable ground to believe that the offense was committed by the person so charged and that such person should be disciplined, it shall recommend sanctions (other than incarceration) and may direct restitution, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, an attempt to provide with cooperation of the town administrator or the superintendent of schools suitable service to the Towns of Foster and Glocester. In any such proceeding the juvenile hearing board, prior to imposing sanctions, shall request the juvenile offender and his parents to agree to the sanctions imposed, and the amount of restitution and manner of making the same. In ordering restitution, the juvenile hearing board shall take into account the juvenile offender's ability to pay, and the amount of actual damage caused as a result of the commission of such offense. 
(b)  Sanctions imposed by the board shall be for a period of time not to exceed six months and may consist of, but not be limited to: community service, reasonable restitution, direct work service for the victim, letters of apology, curfews, referrals for counseling and intervention services, alternative dispute resolution programs, driving license restrictions, etc. The sanctions or conditions set forth shall be in writing, clearly understood by the juvenile and his parents/guardian and a signed copy shall be provided to them. The specific sanctions shall be completed within 60 days except with regard to school related and counseling issues. If sanctions are not agreeable to the juvenile or parents/guardian, the offense complaint shall be returned to the referring person who in turn may refer the matter to family court. If a referral is made to family court under such conditions, a notation shall be included to inform the court of the action of the juvenile hearing board to try to resolve the matter and the reasons why this was unsuccessful. Likewise, if a juvenile fails to comply with the agreed upon sanctions, without good cause, the action of the juvenile hearing board may be vacated and the matter referred the matter to family court with a notation to that effect. The juvenile hearing board shall provide the chief judge of the family court with an annual report as to its activity. 
(Ord. No. 00-14-1, § I, 1-6-2000) 
Sec. 2-138. - Membership. 
    The membership of the regional juvenile hearing board shall consist of seven persons and two alternates over the age of 18 years, all of whom shall have been residents of the respective towns at least three years, and none of whom shall be attorneys admitted to practice before the supreme court of the state. The board shall consist of citizens of the town and the Town of Glocester who have a background in or related to the fields of education, probation and parole, human services, community youth programs, or who are members of the clergy, former law enforcement or judicial officials or citizens who the council deems have the credentials that would be an asset to the board. The town councils shall appoint seven members as follows: Three members from the town, and four members from the Town of Glocester. The two alternates will be comprised of one town representative and one Glocester representative. The juvenile justice planning committee shall be asked to comment on all proposed appointments. Each town council shall appoint a member whose term shall expire on September 30, 2000, and who shall serve thereafter until his successor is appointed and qualified; a member whose term shall expire on September 30, 2001, and who shall serve thereafter until his successor is appointed and qualified; and three members, two from Glocester and one from Foster, whose terms shall expire on September 30, 2002, and who shall serve thereafter until their successors are appointed and qualified. The two alternates shall be appointed for a period of one-year terms to expire on September 30. During the month of August and annually thereafter, the Foster and Glocester town councils shall appoint a member or members to succeed the member or members whose terms will next expire, to serve for a term of three years, commencing on October 1, and thereafter until their successors are appointed and qualified. In the event of a vacancy occurring in the office of a member by death, resignation or otherwise, such vacancy shall be filled in like manner as the original appointment, but only for the remainder of the term of the former member. No member of the regional juvenile hearing board shall be entitled to receive any compensation by reason of his service on the board. 
(Ord. No. 00-14-1, § I, 1-6-2000) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 12; taverns, victualing houses, cook shops, etc, § 12-326 et seq.; indecent intoxication, § 20-2. 
State Law reference- Alcoholic beverages, G.L. 1956, § 3-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 4-1-4-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LIQUOR LICENSE REGULATIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Business licenses, § 12-31 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcoholic beverage shall have the same definition as the term "beverage" in G.L. 1956, § 3-1-1 et seq. 
(Ord. of 1-4-1990(1), § 4) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 4-32. - Applicability of article provisions. 
    All licenses are issued or renewed subject to this article. No license shall be issued or renewed without the receipt of a signed statement by the licensee to the effect that such licensee is aware of this article and agrees to comply with them as a condition to the holding of such license. 
(Ord. of 1-4-1990(1), § 16) 
Sec. 4-33. - Posting of license. 
    The license for the premises shall be posted in plain view and shown to any authorized person upon demand. 
(Ord. of 1-4-1990(1), § 1) 
Sec. 4-34. - Restrooms. 
    A restroom for each sex, accessible to the public, shall be maintained in good working order upon the premises of all class B, C and D licenses. 
(Ord. of 1-4-1990(1), § 2) 
Sec. 4-35. - Telephone. 
    A telephone, accessible to the public, shall be maintained in good working order upon the premises of all licensees. 
(Ord. of 1-4-1990(1), § 3) 
Sec. 4-36. - Licensed premises. 
    All licenses are issued for particular specified premises. A license for premises which are a part of a building does not allow use of other portions of the building or property. All applications for a license shall be accompanied by a scale drawing showing the premises for which application is made, including all parking and driveway areas. Licensees who obtained their licenses prior to the adoption of this article shall, within 30 days of its adoption, submit such scale drawings showing the premises for which the license was originally issued. The licensed premises may not be expanded or reduced without the prior approval of the board of public safety. 
(Ord. of 1-4-1990(1), § 5) 
Sec. 4-37. - Parking and outside areas. 
    Parking areas and other outside areas associated with and used by the patrons and/or help of the licensed premises shall be kept clean and free of litter. Such areas shall be cleaned and free of litter prior to each day's opening time. 
(Ord. of 1-4-1990(1), § 6) 
Sec. 4-38. - Supervision of licensed premises and associated areas. 
(a)  The licensed premises and associated parking and outside areas and the conduct of patrons therein and thereon shall be properly supervised by the licensee so as to preclude the annoyance or disturbance of the public and persons residing in the surrounding area and to ensure that no unlawful activity is engaged in by patrons, agents or employees. 
(b)  Patrons shall not be allowed to congregate or remain in the associated parking or outside areas longer than reasonably necessary for them to go to the licensed premises from their vehicles or to their vehicles from the licensed premises. 
(c)  Patrons shall not be allowed to consume any beverage (alcoholic or nonalcoholic) in the associated parking areas or in any area on the property other than the licensed premises portion thereof. 
(d)  All fights, disturbances or other violence shall be reported immediately to the town police department by the licensee. 
(e)  No alcoholic beverages shall be removed from the licensed premises of a class B, C or D licensee by any patron. 
(Ord. of 1-4-1990(1), § 7) 
Sec. 4-39. - Hours of operation of licensed premises. 
    All sales or service of intoxicating beverages shall cease on or before the required closing time. 
(Ord. of 1-4-1990(1), § 8) 
Sec. 4-40. - Clearing of premises and associated areas. 
(a)  All patrons shall leave the licensed premises within one-half hour after the required closing time, and all employees shall leave the licensed premises within one hour after the required closing time, and all employees and patrons shall leave the associated parking and outside areas within one hour after the required closing time. 
(b)  In the event of extenuating circumstances, the licensee may request an extension from the commanding officer on duty of the town police department. Such an extension, if granted, shall be for a specified time. 
(c)  No alcoholic beverages shall be consumed by the licensee or employees after the required closing time. 
(d)  No one, other than employees, police and enforcement personnel, shall be admitted to the premises after the required closing time. 
(e)  Upon application to the board of public safety, a licensee with victualing privileges may be granted permission to be open for the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages only, at times other than the allowable times to dispense alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 1-4-1990(1), § 9) 
Sec. 4-41. - Police access. 
(a)  At all times while the premises are occupied, police and other enforcement officials shall be admitted and granted access to the licensed premises and the parking and other areas associated therewith. 
(b)  No licensee or agent or employee thereof shall interfere in any way with the official duties or activities of any police officer or other enforcement official, or verbally or physically harass such officer or official. 
(Ord. of 1-4-1990(1), § 10) 
Cross reference- Law enforcement, ch. 14. 
Sec. 4-42. - Employee conduct. 
    No licensee or agent or employee thereof shall violate any ordinance of the town or law of the state on the licensed premises or areas associated. 
(Ord. of 1-4-1990(1), § 11) 
Sec. 4-43. - Patron capacity. 
    No licensed establishments shall allow occupancy of the licensed premises to exceed that allowed under applicable fire and safety codes. In addition, the board of public safety may, from time to time, establish a lesser maximum occupancy at designated licensed premises. 
(Ord. of 1-4-1990(1), § 12) 
Sec. 4-44. - Required food service. 
(a)  Class B licenses may be held by only two types of establishments, bona fide tavern keepers or victualers. A tavern is a place where the principal business is the furnishing of food and sleeping accommodations. A victualing house is a place where a substantial part of the business is furnishing of food for consumption at the place where it is furnished. 
(b)  All class B licenses shall provide adequate kitchen and serving facilities, staff and food supplies to provide food service to a substantial part of the total number of patrons that the licensed premises is designed to accommodate. 
(c)  A substantial level of food service shall be maintained during all hours of operation of a class B license. 
(Ord. of 1-4-1990(1), § 13) 
Sec. 4-45. - Dancing. 
    Dancing shall not be permitted on any licensed premises without a valid permit for the same having first been issued by the board of public safety. 
(Ord. of 1-4-1990(1), § 14) 
Cross reference- Amusements, ch. 6. 
Sec. 4-46. - Live shows. 
    Live shows shall not be permitted on any licensed premises without a valid permit for the live show having first been issued by the board of public safety. 
(Ord. of 1-4-1990(1), § 15) 
Cross reference- Amusements, ch. 6. 
Sec. 4-47. - Supplementary nature of article. 
    This article is in addition to state law and regulations to which all licenses are subject. 
(Ord. of 1-4-1990(1), § 17) 
Sec. 4-48. - Amendment of article provisions. 
    This article may be amended from time to time by action of the board of public safety. 
(Ord. of 1-4-1990(1), § 18) 
Secs. 4-49-4-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - NUDITY 

Sec. 4-71. - Acts to be prohibited by persons maintaining, owning or operating commercial establishments. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining, owning or operating a commercial establishment located within the town at which alcoholic beverages are offered for sale for consumption on the premises to suffer or permit: 
(1)  Any female person, while on the premises of the commercial establishment, to expose to the public view that area of the human breast at or below the areola thereof. 
(2)  Any female person, while on the premises of the commercial establishment to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance of or simulate such portions of the human female breast as described in subsection (1) of this section. 
(3)  Any person, while on the premises of the commercial establishment, to expose to public view his or her genitals, pubic area, anus or anal cleft or cleavage. 
(4)  Any person, while on the premises of the commercial establishment, to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance of or simulate the genitals, pubic area, anus, anal cleft or cleavage. 
(Ord. of 10-5-1995(1), § 1) 
Sec. 4-72. - Exposing female breasts. 
    It shall be unlawful for any female person, while on the premises of a commercial establishment located within the town, at which alcoholic beverages are offered for sale for consumption on the premises, to expose to public view that area of the human female breast at or below the areola thereof, or to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance or simulate such areas of the female breast as described in this section. 
(Ord. of 10-5-1995(1), § 2) 
Sec. 4-73. - Exposure of genitals, pubic area, anus or anal cleft or cleavage. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, while on the premises of a commercial establishment located within the town, at which alcoholic beverages are offered for sale for consumption on the premises, to expose to public view his or her genital, pubic area, anus or anal cleft or cleavage, or to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance of or simulate the genitals, pubic area, or anal cleft or cleavage. 
(Ord. of 10-5-1995(1), § 3) 
Sec. 4-74. - Violations of division to result in revocation of license. 
    If the owner, operator, licensee, lessor, lessee, manager, employee, or any other person participating in the operation of an establishment located within the town at which alcoholic beverages are offered for consumption on the premises, shall violate or be in violation of any of the provisions of this division, the town council shall revoke the license for such establishment after giving a reasonable notice thereof to the holder of the license and affording the holder an opportunity to be heard as to why the revocation should not be issued. 
(Ord. of 10-5-1995(1), § 5) 
Chapter 6 - AMUSEMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Dancing in liquor establishments, § 4-45; live shows at liquor establishments, § 4-46; businesses, ch. 12; licensed public events and festivals, § 28-46. 
State Law reference- Shows and exhibits, G.L. 1956, § 5-22-1 et seq.; local licensing of amusements, G.L. 1956, § 5-22-5. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1-6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPEN RECREATIONAL EVENTS AND AMUSEMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 6-31-6-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Business licenses, § 12-31 et seq. 

Sec. 6-51. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate a recreational event or amusement within the town which is open to the general public where a fee is charged without having first obtained a license therefor from the town council. 
(Ord. of 10-5-1995(2), § I) 
Sec. 6-52. - Relief from zoning board of review required prior to acceptance of application. 
    If the proposed event is not a permitted use as of right under the town zoning ordinance (chapter 38), then the applicant must first obtain the necessary relief from the town zoning board of review before his license application shall be accepted. 
(Ord. of 10-5-1995(2), § II) 
Sec. 6-53. - Application deadline; contents. 
    Written application for the license shall be made to the town council no less than 30 days prior to the date of the scheduled event or the date of the first scheduled event should the license application be for a series of entertainment dates. This application shall include a checklist, to be obtained from the town clerk, and shall specify the name and address of the applicant, the nature of the proposed entertainment, location and dates of proposed entertainments, as well as what provisions will be made for medical assistance, fire protection, police protection, parking facilities, protection of the neighboring property, crowd control and sanitary facilities. Any requirements or demands made by the council shall be borne by the applicant. 
(Ord. of 10-5-1995(2), § III) 
Sec. 6-54. - Notice to owners of meeting. 
    Upon receipt of such application, the town clerk shall schedule the application to be brought before the town council at a regular council meeting. A notice shall be sent by regular mail at least one week prior to the scheduled meeting to the owners of all properties within 300 feet of the perimeter of the premises in or on which the entertainment is sought to be located. The application and time and location of the meeting should also be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation in the town by the town clerk. 
(Ord. of 10-5-1995(2), § IV) 
Sec. 6-55. - Notice to chief of police and building inspector of meeting; purpose. 
    The town clerk shall also give similar notice to the chief of police and building inspector at least one week prior to the meeting so that the application and the provisions set forth in section 6-52 can be reviewed. 
(Ord. of 10-5-1995(2), § V) 
Sec. 6-56. - Fees. 
    Each applicant for a license to operate a recreational event or amusement shall pay the town clerk, upon filing the application, a license fee of $25.00, plus the cost of mail and advertising. 
(Ord. of 10-5-1995(2), § VI) 
State Law reference- License fee for shows, G.L. 1956, § 5-22-2012. 
Sec. 6-57. - Review of application; approval or approval with conditions. 
    The town council shall review each license application at a regular town council meeting on the date scheduled by the town clerk. The application may be approved by the town council or approved with conditions, which may include, but not be limited to, hours of operation and duration of the event. The town clerk may grant such license only if the town council shall find that the proposed entertainment would not constitute a public nuisance and that the chief of police finds all requirements set forth in section 6-53 have been met. The council shall not consider an application for the issuance of a license before the building inspector and chief of police have reviewed the application as evidenced by their signatures on the application checklist. 
(Ord. of 10-5-1995(2), § VII) 
Sec. 6-58. - Assignment of police officers after application evaluation. 
    The chief of police shall assign the number of police officers as deemed necessary after evaluating the application. 
(Ord. of 10-5-1995(2), § VIII) 
Sec. 6-59. - Barriers to issuance. 
    No amusement/event license shall be issued to any applicant currently in arrears in any tax or assessment levied by the town, or for use upon any premises for which any such taxes or assessments are unpaid at the time of the filing of the application. 
(Ord. of 10-5-1995(2), § IX) 
Sec. 6-60. - Violation of division to result in revocation. 
    Any violation of the provisions of this division or of any other town ordinance shall be grounds for immediate revocation of the license. 
(Ord. of 10-5-1995(2), § X) 
State Law reference- Revocation of license, G.L. 1956, § 5-22-2012. 
Sec. 6-61. - Waiver of bond, license fee and other division requirements. 
    The town council, at its discretion, may require the posting of a surety bond, waive the license fee and/or waive any of the requirements in this division. 
(Ord. of 10-5-1995(2), § XI) 
Secs. 6-62-6-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AMUSEMENT DEVICES AND GAMEROOMS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Pinball and game room licensing, G.L. 1956, § 5-2-2010. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-96. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Amusement device or game means any mechanical, electric, electronic or video device used or designed to be operated for entertainment or as a game by the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disk or in similar fashion, whether or not registering a score and whether or not its operation demands skill or chance, or both. It shall include, but not be limited to, such devices as marble machines, pinball machines, skillball, mechanical grab or displayed games, air games, video display or computer games, so-called and all games similar thereto under whatever name they may be called. 
    Gameroom means any establishment containing four or more amusement games. 
(Ord. of 9-9-1982, §§ 2, 3) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-97. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, in addition to the revocation of his license, shall be liable to be punished according to the provisions of section 1-7. 
(Ord. of 9-9-1982, § 14) 
Sec. 6-98. - Hours of operation. 
    No gameroom or amusement machines shall be operated on Sunday. No gameroom or amusement devices shall be operated after the hours of 10:00 p.m. or before 12:00 noon. This section shall not apply to establishments which hold a class B tavern license. Such establishments may keep their gamerooms and amusement machines open for operation during the hours which their class B license permits them to be open. No person under the legal drinking age shall operate a machine in any tavern holding a class B license at any time. 
(Ord. of 9-9-1982, § 11) 
Sec. 6-99. - Operation of machine by underaged persons. 
    No person holding a license under this article shall permit persons under the age of 16 years to play or operate any amusement device or machine unless such person is accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
(Ord. of 9-9-1982, § 9) 
Sec. 6-100. - Gambling devices; seizure and impoundment; destruction. 
    If the chief of police shall have reason to believe that any amusement device is used as a gambling device, such device may be seized by the police and impounded. If, upon trial of the exhibitor for allowing it to be used as a gambling device, such exhibitor is found guilty, such machine shall be destroyed by the police. 
(Ord. of 9-9-1982, § 13) 
Sec. 6-101. - Location restrictions. 
    No license shall be issued for any location which is within 1,000 feet from a school building as measured from the closest point of the school building to the main entrance of such building in which the gameroom or amusement machines or devices are located. 
(Ord. of 9-9-1982, § 10) 
Sec. 6-102. - Machines presently in operation; new or unlicensed machines. 
    All machines presently in existence and in operation in places of business at the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived will be entitled to a license upon payment of a prorated fee if such fee is paid prior to September 30, 1982. Thereafter, any unlicensed machine or any new machine which seeks to be licensed must receive the approval of the town council after filing an application as required by this article. 
(Ord. of 9-9-1982, § 16) 
Secs. 6-103-6-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Business licenses, § 12-31 et seq. 

Sec. 6-126. - Required. 
    No person shall keep for public patronage any amusement device or game within the town without a license from the town. 
(Ord. of 9-9-1982, § 1) 
Sec. 6-127. - Application; fee; issuance of sticker. 
    Application for a license shall be made to the town council upon a form to be supplied by the town clerk. The fee for a license is $50.00 per machine per year commencing on December 1 of each year and expiring on November 30 of each year. The town clerk shall issue a sticker to be attached to the machine on a yearly basis. 
(Ord. of 9-9-1982, § 4) 
Sec. 6-128. - Limit on number issued; exception. 
    No more than three licenses shall be issued for any one establishment except that an establishment wishing to operate four or more amusement games must first obtain a variance or special exception from the zoning board of review. 
(Ord. of 9-9-1982, § 5) 
Sec. 6-129. - Application fee; hearing; contents of application. 
    An applicant for a license shall, upon filing the application form, pay an application fee of $10.00 and an advertising fee. The town clerk shall forward each new application to the chief of police for his report to the town council, and a public hearing will be held on the application after notice in a local newspaper for three weeks. The application for such license shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant, age, date and place of birth. 
(2)  Prior convictions of applicant, if any. 
(3)  Place where the machine or device is to be operated and the business conducted at that place. 
(4)  Description of machine to be covered by the license, name of manufacturer and serial number. 
(Ord. of 9-9-1982, § 6) 
Sec. 6-130. - Transfer-From person to person or place to place. 
    A license shall not be transferable from person to person or place to place and shall be usable only at the place and by the person designated on the license. 
(Ord. of 9-9-1982, § 7) 
Sec. 6-131. - Same-From one machine or device to another. 
    A license may be transferred from one machine or device to another similar machine upon application to the town clerk to such effect and giving of a description and a serial number of the new machine or device. Not more than one machine shall be operated under one license, and the applicant or licensee shall be required to secure a license for each and every machine displaced or operated by him. 
(Ord. of 9-9-1982, § 8) 
Sec. 6-132. - Revocation; hearing. 
    Every license issued under this article is subject to the right, which is hereby expressly reserved, to revoke the license should the licensee, directly or indirectly, permit the operation of any mechanical or electrical amusement device contrary to the provisions of this article or the laws of the state. Such license may be revoked by the town council after written notice of a hearing to the licensee, which notice shall specify the ordinance or law violations with which the licensee is charged and, after a hearing, if the licensee is found to be guilty of such violations. Ten days' notice of this hearing shall be given the licensee. 
(Ord. of 9-9-1982, § 12) 
Chapter 8 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Supplementary zoning regulations pertaining to animals, § 38-290. 
State Law reference- Animals generally, G.L. 1956, § 4-1-1 et seq.; maximum penalty for violation of dog ordinance, G.L. 1956, § 4-13-1; cruelty to animals, G.L. 1956, § 4-1-1 et seq.; poisoning animals, G.L. 1956, § 4-13-2013; power of council to regulate dogs, G.L. 1956, § 4-13-1; town ordinances, contagious diseases, G.L. 1956, § 4-4-2018; municipal regulation of animals, G.L. 1956, § 23-19.2-1; animals at large, G.L. 1956, § 4-15-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 8-1-8-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq. 

Sec. 8-31. - Scope of authority. 
    Since the animal control officer is representing the town, he shall be under the direction of the chief of police. The animal control officer must be aware that he does not act for himself but for the public and for the good name and reputation of the town police department and the town. 
(Ord. of 7-23-1981) 
Sec. 8-32. - Supervision. 
    The animal control officer shall be under the supervision of the chief of police who will have the overall supervision of the animal control officer and shall be responsible for the enforcement of all laws, ordinances and regulations which the animal control officer has authority to execute. 
(Ord. of 7-23-1981, § I) 
Sec. 8-33. - Qualifications. 
    The animal control officer must have the following qualifications: 
(1)  An American citizen in good physical condition. 
(2)  A person of good reputation in the community and free from intemperate or immoral habits. He shall not have been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or habitually consorted with criminals, persons of ill repute or have been engaged in or connected with any illegal or illicit business. 
(3)  Some experience in the keeping and care of animals of various types and breeds, especially dogs, and a respect and liking for dogs and other animals. 
(4)  The ability to maintain courteous relations with all sectors of the public. 
(5)  A graduate from a standard high school or its equivalent or any equivalent combination and experience. 
(6)  In possession of a valid state driver's license. 
(7)  A special constable in the town. 
(Ord. of 7-23-1981, § II) 
Sec. 8-34. - Duties. 
    The duties of the animal control officer are as follows: 
(1)  Ascertain and make a list of the owners or keepers of dogs. 
(2)  Report and be present for duty no more than 20 hours per week. 
(3)  Be neat and clean about his person and shall keep his body clean as circumstances will permit. 
(4)  Comply with the instructions from the police dispatcher. Messages and communications transmitted will be obeyed and communication transmitted by the dispatcher shall not be refused unless so directed by a superior officer. 
(5)  Investigate and answer all complaints received during working hours or as received and settle complaints tactfully. 
(6)  Investigate and answer all complaints that require followup investigations, regardless of the date and time reported. 
(7)  Pick up all dead animals or strays, including dogs, cats and other small animals. 
(8)  Dispose of all dead animals in a safe and sanitary way. 
(9)  Gather injured or strayed animals such as cats, dogs and other domestic pets upon a complaint to do so. 
(10)  Impound strays and contact owners upon determination and return or release animals to the rightful owners. 
(11)  Clean and disinfect the animal control vehicle. 
(12)  Enforce the laws of the state and town ordinances pertaining to animals. 
(13)  Impound animals upon complaint for the duration of appropriate tests and incubation period for such diseases as rabies. 
(14)  Work in close cooperation with various agencies such as the Animal Rescue League and the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. 
(15)  Keep, or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of the impoundment and the disposition of all animals taken into custody. 
(16)  Keep, or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of all bite cases and shall have a police officer respond to all cases involving bites so that a police case report may be made. 
(17)  Keep, or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of all monies belonging to the town. 
(Ord. of 7-23-1981, § III) 
Sec. 8-35. - Operation of motor vehicle. 
(a)  No one shall operate the animal control vehicle without a valid license to operate such vehicle. 
(b)  No one shall operate the animal control vehicle without authority. 
(c)  No person shall be permitted to ride as a passenger in the animal control vehicle unless necessary for the proper performance of duty. 
(d)  The animal control officer shall maintain a written daily vehicle report indicating mileage, gasoline usage and vehicle condition. 
(e)  When leaving the animal control vehicle unattended, the officer shall lock the ignition, remove the keys and lock the doors. 
(f)  While operating the animal control vehicle, the animal control officer shall be in radio communication with the dispatcher. 
(Ord. of 7-23-1981, § IV) 
Cross reference- Traffic, ch. 36. 
Sec. 8-36. - Discipline. 
(a)  The chief of police has the authority to punish any animal control officer for failure to obey the regulations as set forth in this article as well as all general and special orders and orders of superior officers. 
(b)  The offenses for which the animal control officer is subject to punishment are as follows: 
(1)  Commission of a crime or misdemeanor under any statute or ordinance; 
(2)  Disobedience or violation of any department regulation, rules, order, instruction or memorandum; 
(3)  Insubordination; 
(4)  Neglect of duty; 
(5)  Gross inefficiency; 
(6)  Gross incompetence; 
(7)  Unnecessary violence or indignity to a citizen; 
(8)  Absence from duty; 
(9)  Negligence in the care of public property, its abuse, misuse, waste or willful destruction; 
(10)  False official statement, oral or written; 
(11)  Communicating information relating to police business to unauthorized persons; or 
(12)  Intoxication. 
(Ord. of 7-23-1981, § V) 
Secs. 8-37-8-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DOGS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-71. - Foster Old Home Days, dogs restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or owner to permit or cause any dog, whether licensed or leashed, to be on or along the grounds and location designated for any Foster Old Home Days during any time which is designated for said event. However, this section shall not apply to Seeing Eye Dogs assisting the blind or handicap persons, or such other personal service dogs or animals that are controlled by such persons and/or their companions. 
(Ord. of 5-25-2017) 
Editor's note- An ordinance May 25, 2017, set out provisions intended for use as § 8-100. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 8-71. 
Secs. 8-72-8-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - IMPOUNDMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to impound, G.L. 1956, § 4-13-2015.1. 

Sec. 8-101. - Authority to impound unlicensed or uncollared dogs. 
    The animal control officer of the town is empowered to impound any dog over the age of one year, running free within the town, which is unlicensed and/or uncollared. 
Sec. 8-102. - Redemption; fees and fines. 
    Any dog so impounded may be redeemed from the pound by its owner or keeper or agent thereof, on payment to the animal control officer of the appropriate fees and fines as per the following schedule: 
(1)  For maintaining an unlicensed and/or uncollared dog ..... $25.00 
License must be in place within 14 calendar days of the issuance of a citation. 
(2)  License fee, annually ..... 7.00 
(3)  Canine surcharge, per G.L. 1956, § 4-24-9 ..... 1.00 
(4)  License late fee ..... 5.00 
(5)  Pound fee, per day ..... 2.00, or such amount as may otherwise be determined by the pound 
    Notwithstanding the foregoing, the license fee set forth in subsection (2) above may be increased by the town clerk to an amount, not to exceed $15.00, if in the town clerk's reasonable discretion the licensing fee is insufficient to cover the cost of administering the licensing of dogs in the town. 
(Ord. of 7-11-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 8-103. - Classification and disposition of unclaimed dogs. 
    All dogs so impounded which remain unclaimed for a period of five days shall, after such confinement, be considered strays and be destroyed. 
Secs. 8-104-8-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LICENSING 

Sec. 8-126. - Required; failure to license; fees. 
    Any owner or keeper of a dog required to be licensed under the provisions of this division, or appropriate state legislation, who fails to license such dog as provided by appropriate legislation (per G.L. 1956 § 4-13-4) shall, after the last business day of April, be assessed a late fee in addition to the license fee, as indicated in section 8-102. 
(Ord. of 3-10-1977, § I; Ord. of 5-5-1977, § 1; Ord. of 4-9-1981, § 1; Ord. of 7-11-2013, § 2) 
Sec. 8-127. - Animal control officer; duties and authority. 
    The town council shall, each year during the month of April, appoint an animal control officer who shall have the following duties and authority: 
(1)  During the month of May, to canvass the town to determine an accurate census of the number of dogs maintained within the town. 
(2)  To issue dog licenses as appropriate and collect such license and late fees as may be due. 
(3)  To report to the town council any and all dogs required to be licensed which remain unlicensed as of May 31. 
(Ord. of 3-10-1977, § II) 
Sec. 8-128. - Disposition of collected fees. 
    The animal control officer shall turn over all fees collected to the town clerk and shall be compensated by the town council in the amount of $5.00 for each license issued by him. 
(Ord. of 3-10-1977, § III) 
Secs. 8-129-8-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RABIES CONTROL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Rabies control, G.L. 1956, § 4-13-2029 et seq. 

Sec. 8-151. - Reporting bites; quarantine; examination. 
    Every dog which bites a person shall be promptly reported to the animal control officer, and shall thereupon be securely quarantined at the direction of the animal control officer for a period of 14 days. Upon demand of the animal control officer, the owner or keeper of such dog shall, at his own expense, cause such dog to be examined for rabies by a licensed veterinarian who shall furnish a written report of his examination to the animal control officer. In cases where such examination has been demanded, the dog shall remain quarantined until the animal control officer has received the veterinarian's report. 
Sec. 8-152. - Confinement of biting dogs. 
    In addition to the quarantine and examination set forth in section 8-151, every dog which bites a person while off the premises of its owner or keeper shall thereafter be kept confined on the premises of its owner or keeper or in a kennel (except that it shall be allowed to leave such premises or kennel confined in a motor vehicle or under control on a leash). 
Sec. 8-153. - Habitual biting or attacking dogs. 
    Every dog which habitually bites or attacks other dogs or domestic animals while off the premises of its owner or keeper shall, at the direction of the animal control officer, be kept confined as provided in section 8-152. 
Sec. 8-154. - Unspayed female dogs; period of confinement. 
    The animal control officer may from time to time direct the owner or keeper of any unspayed female dog to keep such dog confined as provided in section 8-152. Such period of confinement shall not exceed 21 days at any one time. 
Sec. 8-155. - Failure to obey animal control officer's orders; seizure of animal; payment of fees; disposition of dog on failure to claim. 
    If the owner or keeper of any dog shall fail to obey an order of the animal control officer as to quarantine, confinement or veterinarian examination, the animal control officer is empowered to seize such dog and may enter upon the premises of the owner or keeper to do so. Thereafter, the owner or keeper shall be liable to the town for the cost of picking up such dog, $5.00, for the cost of impoundment $2.00 per day, and for the expense of examination by a veterinarian. The animal control officer shall not be obliged to surrender such dog to the owner or keeper until all such fees and expenses are paid in full. If after five days the owner or keeper does not reclaim such dog and pay the fees and expenses, the animal control officer is empowered and authorized to kill the dog and charge the expense of execution and disposal, $5.00, to the owner or keeper. 
Sec. 8-156. - Seizure of nuisance dog; notice to owner; payment of fees; disposal on failure of owner to claim. 
    The animal control officer is authorized to seize any dog which is causing a nuisance while off the premises of its owner. After seizing such dog the animal control officer shall notify the owner or keeper of such dog, if such owner or keeper is known to the animal control officer, and the animal control officer shall surrender such dog to its owner or keeper upon payment to the town of $5.00 for the cost of picking up the dog and $2.00 per day for the cost of impoundment. If five days after being notified the owner or keeper does not reclaim the dog and pay the fees and expenses, the animal control officer is empowered and authorized to kill the dog and charge the expense of execution and disposal for the dog and charge the expense of execution and disposal, $5.00, to the owner or keeper. 
Sec. 8-157. - Penalty for violation of division. 
    Any person violating this division shall be punished according to the provisions of section 1-7. 
Secs. 8-158-8-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - KENNELS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 12. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-191. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be fined not exceeding $5.00 for each day such kennel is so kept. 
(Ord. of 11-1-1968, § X) 
Secs. 8-192-8-215. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Business licenses, § 12-31 et seq. 

Sec. 8-216. - Classes. 
    Kennel licenses shall be issued by the town in two classes: 
(1)  Class A. A class A license shall be issued to keepers of thoroughbred dogs kept for breeding purposes and for sale either on the premises or other commercial outlet. Note: The raising of animals for sale is permitted in AR and MI districts only and prohibited in NC and HC districts. (See section 38-191 et seq.) 
(2)  Class B. Class B licenses shall be issued to keepers of dogs kept for boarding purposes only. Kennel licenses shall be issued only to keepers or owners of dogs to be housed on the same parcel of land where the owner or keeper resides. 
(Ord. of 11-1-1968, § I) 
Sec. 8-217. - Application for initial issuance. 
    Every owner or keeper of dogs qualified to apply for a kennel license shall file with the town clerk an application for the initial issuance of a kennel license. Such application shall be filed at least two weeks prior to the date requested for a hearing. 
(Ord. of 11-1-1968, § II) 
Sec. 8-218. - Contents of application. 
    Such application shall state the name of the owner and/or keeper of such kennel, the address of such owner and/or keeper, the proposed location of such kennel, the name and address of the owner of the land of such proposed location, the number of dogs to be kept at such kennel and that the dogs are to be kept for breeding and stud purposes only or for boarding purposes, the names of all adjoining owners and all property owners within 500 feet of such proposed location, the number of dogs to be kept at such kennel and that the dogs are to be kept for breeding and stud purposes only or for boarding purposes. 
(Ord. of 11-1-1968, § III) 
Sec. 8-219. - Notice of hearing. 
    Upon receipt of such application, the town clerk shall cause notice of such application for the initial issuance of a kennel license to be published in the Providence Journal or Evening Bulletin at least once during the week prior to the week in which the hearing will be held. Notice shall also be given by the town clerk by registered or certified mail to all owners of adjoining property and all property owners within 500 feet of the proposed location, to be mailed at least one week prior to the hearing on the application. Such notice shall state the name and address of the applicant, the type of license requested and the location for which the license is requested. Such notice shall also state that all persons are entitled to be heard before the granting of such license and shall state the time and place of hearing. 
(Ord. of 11-1-1968, § IV) 
Sec. 8-220. - Hearing. 
    Hearings on applications for the initial issuance of kennel licenses shall be held at regularly scheduled town council meetings unless otherwise ordered by the town council. At such hearing, all persons for or against the granting of such license shall be heard. Hearings shall be open to the public. The town council shall make its decision and grant or deny such license within ten days after the date of hearing. 
(Ord. of 11-1-1968, § V) 
Sec. 8-221. - Fees. 
    Each applicant for the initial issuance of a kennel license shall pay to the town clerk, upon filing his application, a license fee of $25.00 for such license. Each applicant for the initial issuance of a kennel license shall also pay upon filing the sum of $25.00 to defray the costs of giving notice and conducting the hearing. 
(Ord. of 11-1-1968, § VI) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 4-13-2011. 
Sec. 8-222. - Renewal. 
    Application for the renewal of a kennel license shall be made to the town clerk on or before April 1 in each year. Such application shall contain the same information as the application for the initial issuance of a kennel license as set forth in section 8-218. Upon receipt of a proper and timely application, and upon the payment of a license fee of $25.00, if the number of dogs to be kept does not exceed ten and a license fee of $25.00 if the number of dogs to be kept exceeds ten, the town clerk shall issue a renewal of the kennel license to the applicant. All fees so collected by the town clerk shall be paid over by him to the town treasurer. 
(Ord. of 11-1-1968, § VII) 
Sec. 8-223. - Expiration. 
    All kennel licenses shall expire on April 1 in each year. 
(Ord. of 11-1-1968, § VIII) 
Sec. 8-224. - Revocation. 
    Kennel licenses may be revoked by the town council if the kennel and the use and operation thereof at its location constitutes a public nuisance or if the license is in violation of any of the provisions of this article. Notice of proposed revocation shall be given to the licensee by registered or certified mail addressed to the licensee at the address contained in the application for a kennel license and deposited in the mail at least two weeks prior to the date set for hearing. The town council may also give such further notice as it may deem necessary. Hearings shall be open to the public and all interested persons shall be heard. 
(Ord. of 11-1-1968, § IX) 
Sec. 8-225. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to the operation or maintenance of a pet shop as defined by state law, nor to any boarding or keeping of dogs in conjunction with medical treatment by a licensed veterinarian. 
(Ord. of 11-1-1968, § XII) 
Chapter 10 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 16; nuisances, ch. 18; planning, ch. 24; soil erosion and sediment control, ch. 26; solid waste management, ch. 28; streets and sidewalks, ch. 30; subdivision regulations, ch. 32; zoning, ch. 38. 
State Law reference- State Building Code, G.L. 1956, § 23-27.3-100.0 et seq.; inspection of buildings where combustible materials accumulate, G.L. 1956, § 23-28.5-1 et seq.; notice to vacate unfit dwellings, G.L. 1956, § 23-19.2-8; housing maintenance and occupancy code, G.L. 1956, § 45-24.3-1 et seq.; minimum housing standards, G.L. 1956, § 45-24.2-1 et seq.; plumbers, G.L. 1956, § 5-20-1 et seq.; electricians, G.L. 1956, § 5-6-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Enforcement; penalty for violation of chapter. 
(a)  Any person having any duty to perform under the provisions of this chapter may, so far as may be necessary for the performance of his duties, enter any building or premises in the town without being guilty of trespass; provided, however, that the building inspector shall not enter any occupied dwelling without the permission of the owner. Unreasonable refusal of such permission shall be grounds for revocation of a permit. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this chapter wherein no penalty is otherwise prescribed in this article shall be fined in an amount up to $100.00 for every violation thereof, and each day of the existence of any such violation shall be deemed a separate offense. Such fines shall inure to the town. 
(c)  The town may cause suit to be brought in the supreme or superior court in the name of the town to restrain the violation of and compel compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Applications for variance under the provision of the state building code shall be made to the town zoning board of review and shall follow the same procedures as other applications to the review board. 
Sec. 10-2. - Building inspector; appointment and duties. 
(a)  The town council shall appoint a building inspector who shall serve at the pleasure of the town council and until his successor is appointed. Appointments to the office of building inspector shall be based on such qualifications for education and experience as set by the town council necessary for the proper performance of the office. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the building inspector to issue and revoke building permits and to enforce the provisions of this chapter and any subsequent amendments adopted by the town council. The building inspector shall examine all structures during the course of their erection, alteration, repair, moving or demolition to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable ordinances of the town, and shall record all violations which shall be reported to the town council and to the town solicitor. 
(c)  The building inspector shall make a written monthly report to the town council at each regular meeting concerning the number of applicants received, permits issued or refused and fees received. 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq. 
State Law reference- Local building inspector, G.L. 1956, § 23-27.3-107.1.1. 
Secs. 10-3-10-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 10-36. - Conformance of all construction and alteration to state building code. 
    All construction and alteration, subject to the provisions of this chapter and requiring the issuance of a building permit, shall conform to the applicable construction requirements as set forth in the state building code. 
State Law reference- State Building Code to apply throughout state, G.L. 1956, § 23-27.3-100.1.7. 
Sec. 10-37. - Subdivision, zoning and other regulations. 
    Any structure erected, repaired, altered, moved or demolished under the provisions of this chapter shall conform to the town subdivision ordinance, the town zoning ordinance, and to other applicable ordinances of the town. 
Cross reference- Subdivision regulations, ch. 32; zoning, ch. 38. 
Sec. 10-38. - Board of review. 
(a)  The town zoning board of review shall constitute the board of appeal from the inspector of buildings in the town. 
(b)  Appeals to the board of review may be taken by any party aggrieved or by any officer, department of board affected by any order or decision of the building inspector concerning the provisions of this chapter. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time as provided in the rules of the board of review by filing with the building inspector and with the board of review a notice of appeal specifying the grounds for appeal. In no case shall this reasonable time exceed 30 days. 
(c)  The board of review shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal and shall publish notice of the hearing at least one week prior to the date of such hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the town; shall give due notice to the applicant, abutting owners and other parties in interest; and shall hear and decide the appeal within a reasonable time. Any party may appear at the hearing in person, by agent or by attorney. An appeal shall be heard within 40 days from the date of filing, and the decision thereon shall be filed within 15 days after the completion of the hearing. 
(d)  Each appeal shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $100.00 payable to the town. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Local boards of review, G.L. 1956, § 23-27.3-127.2. 
Sec. 10-39. - Special regulations. 
(a)  Excavations. Where an excavation lies within five feet of the line of a public right-of-way, it shall be enclosed within a barricade at least three feet in height and shall be suitably lighted during the hours between sunset and sunrise. 
(b)  Public right-of-way. No person shall store building materials, machinery or construction vehicles within a public right-of-way without the prior written approval of the building inspector and the public works director. 
(c)  Rubbish. Within ten days after completion or demolition of a building or work upon a building, or at such time (after the ten-day period) as may be required by the building inspector, all rubbish and other discarded material shall be removed from the premises by the applicant or his agent. Failure to do so will subject the applicant to a charge of violation of this chapter. 
(d)  Moving a building. Any person wishing to move a building or structure to a new location must obtain a building permit. No electric wire, telephone wire, sign, tree or shrub shall be removed in connection with such moving without the written permission of the building inspector. Any person who intends to move a building or structure into the town must obtain a building permit. All such buildings or structures shall conform to the applicable provisions of the state building code. Any person moving a structure or building must file with the permit application a bond or other surety satisfactory to the town solicitor, and conditioned to comply with all legal requirements and restrictions relative to the moving of buildings; and to pay damages suffered by any person by reason of any negligence of the licensee, his servants or agents in or about the moving of buildings in the town; and to indemnify and save the town harmless from all loss and damage by reason of any such negligence in moving buildings through, over or on any public street or highway in the town; and any liability of the town therefore relative to maintaining its public highways in condition safe and convenient for pedestrian and vehicular travel of any description. Such permit may be revoked at any time by the building inspector for any violation of this chapter or any of the conditions of the bond. 
State Law reference- Moving, raising, shoring or demolition of buildings, G.L. 1956, § 23-27.3-116.0. et seq. 
(e)  Plumbing. All drainage fixtures, gas fixtures and piping shall conform to the requirements as specified in appropriate sections of the state building code. 
(f)  Electrical. All electrical wiring and installation shall conform to the latest edition of the National Electrical Code published by the National Fire Protection Association, 60 Battery March Street, Boston, Massachusetts 02110. 
Secs. 10-40-10-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING PERMITS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Building permit required, G.L. 1956, § 23-27.3-113.1. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-71. - Required; application; fees. 
    Any person, group of persons or corporation contemplating the erection, extension, alteration or repairs, moving or demolition of a structure, or contemplating the structural alteration, electrical wiring or installation of plumbing in an existing structure which work shall cost or have a value of over $500.00, shall make application for a permit on the prescribed forms in the office of the building inspector. One copy of the approved applications shall be retained by the building inspector, and one copy shall be filed with the tax assessor. Such application shall be submitted at least ten days prior to the start of construction, except that in the case of an emergency, the building inspector may waive the ten-day period, and shall be accompanied by a fee payable to the building inspector, to be used as part of his remuneration according to the following schedule: 
(1)  Valuation rates; new construction. New construction valuation rates are as follows: 
a.  Main floor, per square foot ..... $60.00 
b.  Second floor, per square foot ..... 40.00 
c.  Walkout breezeway or finish basement, per square foot ..... 30.00 
d.  Garage, attached under, per square foot ..... 25.00 
e.  Garage, unattached, per square foot ..... 30.00 
f.  Barn, per square foot ..... 30.00 
g.  Addition to house, family room, etc., per square foot ..... 30.00 
h.  Addition to house, kitchen or bath, per square foot ..... 40.00 
i.  Pole barn, per square foot ..... 15.00 
j.  Deck, per square foot ..... 10.00 
k.  Porch, per square foot ..... 12.00 
l.  Dormer, per square foot ..... 20.00 
(2)  Average house. Permit fees for an average house are as follows: 
a.  Plumbing estimate $3,000.00 ..... $35.00 
(Over 11/2 baths or jacuzzi) ..... 50.00 
b.  Mechanical estimate $3,000.00 ..... 35.00 
c.  Wood stove ..... 15.00 
d.  Electrical estimate $3,000.00 ..... 35.00 
Electric heat ..... 50.00 
Temporary service ..... 15.00 
Pool wiring ..... 35.00 
(3)  Fee adjustment for extensive work. Fees shall be adjusted at $5.00 per thousand dollars of valuation for extensive work. 
(4)  Demolition. The demolition fee shall be $15.00. 
(5)  Size requirement. A permit is required for any structure over eight feet by eight feet. 
(6)  Building fee valuation. Building fee valuation shall be as follows: 
a.  $1.00-$1,000.00 ..... $ 25.00 
b.  $1,000.00-$10,000.00 ..... 25.00 
Plus per 1,000 valuation ..... 5.00 
c.  $10,000.00 and above ..... 100.00 
Plus per 1,000 valuation ..... 2.50 
(7)  Late filing fee. Late filing fees are as follows: 
a.  First offense: Double the standard fee and/or $200.00 fine. 
b.  Second offense: Triple the standard fee and/or $500.00 fine. 
State Law reference- Municipalities to prescribe building permit fees, G.L. 1956, § 23-27.3-118.0. 
Sec. 10-72. - Required prior to construction. 
    No construction work other than preliminary grading shall be done without the issuance of a valid building permit. 
Sec. 10-73. - Validity upon identification of construction site on town's plat maps. 
    No building permit shall be valid unless the location of such permitted construction is properly identified by reference to the tax assessor's plat maps of the town. 
Sec. 10-74. - Additional maps and plans prior to issuance; construction start deadline following issuance. 
    The building inspector may require any additional information, maps and plans that he deems necessary in issuing a permit. Construction must be commenced within one year after the date of issuance of a building permit, and the permit shall not be valid if construction is not commenced within such period. 
Sec. 10-75. - Renewal of expired permit; transfer. 
    Permits that have expired without any act of construction may be renewed upon application to the building inspector, and the fee may be waived upon such renewal in the discretion of the building board of review. A building permit shall not be transferable. 
Sec. 10-76. - Denial or revocation. 
    Any act of construction not in conformity with this article and any false representation in any statement submitted in the application for building permit shall be cause for the denial or revocation of a building permit. The denial or revocation of a building permit shall be made by the building inspector to the applicant, in writing, precisely stating the reasons for such action by registered or certified mail to the applicant. 
Sec. 10-77. - Site review for commercial construction required prior to issuance; scope of review. 
    No building permit shall be issued for any commercial building or other commercial construction in any zone of the town until a site review of the proposed construction has first been conducted by the planning board. Such review shall cover: 
(1)  Safe highway access to and from the property; 
(2)  Disposal of wastes on the site; 
(3)  Toxic or hazardous materials to be stored or used on the site; 
(4)  Lighting on the site; 
(5)  Effect of the development on the ecology of the site and neighboring properties, with a particular view to the protection of wetlands and rare and unusual plants in the vicinity; 
(6)  Unusual site conditions such as steep slopes, rock formations, springs and the like; and 
(7)  Historical or archaeological features at the site. 
Secs. 10-78-10-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GROWTH MANAGEMENT ISSUANCE RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 10-101. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to fairly distribute permits for residential development among applicants over time, and to guide the form of development so as to minimize the burden on facilities, primarily schools, and other resources that are at capacity. It is the intent of these provisions to provide for the housing needs of all population groups in a manner which is consistent with the Rhode Island Comprehensive Planning and Land Use Regulation Act (G.L. 1956, § 45-22.2-1 et seq.), with the Foster Comprehensive Community Plan and with Land Use 2010: State Land Use Policies and Plan. 
Sec. 10-102. - Findings. 
    The town council, planning board, town staff and consultants have conducted studies and have followed state planning documents in order to develop a growth management program as called for in the comprehensive community plan. The town council finds that these studies and documents, listed below, establish the basis for the town's growth management plan, and are incorporated herein by reference: 
(1)  Foster Growth Management Program, Andrew Teitz, Esq., and Samuel Shamoon, February 2004. 
(2)  Conceptual Design Options: Building Feasibility Study for Foster/Glocester Regional School, Aharonian and Associates, Inc., August 5, 2003. 
(3)  Town of Foster Comprehensive Plan - 2003 Update, February 2004. 
(4)  Capital Improvement Budgets, Town of Foster, RI, as adopted annually by the town council for fiscal years 1958 through present. 
Sec. 10-103. - Basic residential requirements. 
(a)  Issuance of building permits authorizing creation of one or more additional dwelling units through new construction or change of use shall be allowed only under the procedures and requirements set forth herein. 
(b)  Applicants for such residential building permits shall be authorized in accordance with the priority assigned to them in section 10-108. Applicants shall be assigned dates to begin construction by the building official so that the total number of dwelling units authorized to begin construction in any quarter does not exceed either the 12-month quota as established in section 10-104. The term "quarter" shall mean a period of three consecutive calendar months, beginning on the first day of the first month and continuing through three consecutive months. 
Sec. 10-104. - 12-month quota. 
(a)  Definitions. The term "12-month quota" shall mean the maximum number of residential dwelling units that may be authorized by building permits, except for exemptions as provided herein, during any continuous 12-month period, beginning on July 1 and ending on June 30. 
(b)  Established. The 12-month quota shall be established as follows: 
(1)  On or before the end of the second quarter (December 31, 2004), the planning and building departments shall issue a written report detailing the issuance of permits, exemptions and an analysis of the following data: 
a.  The town's ability to provide public local school capacity over the period of the current capital improvement budget. 
b.  The town's ability to provide regional school capacity over the period of the current capital improvement budget. 
c.  The demands upon capacity that are anticipated to be made by nonresidential development and by residential development not subject to the development priority provisions or exempted in previous years but not yet constructed. 
(2)  The town council has determined, based upon studies conducted pursuant to the comprehensive plan, that the town's present six-year capacity for additional dwelling units within its sustainable and serviceable limits equals not more than 156 dwelling units in addition to those now existing. 
(3)  Any application for a building permit creating one or more additional dwelling units submitted after the effective date of this article shall be subject to the review procedures set forth in section 10-106. Permit applications submitted before the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived shall not be subject to any of the quota limitations of this division. 
(4)  The town council shall set the town's six-year capacity as part of its annual capital improvement budget approval without necessity of amending the provisions of the zoning ordinance. During the capital improvement budget approval, an assessment will be provided by the planning department to the town council members detailing the local and regional school capacity and the current annual enrollment at said schools. For purposes of administering this division, the council's determination of the town's six-year capacity shall take effect upon its adoption. 
Sec. 10-105. - Dwelling units exempt from the quota. 
    The following types of dwellings shall not be subject to the provisions of this division with regard to the 12-month or current quarterly quota. These types of dwellings have been determined to have no or minimal impact upon the town's capacity for additional dwelling units within its sustainable and serviceable limits or they provide positive benefits to the town that are consistent with the comprehensive community plan. The building official shall accept applications for construction of the types of dwelling units listed below and shall act upon them without regard to the quotas, priority determination and procedures as set forth in this article. All such permits issued shall be considered to be issued in addition to the 12-month or quarterly quota provisions of this division. 
(1)  Protected development. The application to construct a dwelling unit is not subject to this division because of the vested rights provisions of G.S. 1956, § 45-24-44. 
(2)  Elderly housing. Dwelling units which would contribute to meeting the yearround housing needs of elderly citizens through publicly enforceable restrictions limiting occupancy for a period of not less than 30 years to households at least half or more of whose members are 62 years of age or older. 
(3)  Accessory apartments. Apartment houses are subject to further limitations in the zoning ordinance(chapter 38). 
Sec. 10-106. - Procedure for issuance of building permits. 
(a)  Applications for building permits for construction of one or more dwelling units shall be submitted to the building official, who shall adhere to the following procedure in reviewing and issuing permits: 
(1)  Completeness. The building official shall, upon receipt of an application submitted, examine the application, plans and all materials for completeness, which shall include all plans and materials required for a building permit under the applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance and the state building code. If said application, plans and materials are complete, the building official shall stamp it indicating the date and time of official receipt by the town. 
(2)  Incomplete application. If the application is incomplete and does not contain all plans and materials as required by the zoning ordinance (chapter 38) and the state building code, the application, plans and materials shall be returned to the applicant, within 15 days, who will be informed by the building official what is missing from the submission in order to qualify as a complete application. 
(b)  The building official shall not issue permits for any dwelling units in excess of the quota unless such units are exempt, as provided in section 10-105. The building official shall keep track of all permits issued plus complete applications submitted during the most recent quarter. If, within any quarter, the number exceeds the quota, additional building permits shall no longer be issued. Applications for additional permits shall be accumulated for action at the beginning of the next quarter, and shall be prioritized and issued under the ensuing quarter. 
(c)  At the beginning of the next quarter, the building official shall issue building permits for the accumulated permits held over from the prior quarter. If the quarterly quota has not been met, building permits will be issued for complete applications received during the current quota as provided in this division. 
(d)  The annual number of permits are assigned as follows: 
First quarter July 1 to September 30 seven permits Second quarter October 1 to December 31 six permits Third quarter January 1 to March 31 six permits Fourth quarter April 1 to June 30 seven permits  
Under no circumstances shall the number of building permits, other than those exempt dwellings, exceed the annual quota. 
(e)  In the event that the number of building permits issued in any one year, July 1 to June 30, does not reach the annual quota, there shall be no carryover of permits to the following year. 
Sec. 10-107. - Low or moderate income housing. 
    Dwellings which are authorized under the provisions of the Low and Moderate Income Housing Act (G.L. 1956, § 45-53-1 et seq.) shall be treated as follows: 
(1)  Complete applications for construction of dwelling units so authorized shall be granted permits within the time limits prescribed in the state building code, regardless of the availability of permits within the current quarterly quota, but may be subject to the procedural requirements of section 10-106, or the priority criteria of section 10-108 and the limitations of section 10-109 depending on the procedure of the application; 
(2)  All permits so issued shall be considered to be issued as part of the quota provisions of this article and shall be counted when determining the number of permits issued within the 12-month quota. 
Sec. 10-108. - Priority criteria. 
(a)  Building permits shall be issued by the building official up to the maximum number permitted by the applicable current quarterly quota, in the order of priority assigned below and in accordance with the procedure set forth in section 10-106 and the limitations set forth in section 10-109. In the event of a tie, priority shall go to the application with the earlier date and time of the submission of a complete application. 
(b)  The order of priority shall be as follows: 
(1)  Applicants for development meeting the criteria for low and moderate income housing as defined in G.L. 1956, § 45-53-3(5). 
(2)  Other applicants whose application for construction of a dwelling has been denied for two consecutive quarters because of the provisions of this division, provided that no more than one permit shall be issued to an applicant in this priority until all such available permits for the quarter have been exhausted. 
(3)  Applications for construction of a single household detached dwelling as an individual applicant provided that the property has not been subdivided and a permit has not been granted for other parcels within the subdivided land. 
(4)  Any remaining applications in the order of complete applications received. 
Sec. 10-109. - Limitation on number of authorized units. 
    In order to ensure that residential building permits are equitably distributed among all qualified applicants, the following shall apply: 
(1)  No single applicant shall be granted building permits for more than one dwelling unit during any quarter if doing so would result in denial of a permit for any other applicant. 
(2)  Permits for construction granted priority under the provisions of section 10-108(b)(1), low or moderate income housing, shall be limited to a total of three dwelling units per quarter on a townwide basis if the issuance of more permits would result in denial of a permit for any other applicant for other types of dwellings. If the building official receives applications for more than four such affordable dwelling units in any quarter, priority shall go to the application with the earlier date and time of submittal of a complete application. 
(3)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this division or the provisions of G.S. 1956, § 23-27.3-114.2, nothing herein shall prevent any applicant from accumulating building permits (or commitments for future building permits) over a period of time and using all permits (or commitments) so accumulated to construct a multi-household structure or land development project as a single construction project. 
Sec. 10-110. - Nondwelling development. 
(a)  In acting upon special use permits or variances for developments other than those comprised only of dwelling units, the zoning board of review shall take into consideration the intent of this division, and in acting upon applications for major land development projects, other than those comprised only of dwelling units, the planning board shall do the same. Those boards may require applicants for such special use permits, variances or major land development projects to document the townwide impacts of their proposals upon the following, using a format and materials to be provided by the planning department to facilitate that task: 
(1)  Amount of land resources remaining for development; 
(2)  Impact upon the adequacy of the town's road system; 
(3)  Impact upon public schools; 
(4)  Impact upon the adequacy of public facilities, including town hall, police and fire facilities, library, and recreation facilities. 
(b)  In granting approvals for such permits, each of those boards shall impose such conditions as are appropriate to ensure that the timing of the resulting development will be consistent with the objective to deplete not more than one-third of the town's capacity for additional development within sustainable and serviceable limits in any two years, taking into consideration the documented impacts, the context of impacts from other development, and the mitigation, if any, which has been proposed or required. 
(c)  The provisions of this division shall apply only to applications for development which requires the granting of special use permits other than for a special impact development and/or variances and shall not apply to any use permitted by right in the zoning ordinance (chapter 38). Similarly, major land development projects, if allowed by right in the zoning ordinance (chapter 38), if no special use permits or use variances are required, shall not be subject to the provisions of this division. All such permitted nondwelling uses shall be exempt from the procedural and quota provisions of this division. 
Sec. 10-111. - Expiration of division. 
    This division shall expire December 31, 2010, unless it is earlier extended through amendment of this provision. Upon its expiration, any timing limitations previously placed on building permit availability shall no longer be enforced, but any housing cost or income eligibility stipulations upon which permits were earlier qualified shall remain in full force and effect. 
Sec. 10-112. - Protection against zoning change. 
    Any protection against zoning change provided by this division or by state law (G.L. 1956, § 45-24-44) shall be extended three months each quarter that a building permit application for the dwelling unit in question has been denied. 
Sec. 10-113. - Appeals. 
    Any decision by the building official to carry out the purposes of this division may be appealed by an aggrieved party to the zoning board of review. The appeal shall be taken within 20 days following an action by the building official to enforce the provisions of this division and shall specify the grounds for such appeal. The building official shall forthwith transmit to the zoning board of review all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. Notice of the appeal shall also be transmitted to the planning board. The procedure for any appeal including a public hearing shall be in accordance with the zoning ordinance (chapter 38). 
Chapter 12 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 4; amusements, ch. 6; kennels, § 8-191 et seq.; mobile home parks and trailer parks, § 16-121 et seq.; taxation, ch. 34; zoning standards for commercial and industrial development, § 38-285; site plan for commercial and industrial development, § 38-394. 
State Law reference- Businesses and professions, G.L. 1956, § 5-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 12-1-12-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Liquor license regulations, § 4-31 et seq.; license for open recreational events and amusements, § 6-51 et seq.; license for amusement devices in game rooms, § 6-126 et seq.; kennel licenses, § 8-216 et seq.; license for firearm dealers, § 12-91 et seq.; license for hawkers, peddlers and door-to-door salesmen, § 12-161 et seq.; license for junk and secondhand goods dealers, § 12-221 et seq.; license for privately owned camping areas, § 12-286 et seq.; license for taverns, victualing houses, cook shops, etc, § 12-351 et seq.; license for mobile home parks and trailer parks, § 16-151 et seq.; licensed public events and festivals, § 28-46; licensing of solid waste haulers, § 28-41. 

Sec. 12-31. - Renewal or transfer. 
    It shall be a condition for the renewal or transfer of any license (except individual trailer licenses) issued by the town that the holder of the license show that all taxes due to the town by the license holder and by the owner of the premises that are licensed be paid in full. Further, the holder of the license shall present to the town council, prior to the date for renewal or transfer, a statement from the police department approving of the renewal or transfer, a statement from the building and zoning inspector approving of the renewal or transfer and a statement from the appropriate fire company approving of the renewal of transfer. In exercising judgment as to whether to approve or disapprove, the police department, building and zoning inspector and fire company should take into consideration the following: 
(1)  Police department. A background report shall be required. 
(2)  Fire department. The applicant must be in compliance with state fire codes. A signed statement shall be filed by the fire company. 
(3)  Building and zoning inspector. The applicant must comply with G.L. 1956, § 23-27.3-124.0 et seq. (unsafe conditions). The applicant must correct any outstanding zoning violations. 
(4)  Tax collector: The applicant must comply with the town's ordinance regarding payment of taxes for the renewal or transfer of licenses. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1990, § 1; Ord. of 5-8-2003(1), § 1) 
Sec. 12-32. - Denial of renewal. 
    The town council shall not renew any license where the applicant for renewal or transfer shall fail to provide such proof of payment of taxes and the required approvals. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1990, § 2) 
Sec. 12-33. - Application of article provisions. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply in all circumstances except where state or federal law shall otherwise provide in the case of bankruptcies and receiverships. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1990, § 3) 
Secs. 12-34-12-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIREARMS DEALERS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Discharge of firearms, § 20-3. 
State Law reference- Authority to grant a firearm dealer's license, G.L. 1956, § 11-47-39. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-66. - Authority of article. 
    This article is enacted pursuant to the provisions of G.L. 1956, § 11-47-39 et seq. which provides for firearms dealers' licenses to be issued by cities and towns of this state. 
(Ord. of 1-4-1990(2), § 1) 
Secs. 12-67-12-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Business licenses, § 12-31 et seq. 

Sec. 12-91. - Required. 
    No person who is not licensed under the provisions of this article shall engage in the business of buying or selling firearms within the town. The term "person," as used in this section, shall mean any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, business or other entity. 
(Ord. of 1-4-1990(2), § 2) 
Sec. 12-92. - Application; contents. 
    Any person applying for a license under this article shall file a written application for such license with the town council. Such applications shall be in a form prescribed by the town clerk and shall include the name of the person applying; the residence and business address of the person applying; a statement as to whether the person applying has ever been arrested or convicted at any time, including misdemeanor and felony arrests and convictions; and any such arrests and convictions shall be listed giving full details of the same. The application shall include the age of the applicant, the applicant's residence addresses for the previous five years and the applicant's social security number. In case the applicant is a corporation, the application shall include the names of all shareholders of the corporation, all directors and all officers. The application shall be subscribed to and sworn to under oath. 
(Ord. of 1-4-1990(2), § 3) 
Sec. 12-93. - Investigation of applicant; report by chief of police; recommendation. 
    Upon receipt of an application under this article, the town clerk shall refer the application to the chief of police who shall make a full investigation of the applicant and shall file a report with the town council with the recommendation of such chief of police as to whether the application should be granted or denied. 
(Ord. of 1-4-1990(2), § 4) 
Sec. 12-94. - Advertisement prior to hearing. 
    Upon receipt of the application with the report of the chief of police, the town council shall cause the application to be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation in the town once a week for three successive weeks prior to the hearing on the license. 
(Ord. of 1-4-1990(2), § 5) 
Sec. 12-95. - Hearing. 
    The town council shall hold a public hearing on the issuance of the license at a time and place to be designated by the council, at which hearing all persons wishing to be heard for or against the issuance of the license shall be given an opportunity to be heard. 
(Ord. of 1-4-1990(2), § 6) 
Sec. 12-96. - Application fee; renewal fee. 
    The application for a license under this article shall be accompanied by an application fee of $75.00. The renewal license fee, as prescribed by G.L. 1956, § 11-47-39 et seq., shall be $5.00. 
(Ord. of 1-4-1990(2), § 7) 
Sec. 12-97. - Federal and state licenses required. 
    No license shall be issued under this article to any person who does not have the requisite federal and state license for dealers in firearms. 
(Ord. of 1-4-1990(2), § 8) 
Sec. 12-98. - Subject to state and federal laws. 
    Any license issued under this article shall be subject to all applicable provisions of federal and state law. 
(Ord. of 1-4-1990(2), § 9) 
Sec. 12-99. - Conditions. 
    Any license issued under this article shall, in addition to other applicable provisions of law, be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Location. The business shall be carried on only in the building designated in the license. 
(2)  Display. The license or copy thereof, certified by the issuing authority, shall be displayed on the premises where it can easily be read. 
(3)  Sales of pistols and revolvers. No pistol or revolver shall be sold in violation of any provision of G.L. 1956, § 11-47-1 et seq., nor shall a pistol or revolver be sold under any circumstances unless the purchaser is personally known to the seller or shall present clear evidence of his identity. 
(Ord. of 1-4-1990(2), § 10) 
Sec. 12-100. - Expiration date. 
    Any license issued under this article shall expire on December 31 of each year. 
(Ord. of 1-4-1990(2), § 11) 
Sec. 12-101. - Renewal. 
    Any license issued under this article shall be annually renewable upon payment of an annual renewal fee and a certification of compliance by the license holder with all the terms and conditions of the license. In addition, such annual renewal of such license shall be subject to the ordinance concerning payment of taxes and approval of public safety authorities for the renewal or transfer of licenses issued by the town. 
(Ord. of 1-4-1990(2), § 12) 
Sec. 12-102. - Continuation; annual renewal. 
    All licenses previously issued by the town pursuant to the provisions of G.L. 1956, § 11-47-1 et seq. shall continue in effect, subject to the terms of this article, and shall be renewed annually by the holder pursuant to the terms of this article. 
(Ord. of 1-4-1990(2), § 13) 
Sec. 12-103. - Suspension or revocation; hearing. 
    Any license issued under this article may be suspended or revoked by the town council at any time, for reasonable cause shown, after giving the license holder an opportunity to be heard at a public hearing to be scheduled by the town council. 
(Ord. of 1-4-1990(2), § 14) 
Secs. 12-104-12-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HAWKERS, PEDDLERS AND DOOR-TO-DOOR SALESPERSONS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 30. 
State Law reference- Hawkers and peddlers, G.L. 1956, § 5-11-1.1 et seq.; local licensing fees, G.L. 1956, § 5-11-2018. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-136. - Authority of article. 
    This article is enacted pursuant to the provisions of G.L. 1956, § 5-11-1.1 et seq. 
(Ord. of 3-8-1990, § 1) 
Sec. 12-137. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Door-to-door salespersons means persons who deliver goods, wares or merchandise to customers for which payment has already been made or is to be made at the time of delivery. Persons selling farm or garden produce, including flowers, and milkmen and persons selling works of art or crafts of their own making at any art or crafts show or exhibition are not deemed to be hawkers, peddlers or door-to-door salespersons. 
    Hawker means any person selling, or offering for sale, any goods, wares or merchandise whatsoever, including any food or beverage, on any public street, highway or public right-of-way in this town from a stationary location. 
    Peddler means any person selling, or offering for sale, any goods, wares or merchandise whatsoever, including any food or beverage, from a vehicle, cart or any other conveyance which is not stationary. 
(Ord. of 3-8-1990, § 2) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 12-138. - Exemptions. 
    Persons selling religious books and publications on behalf of Bible, tract or other religious or moral societies for the purpose of promoting religious or moral improvement, and which are sold for that purpose and not for pecuniary profit, are not deemed to be hawkers, peddlers or door-to-door salespersons. Persons peddling or selling any articles of wearing apparel manufactured with his own hands are not deemed to be hawkers, peddlers or door-to-door salespersons. 
(Ord. of 3-8-1990, § 3) 
Secs. 12-139-12-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Business licenses, § 12-31 et seq. 

Sec. 12-161. - Duration; expiration date. 
    Licenses issued under this article shall be for the calendar year of issuance and shall expire on December 31 of each year. 
(Ord. of 3-8-1990, § 4) 
Sec. 12-162. - Hearing, notice and fees; issuance preconditions. 
    Licenses shall be issued under this article by the town council after a hearing and public notice given by publication of the application at least one week prior to the date of the hearing. The applicant shall pay, at the time of application, a fee in the amount of $50.00. 
(Ord. of 3-8-1990, § 5) 
Sec. 12-163. - Revocation; notice; hearing. 
    Licenses issued under this article may be revoked for good and just cause. The town council shall give at least one week's notice to the license holder of a hearing on the revocation of the license. Notice shall be given by certified mail to the address given in the license holder's application. Notice shall include a short and concise statement of the alleged good and just cause. After the hearing, the town council may revoke the license upon a finding of good and just cause for revocation. 
(Ord. of 3-8-1990, § 6) 
Sec. 12-164. - Unlicensed sales. 
    No person who is not licensed under this article shall sell or offer for sale any goods, wares or merchandise whatsoever, including food or beverages, as a hawker or peddler within the town. 
(Ord. of 3-8-1990, § 7) 
Secs. 12-165-12-195. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - JUNK AND SECONDHAND GOODS DEALERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-196. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Automobile junkyard means a place where one or more unserviceable, discarded, wornout or junked automobiles, or bodies, engines, tires, parts or accessories thereof are gathered together. 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 12-197. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person carrying on any of the businesses described in this article without a license shall be punished according to the provisions of section 1-7. 
Secs. 12-198-12-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Business licenses, § 12-31 et seq. 

Sec. 12-221. - Required. 
    All persons selling, purchasing, bartering and dealing in junk, old metals and any other secondhand articles and all persons establishing, operating or maintaining automobile junkyards shall be required to obtain a license from the town council. 
Sec. 12-222. - Fees for shopkeepers. 
    The fee for a license for the keeper of a shop or storehouse for the reception of any junk, old metals or secondhand articles which is not an automobile junkyard shall be $25.00. The fee for a license for any foundryman or other person receiving such materials for the purpose of melting the materials or converting such materials into castings shall be $25.00. The fee for a license for the gatherer of such materials in any bag, wagon or cart shall be $25.00. The fee for a license for any person establishing, operating or maintaining an automobile junkyard shall be $25.00. 
Sec. 12-223. - Hearing; notice; posting; filing fees. 
    The town council, before granting a license under this article to keep a shop or storehouse for the reception of any junk, old metals or other secondhand articles or to establish, operate or maintain an automobile junkyard in any location not lawfully occupied for such purpose at the time of the application for such license, shall hold a public hearing notice, which shall be posted at the time of the application for such license; shall hold a public hearing notice which shall be posted at least seven days, but not more than 14 days prior to such hearing in not less than two public places in the town and in a newspaper of general circulation in the town; provided, however, that before the notice of a hearing shall be posted or published, the applicant for the license shall pay a filing fee of $10.00, plus the cost of posting and publishing such notice. 
Sec. 12-224. - Refusal. 
    No license shall be granted under this article to the keeper of any shop or storehouse for the reception of any junk, old metals or other secondhand articles or to the person establishing, operating or maintaining an automobile junkyard in any location not lawfully occupied for such purpose at the time of the application for such purpose at the time of the application for such license where the owners or occupants or the greater part of the land within 200 feet of such building or place shall file with the town council their objection to the granting of such license; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to an applicant who is the keeper of such a shop or storehouse or automobile junkyard within the town which is being acquired under eminent domain proceedings who is applying for a license pursuant to G.L. 1956, § 5-21-1. 
Sec. 12-225. - Conditions for granting for automobile junkyard. 
    No license shall be granted for an automobile junkyard under this article unless: 
(1)  It is to be operated and maintained entirely within a building; 
(2)  It is to be operated and maintained exclusively for the purpose of salvaging the value as scrap of the material collected, as opposed to reselling parts to be used for the purpose for which they were originally manufactured, and is to be located in a built-up commercial or industrial area, or contiguous to a railroad siding, or on or contiguous to docking facilities; or 
(3)  It is: 
a.  More than 600 feet away from any state highway; 
b.  More than 300 feet from any park, bathing beach, playground, school, church or cemetery and is not within ordinary view therefrom; and 
c.  Screened from view either by natural objects or well constructed and properly maintained fences at least six feet high, acceptable to the town council and so specified on the license. 
Sec. 12-226. - Considerations by council. 
    In considering the application for any license under this article, the town council shall consider the character and reputation of the applicants and the nature and location of the proposed site with reference to the character of the surrounding neighborhood and the orderly development of the town. 
Sec. 12-227. - Burning conditions. 
    In granting a license the town council may impose such conditions as it may deem fit with respect to burning. 
Sec. 12-228. - Expiration; revocation. 
    All licenses issued under this article shall expire on December 31 next following the date of issuance and may be revoked at the pleasure of the town council. 
Sec. 12-229. - Limit on number for junkyards. 
    No more than four licenses for automobile junkyards under this article shall be in effect at any one time. 
Sec. 12-230. - Application of section 12-225 to junkyards. 
    The provisions of section 12-225(1), (2) and (3)b shall not apply to any automobile junkyard in existence and having a valid license on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
Secs. 12-231-12-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PRIVATELY OWNED CAMPING AREAS[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Parks and recreation, ch. 22. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-261. - Purpose of article. 
    The purpose of this article is to promote the public health, safety, morals, orderly development and general welfare of the town, and to encourage the development of orderly and well managed camping areas. 
(Ord. of 6-17-1965, § 1) 
Sec. 12-262. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Camping area means any tract or parcel of land set aside for use by persons paying a fee to camp there in tents, similar portable structures and vehicles designed for use in camping, or camping trailers. 
(Ord. of 6-17-1965, § IX) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 12-263. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person violating each or any of the provisions of this article shall be punished according to the provisions of section 1-7. The town council may also revoke the camping area license as specified in section 12-290. 
(Ord. of 8-22-1991, § I) 
Sec. 12-264. - Operation. 
    Camping areas shall be open and operated during the period from March 1 to December 31 only. 
(Ord. of 8-22-1991, § I) 
Secs. 12-265-12-285. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Business licenses, § 12-31 et seq. 

Sec. 12-286. - Required. 
    No person shall maintain or operate a camping area within the town without a license for such camping area, except as provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 6-17-1965, § I) 
Sec. 12-287. - Application procedure. 
(a)  Application for a camping area license shall be made in writing to the town council and shall be filed with the town clerk at least four weeks prior to the special or regularly scheduled town council meeting at which hearings on such applications are sought. 
(b)  Such application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner of the land on which the camping area is to be established. 
(2)  A description of the facilities intended to be installed on the proposed camping area and the services to be available to persons camping there. 
(c)  Such application shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  A plat of the proposed camping area, showing its area and the names and addresses of all property owners adjoining or within 200 feet of the proposed camping areas. 
(2)  Application fee of $50.00 to defray expenses of administering this article. 
(3)  Certificate of the town health officer that the facilities intended to be installed on the proposed camping area and the services to be available to persons camping there will be adequate to meet water supply needs, sewage and garbage disposal needs, and that the proposed camping area will otherwise present a healthy environment for camping. 
(4)  A certificate of the tree warden that the fire prevention facilities intended to be installed on the proposed camping area are adequate, that fire prevention measures intended to be followed at the proposed camping area are adequate and that the proposed camping area will otherwise present a safe environment for camping. 
(d)  The town clerk shall refuse to accept any application not containing the information specified in subsection (b) of this section or not accompanied by the plat, fee and certificates specified in subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)  Upon receipt of a proper application, the town clerk shall send, by regular mail, notice of such application and the date, time and place of the hearing thereon to each of the property owners adjoining or within 200 feet of the proposed location, as shown on the plat accompanying the application. Such notice shall be sent at least three weeks prior to the town council meeting at which such application is to be considered. The town clerk shall also cause the application to be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation in the county, once a week during the two weeks prior to the town council meeting at which such application is to be considered. 
(Ord. of 6-17-1965, § II) 
Sec. 12-288. - Standards governing issuance. 
    No such license shall be granted unless the following standards are met: 
(1)  The proposed camping area must have an area of at least ten acres. 
(2)  No camping facilities or campsites on the proposed camping area shall be located within 200 feet of any adjoining landowner's dwelling house. 
(Ord. of 6-17-1965, § III) 
Sec. 12-289. - Hearing on issuance; issuance or denial. 
    A hearing on the issuance of a camping area license shall be at a special or regularly scheduled town council meeting, after hearing the license shall be granted forthwith if the standards outlined in section 12-288 are met and the proposed location of the camping is found to be compatible with the character and land use of the surrounding neighborhood. 
(Ord. of 6-17-1965, § IV) 
Sec. 12-290. - Conditions required. 
    Any license granted under this article shall be on the following conditions: 
(1)  The license shall not be transferable. 
(2)  The license shall be revocable by the town council for violation of any of the provisions of this article or upon evidence presented by the town health officer or tree warden that the camping area is unhealthy or unsafe, or that adequate health and safety measures are not being followed. 
(3)  The license shall also be revocable by the town council for any violation committed on the premises or of the provisions of any other ordinance or statute, or for maintaining, or allowing the maintenance of, a nuisance on the premises. 
(4)  The license shall permit inspections of the camping area at reasonable times by the town police. 
(Ord. of 6-17-1965, § V) 
Sec. 12-291. - Expiration and renewal; annual fees. 
    All licenses under the authority of this article shall expire on February 1 of each year. Such licenses shall be renewed by payment of an annual license fee of $50.00 to the town treasurer on or before February 1 of each year. 
(Ord. of 6-17-1965, § VI; Ord. of 8-22-1991, § VI) 
Secs. 12-292-12-325. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TAVERNS, VICTUALING HOUSES, COOKSHOPS, ETC.[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 4. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-326. - Grocery or general stores exempt from article provisions. 
    All persons conducting grocery or general stores are hereby exempt from the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 12-327. - Town clerk to procure suitable licenses and bonds; publication of article. 
    The town clerk is hereby authorized and directed to procure suitable licenses and bonds for the purposes described in this article, and have this article published in conformity with state law. 
Secs. 12-328-12-350. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference- Business licenses, § 12-31 et seq. 

Sec. 12-351. - Required. 
    No person shall keep a tavern, victualing house, cookshop or oyster house without first having obtained a license therefor from the town clerk. 
Sec. 12-352. - Terms and conditions. 
    Every such license shall specify the person licensed, the business licensed and the building or room in which the business shall be pursued, and shall continue and be in force from December 1 to November 30 following the granting of such license, unless sooner revoked for cause. Every such license shall be given upon such terms and conditions as the town council may from time to time prescribe. 
Sec. 12-353. - Fees. 
    The fee for a tavern, victualing house, cookshop or oyster house license shall be $25.00. The fee for lunch, ice cream, soda and cigar stands, etc., shall be $25.00. 
Sec. 12-354. - Bond-Required for tavern, victualing house, cookshop or oyster house. 
    Every person licensed for the purpose of keeping a tavern, victualing house, cookshop or oyster house, etc., shall give a bond to the town in the sum of $100.00 and shall furnish as surety upon such bond either some person owning real estate within the town or some surety company authorized to do business in the state. Such bond shall be conditioned to comply with the provision of the license and of the law. 
Sec. 12-355. - Same-Required for lunch, ice cream, soda and cigar stand. 
    Every person licensed for the purpose of keeping a lunch, ice cream, soda and cigar stand, etc., shall give a bond to the town in the sum of $50.00, and shall furnish as surety upon such bond either some person owning real estate within the town or some surety authorized to do business in the state. Such bond shall be conditional to comply with the provisions of the license and of the law. 
Sec. 12-356. - Required for keeping billiard table, bagatelle table, pool table or table of similar character. 
    No person shall keep a billiard table, bagatelle table, pool table or any table of similar character in any shop or place of business, or own or keep such table for public use or profit, unless a license for such table shall first be granted by the town council. Such license shall be issued upon such terms and conditions as the town council may from time to time prescribe. 
Sec. 12-357. - License fee in connection with section 12-356. 
    Every person licensed under section 12-356 shall pay to the town treasurer the sum of $50.00. Every such license shall continue and be in force from December 1 to November 30 following the granting of such license, unless sooner revoked for cause. 
Sec. 12-358. - Keeping tables as described in section 12-356 without license; penalty. 
    Every person who shall keep or use any such billiard table, bagatelle table, pool table or any table of similar character without obtaining such license first shall be punished according to the provisions of section 1-7. 
Chapter 14 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq.; police access to liquor establishments, § 4-41; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 20; traffic, ch. 36. 
State Law reference- Relief of injured and deceased police officers, G.L. 1956, § 45-19-1 et seq. 

Sec. 14-1. - Purpose of chapter. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to secure a better regulated and efficient police force to the citizens of the town and to more effectively preserve the peace and good order of the town. 
Sec. 14-2. - Chief of police. 
    The chief of police shall be appointed by the town council and shall serve until his successor is appointed and qualified for office. The chief of police shall serve under the direction and control of the town council and shall be responsible for the administration, control, discipline and good order of the uniformed police force of the town. The chief of police may be removed from office at any time by the town council. 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq. 
Sec. 14-3. - Police officers-Examination; appointment; removal. 
    The chief of police, upon taking office and from time to time thereafter, shall make recommendations to the town council of qualified police constables of the town to serve as uniformed police officers of the town. The town council shall examine the qualifications of each constable so recommended and, if satisfied of his qualifications, shall appoint him a uniformed police officer of the town. Police officers so appointed shall serve under the direction and control of the chief of police. Any police officer may be removed from office at any time by the town council upon a recommendation of the chief of police. 
Sec. 14-4. - Same-Duties. 
    It shall be the duty of every police officer of the town to preserve peace and good order, and to see that all ordinances are promptly enforced. 
Chapter 16 - MANUFACTURED HOMES AND TRAILERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; businesses, ch. 18; planning, ch. 24; soil erosion and sediment control, ch. 26; solid waste management, ch. 28; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 30; subdivision regulations, ch. 32; zoning, ch. 38; supplementary zoning regulations for house trailers and mobile homes, § 38-280. 
State Law reference- Mobile homes, G.L. 1956, § 31-44-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1-16-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MOBILE HOMES AND HOUSE TRAILERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 16-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Trailer means any portable structure, mobile home, or vehicle designed to be drawn by vehicles or self-propelled and occupied as a dwelling or used for sleeping purposes. 
(Ord. of 5-6-1965(1), § XV) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 16-32. - Camping trailers in licensed camping areas; trailers in licensed trailer parks. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to so-called camping trailers or vehicles designed for use in camping while located in a camping area duly licensed under the town ordinance regulating camping areas (article IV of chapter 12). The provisions of this article shall not apply to trailers located in trailer parks duly licensed under the town ordinance regulating trailer parks (article III of this chapter). 
(Ord. of 5-6-1965(1), § XIII; Ord. of 6-17-1965, § I) 
Sec. 16-33. - Penalties; order prohibiting use. 
    Any person violating each or any of the provisions of this article shall be fined $100.00. Each day's violation shall be considered as a separate offense. The town council may also apply to the Superior Court for an order prohibiting the use as a dwelling unit of any trailer located or used in violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-6-1965(1), § XIII) 
Secs. 16-34-16-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - INSTALLATION PERMIT 

Sec. 16-56. - Location of trailers without permit prohibited. 
    No person shall locate any trailer for use as a dwelling unit within the town without an installation permit for the same except as provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 5-6-1965(1), § I) 
Sec. 16-57. - Procedure for applying for installation permit. 
(a)  Application for an installation permit shall be made in writing to the town council and shall be filed with the town clerk at least four weeks prior to the regularly scheduled town council meeting at which hearing on such application is sought. 
(b)  Such application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The name and address of the owner of the trailer. 
(3)  The name and address of the owner of the proposed location of such trailer. 
(4)  A metes and bounds description of the proposed location of such trailer. 
(c)  Such application shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  A plat of the proposed location of such trailer prepared by a licensed surveyor showing the area of such location and the names and addresses of all property owners adjoining or within 200 feet of the proposed location. 
(2)  An application fee of $100.00 to defray the expense of administering this article. 
(d)  The town clerk shall refuse to accept any application not containing the information specified in subsection (b) of this section or not accompanied by the plat and fee specified in subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)  Upon receipt of a proper application, the town clerk shall send, by regular mail, notice of such application and the date, time and place of the hearing thereon to each of the property owners adjoining or within 200 feet of the proposed location, as shown on the plat accompanying the application. Such notice shall be sent at least three weeks prior to the town council meeting at which such application is to be considered. The town clerk shall also cause such application to be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation in the county once a week during the two weeks prior to the town council meeting at which such application is to be considered. 
(Ord. of 5-6-1965(1), § II; Ord. of 7-1-1971, § 1) 
Sec. 16-58. - Standards to govern issuance of installation permit. 
    No such installation permit shall be issued unless the following standards are met: 
(1)  The proposed location shall not be within 1,500 feet of any church, school, library, park, recreation area or municipal building. 
(2)  The proposed location shall have an area of at least 40,000 square feet. 
(3)  The proposed location shall have a frontage on an established public road of at least 175 feet. 
(Ord. of 5-6-1965(1), § III) 
Sec. 16-59. - Hearing on issuance of installation permit; issuance or denial of permit. 
(a)  Hearings on the issuance of an installation permit shall be held at regularly scheduled town council meetings. After hearing, the installation permit shall be issued forthwith if the standards outlined in section 16-58 are met and the proposed location of the trailer is found to be compatible with the character and land use of the surrounding neighborhood; otherwise, the application shall be denied. 
(b)  Installation permits shall automatically expire six months after they are granted unless a trailer is located on the property and a license granted for the use of said trailer within said six-month period. Installation permits shall not be transferable and any attempt to transfer the same shall result in automatic revocation thereof. 
(Ord. of 5-6-1965(1), § IV; Ord. of 4-6-1967) 
Sec. 16-60. - Temporary permits. 
    The town council may issue a temporary permit for the location and use of a trailer as a dwelling unit while a dwelling house is under construction at the same location. Such permit shall expire six months after its issue and shall not be extended or renewed. On the expiration of such permit, the trailer must be removed. Such permit shall be issued only after the town council is satisfied that the applicant is acting in good faith and will remove the trailer on the expiration of the temporary permit. 
(Ord. of 5-6-1965(1), § XII) 
Secs. 16-61-16-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TRAILER LICENSES 

Sec. 16-81. - Unlicensed trailers prohibited. 
    No person shall maintain or use any trailer as a dwelling unit within the town without a license for the same except as provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 5-6-1965(1), § V) 
Sec. 16-82. - Procedure for applying for initial trailer license. 
(a)  Application for the initial issuance of a trailer license shall be made in writing to the town council and shall be filed with the town clerk at least two weeks prior to the regularly scheduled town council meeting at which hearing on such application is sought. 
(b)  Such application shall contain a statement that the standards outlined in section 16-83 are met. 
(c)  Such application shall be accompanied by the installation permit previously issued by the town council under section 16-59. 
(d)  The town clerk shall refuse to accept any application not containing the statement specified in subsection (b) of this section or not accompanied by the permit specified in subsection (c) of this section. 
(Ord. of 5-6-1965(1), § VI) 
Sec. 16-83. - Standards to govern issuance of initial trailer license. 
    No such initial trailer license shall be issued unless the following standards are met: 
(1)  The trailer must be set back at least 30 feet from the road on which it is located and 50 feet from adjoining lot lines. 
(2)  The trailer must have its own individual or municipal water supply and its own septic tank, not used by any other dwelling unit. 
(Ord. of 5-6-1965(1), § VII) 
Sec. 16-84. - Hearing on issuance of initial trailer license; issuance or denial of license. 
    Hearings on the issuance of an initial trailer license shall be held at regularly scheduled town council meetings. After hearing, the initial trailer license shall be issued forthwith upon payment of the $10.00 annual license fee, if the standards outlined in section 16-83 are met; otherwise, the application shall be denied. 
(Ord. of 5-6-1965(1), § VIII) 
Sec. 16-85. - Previously located trailers. 
    Trailers located in the town before the effective date of this article must comply with the provisions of any ordinance regulating trailers, including provisions for licensing such trailers, in effect at the time of their location, and must also comply with the provisions of section 16-83(b) (relating to individual water supply and septic tank) and the provisions of section 16-86 (relating to annual license fees). 
(Ord. of 5-6-1965(1), § IX) 
Sec. 16-86. - Expiration and renewal of licenses; annual license fees. 
    All licenses issued under the authority of this article or any previous ordinance regulating trailers shall expire on December 31 of each year. Such licenses shall be renewed by payment of an annual license fee of $10.00 to the town treasurer on or before December 31 of each year. 
(Ord. of 5-6-1965(1), § X) 
Sec. 16-87. - Transfer of licenses. 
    Trailer licenses issued under the authority of this article or any previous ordinance regulating trailers shall not be transferable except upon written application to the town council. The town council shall authorize the transfer of the license if it finds that the location of the trailer is compatible with the character and land use of the surrounding neighborhood at the time the transfer is requested. Any attempt to transfer the license without first obtaining the authorization of the town council shall result in automatic revocation thereof. 
(Ord. of 5-6-1965(1), § XI) 
Secs. 16-88-16-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MOBILE HOME PARKS AND TRAILER PARKS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 12. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 16-121. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Collector means the tax collector of the town. 
    Health officer means the duly appointed health officer of the town or his deputy. 
    Licensee means any person receiving a license to conduct, operate or maintain a mobile home or trailer park or individual mobile home, or trailer, as the case may be. 
    Licensing authority means the town council. 
    Mobile home means a unit or any vehicle used for sleeping or living quarters, permanent or temporary, which is equipped with running water, bath facilities, flush toilet, and appropriate sanitary conditions. 
    Mobile home park or trailer park means privately owned land upon which two or more mobile homes or trailers are or are intended to be used and occupied as sleeping or living quarters, permanent or temporary. 
    Trailer means any house, car, or automobile trailer, other than a mobile home, used for or adaptable for use as living quarters, permanent or temporary. 
(Ord. of 5-6-1965(2), § I) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 16-122. - General requirements for operation of a mobile home or trailer park. 
(a)  The park shall be located on a site graded to ensure drainage of surface and subsurface water, sewerage, and freedom from stagnant pools. 
(b)  A minimum lot size of 10,000 square feet shall be provided for each mobile home or trailer lot of space. 
(c)  There shall be a minimum of 80 feet clearance between each mobile home or trailer. 
(d)  All mobile home or trailer lots shall abut on a roadway of not less than 30 feet width where off-road parking is provided or 40 feet where no off-road parking is provided. 
(e)  All roads within the park shall be well drained, provided with hard surface, shall be maintained in good condition by the owner or licensee of the mobile home park or trailer park. 
(f)  No mobile home or trailer shall be located closer than 50 feet from the traveled portion of any public highway. 
(g)  Streetlights of not less than 1,000 lumens each shall be installed at intervals of not more than 200 feet apart. 
(h)  The park shall be properly landscaped. 
(Ord. of 5-6-1965(2), § IV) 
Sec. 16-123. - Sanitary requirements for operation of mobile home or trailer parks. 
(a)  An adequate and potable supply of water with a minimum of 25 pounds per square inch pressure at all times shall be provided for each mobile home or trailer space or lot. The water source shall be capable of producing 300 gallons of potable water per mobile home or trailer lot per day from a source approved by the health officer. 
(b)  No part of the sewerage disposal leaching field system shall be located within 250 feet of any mobile home or trailer park well water supply. 
(c)  Where the sewer lines of a mobile home park or trailer park are not connected to a public sewer, the means of disposal of all sewerage must be approved by the state board of health. 
(d)  Each mobile home or trailer lot shall be provided with an approved electrical connection. 
(e)  Licensees shall furnish at least two refuse cans with tightfitting covers for each occupied mobile home or trailer lot or use any approved collection method in accordance with the state health sanitation laws. Refuse shall be collected and removed regularly and in such manner that no nuisance shall be maintained; it shall be the responsibility of each licensee to maintain proper sanitary conditions with respect to waste and refuse disposal. 
(Ord. of 5-6-1965(2), § V) 
Cross reference- Solid waste management, ch. 28. 
Sec. 16-124. - Registration of mobile homes or trailers. 
(a)  Each licensee shall keep a register in which the following information shall be recorded forthwith upon the lettering of each mobile home or trailer lot. Such information shall be furnished to the licensing authority by filing same with the town clerk. 
(1)  Full name of mobile home or trailer owner. 
(2)  Make, model, size, serial number, and year of manufacture of mobile home or trailer. 
(3)  State in which registered and registration number, if any. 
(b)  Each licensee shall keep or cause to be kept, for taxation purposes, the following information: 
(1)  The name of the state and the registration or license number of each vehicle; 
(2)  The make, year, length, serial and license number of each mobile home or trailer stationed, maintained, occupied or registered at the mobile home park or trailer park on December 31 of each year. 
Such information shall be filed with the board of tax assessors of the town between January 1 and January 15 in each year. 
(Ord. of 5-6-1965(2), § VI) 
Sec. 16-125. - Existing land and area requirements. 
    The provisions of sections 16-122 and 16-152, except 16-152(a) and (d) shall not apply to any mobile home or trailer site located within the town prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives. 
(Ord. of 5-6-1965(2), § X) 
Sec. 16-126. - Penalties for violation. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $25.00 for each offense. Each day a violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 5-6-1965(2), § VIII) 
Secs. 16-127-16-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Business licenses, § 12-31 et seq. 

Sec. 16-151. - Required. 
    No person shall maintain or operate a mobile home park or trailer park without having first obtained a license from the licensing authority. These regulations shall apply forthwith to all existing mobile home or trailer parks; provided, however, that the licensing authority shall, upon application, grant such extension of time or waive such requirements (other than sanitary requirements) as may in its judgment be required by the specific circumstances. 
(Ord. of 5-6-1965(2), § II) 
Sec. 16-152. - Application. 
(a)  An application for a mobile home park or trailer park license shall contain the following: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant, and name and address of real party in interest if other than the applicant. 
(2)  A plot plan made by a licensed surveyor under seal showing the site of the mobile home park or trailer park, roads, location, size, shape and identification number of the mobile home or trailer lots or spaces, locations of sanitary provisions and the name of abutting property owners according to the records of the board of tax assessors. 
(3)  Certificate of approval of the health officer as to compliance with the sanitary requirements set forth. 
(4)  The initial fee for a permit for a mobile home park or trailer park shall be $125.00 payable to the town clerk. Any renewal of such permit thereafter shall be $125.00 per year. 
(5)  Proof of ownership, option or valid lease of the premises to be used as a mobile home park or trailer park. 
(6)  Approval of the planning board. 
(b)  No original license for a mobile home or trailer park shall be granted or issued until a public hearing advertised at least once a week for three successive weeks in a public newspaper published in the county shall be held by the licensing authority. 
(Ord. of 5-6-1965(2), § III) 
Chapter 18 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 16; solid waste hazard or nuisance, § 28-40. 
State Law reference- Nuisances, G.L. 1956, § 11-30-1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1-18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NOISE 

Sec. 18-31. - Creation of certain sounds declared nuisance. 
    It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any person to make, cause or suffer, or permit to be made or caused upon any premises owned, occupied or controlled by him, or upon any public property, public roadway or thoroughfare in the town, unnecessary noise or sounds by means of the human voice, or, by any other means or methods which are physically annoying to persons, or which are so harsh, or so prolonged or unnatural, or, unusual in their use, time and place as to occasion physical discomfort or which are injurious to the lives, health, peace and comfort of the inhabitants of the town. 
(Ord. of 2-4-1982, § I) 
Sec. 18-32. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person violating this article shall be fined an amount not exceeding $100.00. 
(Ord. of 2-4-1982, § II) 
Chapter 20 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Law enforcement, ch. 14. 
State Law reference- Offenses punishable by state law not to be imposed by ordinance, G.L. 1956, § 45-6-6; criminal offenses, G.L. 1956, § 11-1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 20-1. - Disorderly conduct; penalty for violation of section. 
    Every person who shall revel, commit any nuisance or mischief, disturb the peace, quarrel or otherwise behave in an indecent or disorderly manner in any public building, public hall, public place of amusement, church, public school, street, highway, public bridge, public lands, burial grounds, public parks, or any public place in the town of any establishment or club which serves or caters to the public, to the disturbance or annoyance of the peaceable inhabitants of the town, or any portion of them, or shall assist, aid, encourage or promote the same to be done by any other person shall be fined for each offense the sum of $20.00, or imprisoned for a term not to exceed ten days. 
State Law reference- Disorderly conduct, G.L. 1956, § 11-45-1. 
Sec. 20-2. - Indecent intoxication. 
    Any person who shall be found intoxicated under such circumstances as to amount to a violation of decency in any highway, street, gangway or other public place in this town shall, upon conviction, be fined for each and every offense not less than $5.00 nor more than $20.00, or be imprisoned not more than ten days. 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 4. 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt an ordinance to punish indecent intoxication, G.L. 1956, § 45-6-3. 
Sec. 20-3. - Discharge of firearms; penalty for violation of section. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearms within a distance of 500 feet from any building within the town; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the owner or lessee of any such building, or to the immediate members of his family. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be fined not exceeding $20.00 or imprisoned not exceeding ten days for each such violation. 
Cross reference- Firearms dealers, § 12-66 et seq. 
State Law reference- Weapons, G.L. 1956, § 11-47-1 et seq. 
Chapter 22 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Privately owned camping area, § 12-261 et seq.; streets and sidewalks, ch. 30. 
State Law reference- Parks and recreational areas, G.L. 1956, § 32-1-2 et seq.; municipal regulation of parks, G.L. 1956, § 32-3-1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1-22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RECREATION DEPARTMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-31. - Established; composition. 
    There shall be a recreation department consisting of a recreation director and a recreation committee. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1989(2), § I) 
Secs. 22-32-22-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RECREATION DIRECTOR[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq. 

Sec. 22-51. - Appointment. 
    The town council shall appoint a recreation director who shall serve at the pleasure of the town council. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1989(2), § II A.) 
Sec. 22-52. - Duties. 
    The director shall: 
(1)  Be responsible for the implementation and operation of all town-sponsored recreational programs in the town. 
(2)  Arrange for the regular maintenance of all town recreational buildings and grounds by the public works director. 
(3)  Attend recreation committee meetings for the purpose of reporting on recreation department operations, and shall collaborate in the development of the annual operating budget. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1989(2), § II B.) 
Sec. 22-53. - Compensation. 
    The recreation director shall receive such compensation as the town council may see fit. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1989(2), § II C.) 
Secs. 22-54-22-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RECREATION COMMITTEE 

Sec. 22-76. - Appointment. 
    The town council shall appoint a recreation committee to consist of seven members, to serve for staggered terms. Annually at the meeting held for the purpose of appointments to town offices, the council shall appoint one member (or two members as necessary in some years) to replace the member whose term shall next expire, and who shall serve for a term of five years. In case of a vacancy in the recreation committee, the council shall fill the vacancy by appointment for the unexpired term. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1989(2), § III A.) 
Sec. 22-77. - Duties. 
    The recreation committee shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Establish, construct, equip and control public playgrounds, athletic fields, swimming areas and other community recreation centers. 
(2)  Plan, develop and assist the recreation director in the implementation of all town-sponsored recreation programs for youths, adults and senior citizens. 
(3)  Develop an annual operating budget for the recreation department to be submitted to the town council for approval. 
(4)  Present a capital budget and improvement program annually to the planning board. 
(5)  Cooperate with the planning board and the conservation advisory commission in the administration of the recreation, conservation and open space element of the town's comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1989(2), § III B.) 
Sec. 22-78. - Organization. 
(a)  The recreation committee shall elect annually from its membership a chairperson, vice-chairperson, secretary and treasurer. 
(b)  The recreation committee shall meet once a month at a regular, specified time. An agenda of the meeting shall be posted at the town clerk's office and as otherwise required by the R.I. Open Meetings Law, G. L 1956, § 42-46-1 et seq. 
(c)  The secretary shall keep minutes of all meetings and submit all minutes approved by the recreation committee to the town clerk for public record. 
(d)  The recreation committee shall present a quarterly report to the town council. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1989(2), § III C.) 
Sec. 22-79. - Expenses and appropriations. 
    The members of the recreation committee shall serve without compensation. They shall have no authority to spend any money or to contract any indebtedness for or on account of the town, other than such moneys as shall be appropriated, or such indebtedness as they may be especially authorized to incur by the town at the financial town meeting. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1989(2), § III D.) 
Chapter 24 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 16; soil erosion and sediment control, ch. 26; streets and sidewalks, ch. 30; subdivision regulations, ch. 32; zoning, ch. 38. 
State Law reference- Planning and development, G.L. 1956, § 45-22-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 24-1-24-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Planning boards, G.L. 1956, § 45-22-1 et seq. 

Sec. 24-31. - Established. 
    In accordance with G.L. 1956, § 45-22-1 et seq., there is hereby established a planning board for the town. 
Sec. 24-32. - Duties. 
(a)  Studies, plans and reports. The planning board shall make studies of and prepare plans and reports for the needs and resources of the town with reference to its physical growth and development as effecting the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the people. Such studies, plans and reports may concern, among other things, the following: 
(1)  Land use; 
(2)  Transportation facilities; 
(3)  Public utilities; 
(4)  Public facilities including recreation areas, school and fire or police stations; 
(5)  Blighted areas, including plans for redevelopment or renewal; 
(6)  Air and water pollution; 
(7)  Natural resources; 
(8)  Protection from disaster; and 
(9)  Economic and sociological characteristics of the town. 
(b)  Master plan; contents. The planning board shall prepare and adopt a master plan for the future development of the town. Such master plan shall, among other things, show the proposed arrangement of land uses, transportation facilities, public facilities, utility systems, deteriorating neighborhoods planned for redevelopment or renewal, land natural resources and historic sites to be preserved. No portion of the master plan or amendment thereto shall be adopted by the planning board without a public hearing. Such a master plan shall serve as a guide to the planning board in the performance of its duties. 
(c)  Capital budget; six-year capital improvement program. When directed by the town council, the planning board shall collaborate with the budget committee in the preparation of a capital budget for the following year and a comprehensive six-year capital improvement program. 
(d)  Calling on others for assistance. The planning board, with the approval of the town council, shall have the authority to call upon other departments, boards and committees of the town and upon state and federal agencies for assistance in the performance of its designated functions, and shall cooperate with such town, state and federal agencies on matters of community, regional and state planning and development. All town officials, boards and committees shall, upon direction of the town council, furnish the planning board with such information as it may require for its work. 
(e)  Advisory recommendations to council. The planning board shall give an advisory recommendation on the matter within the scope of this section when so requested by the town council. Nothing in this subsection, however, shall prevent the town council from acting on any matter contrary to or in the absence of a recommendation from the planning board. 
(f)  Annual report. The planning board shall submit an annual report to the town council summarizing the work of the preceding year and recommending plans for future development. All plans and reports of the planning board shall be submitted to the town council and thereafter, upon approval of the town council, may be published for general distribution. 
Sec. 24-33. - Technical assistance. 
    The planning board may employ such technical assistance as it may require within the funds, appropriated for its use and may enter into agreements with state, federal or regional agencies upon the approval of the town council and within the funds appropriated to it for such purpose. 
Sec. 24-34. - Membership and term; compensation; vacancies. 
    The planning board shall consist of five members resident in the town. One member shall be elected at each annual financial town meeting to serve for a term of five years except that, at the financial town meeting, 1958, one member shall be elected for a term of one year, one for two years, one for three years, one for four years and one for five years. All members shall serve without compensation. Any vacancy which occurs on the planning board shall be filled by the town council until the next annual financial town meeting, at which time a successor will be elected to fill the unexpired term. Members shall serve until their respective successors are elected or appointed. 
Sec. 24-35. - Organization. 
    Following the annual financial town meeting, the planning board shall organize by electing a chairperson, a vice-chairperson and a secretary. The planning board shall adopt any rules and procedures necessary for the performance of the duties prescribed in this article. The planning board shall hold regularly scheduled meetings once a month. Special meetings shall be held at the call of the chairperson or upon the request of two of the planning board members. 
Chapter 26 - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 16; planning, ch. 24; streets and sidewalks, ch. 30; subdivision regulations, ch. 32; zoning, ch. 38; supplementary zoning regulations for surface and subsurface drains, § 38-278. 
State Law reference- Soil erosion and sediment control generally, G.L. 1956, § 45-46-1 et seq.; local ordinances, G.L. 1956, § 45-46-4. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Purpose of chapter. 
(a)  The town council hereby finds that excessive quantities of soil are eroding from certain areas that are undergoing development for nonagricultural uses such as housing developments, industrial areas, recreational facilities and roads. This erosion makes necessary costly repairs to gullies, washed out fills, roads and embankments. The resulting sediment clogs the storm sewers, road ditches and muddies streams, leaves deposits of silt in ponds and reservoirs and is considered a major water pollutant. 
(b)  The purpose of this chapter is to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation from occurring as a result of nonagricultural development within the town by requiring proper provisions for water disposal, and the protection of soil surfaces during and after construction, in order to promote the safety, public health and general welfare of the town. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1987, art. I, § 1) 
Sec. 26-2. - Applicability of chapter. 
    This chapter shall be applicable to any situation involving any disturbance to the terrain, topsoil or vegetative ground cover upon any property within the town after determination of applicability by the building inspector and/or his designee based upon criteria outlined in section 26-4. Compliance with the requirements as described in this chapter shall not be construed to relieve the owner/applicant of any obligations to obtain necessary state or federal permits. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1987, art. II, § 2) 
Sec. 26-3. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means any person, corporation or public or private organization proposing a development which would involve disturbance to the natural terrain. 
    Cut means an excavation. The difference between a point on the original ground and a designated point of lower elevation on the final grade; also, the material removed in excavation. 
    Development project means any construction, reconstruction, demolition, or removal of structures, roadways, parking or other paved areas, utilities or other similar facilities, including any action requiring a building permit by the town. 
    Erosion means the removal of mineral and/or organic matter by the action of wind, water and/or gravity. 
    Excavate means any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar material is dug into, cut, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated or bulldozed, and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom. 
    Fill means any act by which earth, sand or other material is placed or moved to a new location above the ground. The fill is also the difference in elevation between a point of existing undisturbed ground and a designated point of higher elevation of the final grade. 
    Land disturbing activity means any physical land development activity which includes such actions as clearance of vegetation, moving or filling of land, removal or excavation of soil or mineral resources or similar activities. 
    Runoff means the surface water discharge or rate of discharge of a given watershed after a fall of rain or snow and including seepage flows that do not enter the soil but run off the surface of the land; also, that portion of water that is not absorbed by the soil, but runs off the land surface. 
    Sediment means solid material, both mineral and/or organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water and/or gravity as a product of erosion. 
    Soil erosion and sediment control plan, erosion and sediment control plan and approved plan mean the (approved) document required before any person may cause disturbance to the natural terrain within the town as regulated in this chapter. 
    Watercourse means any freshwater wetland at its seasonal high water level including, but not limited to, any river, stream, brook, pond, lake, swamp, marsh bog, fen, wet meadow or any other standing or flowing body of water. The edge of the watercourse shall be used for delineation purposes. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1987, art. IX, § 1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-4. - Determination of applicability. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any existing vegetation, grades and contours of land in a manner which may increase the potential soil erosion, without first applying for a determination of applicability from the building inspector and/or his appointed agent. Upon determination of applicability, the owner/applicant shall submit within 60 days a soil erosion and sediment control plan for approval by the building inspector or his designee, as provided in section 26-81. The application for determination of applicability shall describe the location, nature, character and time schedule of the proposed land disturbing activity in sufficient detail to allow the building inspector and/or his designee to determine the potential for soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from the proposed project. In determining the applicability of this chapter to a particular land disturbing activity, the building inspector or his designee shall consider site topography, drainage patterns, soils, proximity to watercourses and other such information as deemed appropriate by the building inspector and/or his designee. A particular land disturbing activity shall not be subject to the requirements of this chapter if the building inspector and/or his designee finds that erosion resulting from the land disturbing activity is insignificant and represents no threat to adjacent properties or to the quality of any watercourse. The current "Rhode Island Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook," U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, state service department of environmental management, and state conservation committee shall be consulted in making this determination. 
(b)  This chapter shall not apply to existing quarrying operations actively engaged in excavating rock, but shall to sand and gravel extraction operations. 
(c)  No determination of applicability shall be required for the following: 
(1)  Construction, alteration or use of any additions to existing single-family or duplex homes or related structures, provided the grounds coverage of such addition is less than 1,000 square feet, and such construction, alteration and use does not occur within 100 feet of any watercourse, and the slopes at the site of land disturbance do not exceed ten percent. 
(2)  Use of a home garden in association with onsite residential use. 
(3)  Accepted agricultural management practices such as seasonal tilling and harvest activities associated with property utilized for private and/or commercial agricultural or silvicultural purpose. 
(4)  Excavations for improvements other than those described in subsection (a) of this section which exhibit all of the following characteristics: 
a.  Does not result in a total displacement of more than 50 cubic yards of material; 
b.  Has no slopes steeper than ten feet vertical in 100 feet horizontal or approximately ten percent; and 
c.  Has all disturbed surface areas promptly and effectively protected to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation. 
(5)  Grading, as a maintenance measure, or for landscaping purposes on existing developed land parcels or lots, provided that all bare surface is immediately seeded, sodded or otherwise protected from erosion actions and all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The aggregate of areas of such activity does not exceed 2,000 square feet; 
b.  The change of elevation does not exceed two feet at any point; and 
c.  The grading does not involve a quantity of fill greater than 18 cubic yards, except where fill is excavated from another portion of the same parcel and the quantity does not exceed 50 cubic yards. 
(6)  Grading, filling, removal or excavation activities and operations undertaken by the town under the direction and supervision of the director of public works for work on streets, roads or right-of-way dedicated to public use; provided, however, that adequate and acceptable erosion and sediment controls are incorporated in engineering plans and specifications and employed. Appropriate controls shall apply during construction as well as after the completion of these activities. All such work shall be undertaken in accordance with the performance principles provided for in section 26-88 and such standards and definitions as may be adopted to implement such performance principles. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1987, art. III, § 1) 
Secs. 26-5-26-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 26-36. - Powers of town council. 
    The town council authorizes the building inspector to administer the provisions of this chapter under G.L. 1956, §§ 45-46-1, 45-46-4 and 45-46-5, entitled "Soil Erosion and Sediment Control," and may designate all enforcement responsibilities to his designee. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1987, art. I, § 2) 
Sec. 26-37. - Qualifications of building inspector. 
    The building inspector and/or his appointed agent reviewing soil erosion and sediment control plans shall have the following qualifications: 
(1)  Be a registered engineer, surveyor or landscape architect or a soil and water conservation society certified erosion and sediment control specialist; or 
(2)  Have attended a soil erosion and sediment control training session sponsored by the United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service and Conservation Districts. 
The building inspector and/or his appointed agent shall be granted the necessary authority to administer this chapter, including entry onto private property when necessary for periodic inspections to ensure compliance with provisions of the approved soil erosion and sediment control plan. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1987, art. II, § 1) 
Sec. 26-38. - Performance bond. 
(a)  Before approving an erosion and sediment control plan, the building inspector and/or his designee may require the applicant/owner to file a surety company performance bond, deposit of money, negotiable securities or other method of surety, as specified by the building inspector or his designee. When any land disturbing activity is to take place within 100 feet of any watercourse or coastal feature or within an identified flood hazard district, or on slopes in excess of ten percent, the filing of a performance bond shall be required. The amount of the bond, as determined by the public works department or, in its absence, the building inspector and/or his designee, shall be sufficient to cover the cost of implementing all erosion and sediment control measures as shown on the plan. 
(b)  The bond or negotiable security filed by the applicant shall be subject to approval of the form, content, amount and manner of execution by the public works director and the town solicitor. 
(c)  A performance bond for an erosion and sediment control plan for a subdivision may be included in the performance bond of the subdivision. The posting of the bond as part of the subdivision performance bond does not, however, relieve the owner of any requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1987, art. VI, § 1(a)) 
Sec. 26-39. - Notice of default on performance secured by bond. 
(a)  Whenever the building inspector and/or his designee shall find that a default has occurred in the performance of any terms or conditions of the bond or in the implementation of measures secured by the bond, written notice shall be made to the applicant and to the surety of the bond by the town solicitor. The notice shall state the nature of default, work to be done, the estimated cost thereof, and the period of time deemed by the building inspector and/or his designee to be reasonably necessary for the completion of the work. 
(b)  Failure of the applicant to acknowledge and comply with the provisions and deadlines outlined in such notice of default shall mean the institution, by the town solicitor, without further notice of proceedings whatsoever, of appropriate measures to utilize the performance bond to cause the required work to be completed by the town, by contract or by other appropriate means as determined by the town solicitor. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1987, art. VI, § 1(b)) 
Sec. 26-40. - Notice of default on performance secured by cash or negotiable securities deposit. 
    If a cash or negotiable securities deposit has been posted by the applicant, notice and procedure shall be the same as provided for in section 26-39. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1987, art. VI, § 1(c)) 
Sec. 26-41. - Release from performance bond conditions. 
    The performance bonding requirement shall remain in full force and effect for 12 months following completion of the project, or longer if deemed necessary by the building inspector and/or his designee. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1987, art. VI, § 1(d)) 
Sec. 26-42. - Approval; expiration; renewal. 
(a)  Every approval granted shall expire at the end of the time period set forth in the conditions. The developer shall fully perform and complete all of the work required within the specified time period. 
(b)  If the developer is unable to complete the work within the designated time period, he shall, at least 30 days prior to the expiration date, submit a written request for an extension of time to the building inspector and/or his designee, setting forth the reasons underlying the requested time extension. If the extension is warranted, the building inspector and/or his designee may grant an extension of time up to a maximum of one year from the date of the original deadline. Subsequent extensions under the same conditions may be granted at the discretion of the building inspector. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1987, art. VI, § 2) 
Sec. 26-43. - Maintenance of measures. 
    Maintenance of all erosion-sediment control devices under this chapter shall be the responsibility of the owner. The erosion-sediment control devices shall be maintained in good condition and working order on a continuing basis. Watercourses originating and located completely on private property shall be the responsibility of the owner to their point of open discharge at the property line or at a communal watercourse within the property. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1987, art. VI, § 3) 
Sec. 26-44. - Liability of applicant. 
    Neither approval of an erosion and sediment control plan nor compliance with any conditions of this chapter shall relieve the owner/applicant from any responsibility for damage to persons or property, nor impose any liability upon the town for damages to persons or property. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1987, art. VI, § 4) 
Sec. 26-45. - Inspections. 
(a)  Periodic inspections. The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the building inspector and/or his designee. All work shall be performed in accordance with an inspection and construction control schedule approved by the building inspector and/or his designee, who shall maintain a permanent file on all of his inspections. Upon completion of the work, the developer or owners shall notify the building inspector and/or his designee that all grading, drainage, erosion and sediment control measures and devices, and vegetation and ground cover planting has been completed in conformance with the approval, all attached plans, specifications, conditions, and other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Final inspection. Upon notification of the completion by the owner, the building inspector and/or his designee shall make a final inspection of the site in question and shall prepare a final summary inspection report of its findings which shall be retained in the department of inspections and in the department of public works' permanent inspections file. The applicant/owner may request the release of his performance bond from the building inspector and/or his designee 12 months after the final site inspection has been completed and approved. In the instance where the performance bond has been posted with the recording of a final subdivision, the bond shall be released after the building inspector and/or his designee has been notified by the town planner of successful completion of all plat improvements by the applicant/owner. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1987, art. VII, § 1) 
Sec. 26-46. - Notification of noncompliance. 
    If, at any stage, the work-in-progress and/or completed under the terms of an approved erosion and sediment control plan does not conform to the plan, a written notice from the building inspector and/or his designee to comply shall be transmitted by certified mail to the owner. The notice shall set forth the nature of the temporary and permanent corrections required and the time limit within which corrections shall be completed as set forth in section 26-47(b). Failure to comply with the required corrections within the specified time limit shall be considered in violation of negotiable securities deposit shall be subject to notice of default, in accordance with sections 26-39 and 26-40. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1987, art. VIII, § 1) 
Sec. 26-47. - Penalties for violation of chapter. 
(a)  Revocation or suspension of approval. The approval of an erosion and sediment control plan under this chapter may be revoked or suspended by the building inspector and all work on the project halted for an indefinite time period by the building inspector after written notification is transmitted by the building inspector to the developer for one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  Violation of any condition of the approved plan, or specifications pertaining thereto; 
(2)  Violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation related to the work or site of work; and 
(3)  The existence of any condition or the performance of any act constituting or creating a nuisance, hazard, or endangerment to human life or the property of others, or contrary to the spirit of this chapter. 
(b)  Other penalties. In addition thereto, whenever there is a failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter, the town shall have the right to notify the applicant/owner that he has five days from the receipt of notice to temporarily correct the violations and 30 days from the receipt of notice to permanently correct the violations and applicant/owner fail to take the temporary corrective measures within the five-day period and the permanent corrective measures within the 30-day period, the town shall then have the right to take whatever actions it deems necessary to correct the violations and to assert a lien on the subject property in an amount equal to the costs of remedial actions. The lien shall be enforced in the manner provided or authorized by law for the enforcement of common law liens on personal property. The lien shall be recorded with the records of land evidence of the town, and the lien shall incur legal interest from the date of recording. The imposition of any penalty shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the provisions of this chapter, including revocation of the performance bond or assessment of a lien on the property by the town. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1987, art. VIII, § 2) 
Secs. 26-48-26-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PLAN 

Sec. 26-81. - Approval procedures; generally. 
(a)  To obtain approval for a land disturbing activity as found applicable by the building inspector or his designee under section 26-4, an applicant shall first file an erosion and sediment control plan signed by the owner of the property, or authorized agent, on which the work subject to approval is to be performed. The plan or drawings, as described in section 26-87, shall include proposed erosion and sediment control measures to be employed by the applicant or the applicant's agent. 
(b)  State freshwater wetlands permit. Where any portion of a proposed development requires approval under the state Freshwater Wetlands Act, G.L. 1956, § 2-1-18 et seq., and where the approval contains provisions for soil erosion and sediment controls, that approved plan shall be a component of the overall soil erosion and sediment control plan required under this article for the development. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1987, art. IV, § 1(a)) 
Sec. 26-82. - Fees. 
    The town will collect fees in accordance with the site plan review fee schedule in article IV of this chapter from each applicant requesting approval of a soil erosion and sediment control plan for the purposes of administering this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1987, art. IV, § 1(b)) 
Sec. 26-83. - Review. 
(a)  Within five working days of the receipt of a completed plan, the building inspector and/or his designee shall send a copy of the plan to the Northern Rhode Island Conservation District as provided for in the Memorandum of Understanding dated, October 24, 1991, and agreed upon by the town and the district. A copy shall also be sent to the public works department, the planning board and conservation commission for the purpose of review and comment. The building inspector and/or his designee may also, within the above time frame, submit copies of the plan to other local departments or agencies in order to better achieve the purpose of this chapter. Failure of the aforementioned review authorities, other than the Northern Rhode Island Conservation District, to respond within 21 days of their receipt of the plan shall be deemed as no objection to the plan as submitted. 
(b)  The time allowed for plan review shall be commensurate with the proposed development project, and shall be done simultaneously with other reviews. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1987, art. IV, § 1(c)) 
Sec. 26-84. - Approval. 
(a)  The building inspector and/or his designee shall take action in writing either approving or disapproving the plan with reasons stated within ten days after the building inspector has received the written opinion of the review authorities. 
(b)  In approving a plan, the building inspector and/or his designee may attach such conditions deemed reasonably necessary by the aforementioned review authorities to further the purposes of this chapter. The conditions pertaining to erosion and sediment control measures and/or devices may include, but are not limited to, the erection of walls, drains, dams and structures; planting vegetation, trees and shrubs; furnishings; necessary easements; and specifying a method of performing various kinds of work; and the sequence or timing thereof. The applicant/owner shall notify the building inspector and/or his designee, at least 72 hours in advance of his intent to begin clearing and construction work described in the erosion and sediment control plan. The applicant shall have the erosion and sediment control plan on the site during grading and construction. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1987, art. IV, § 1(d)) 
Sec. 26-85. - Appeals. 
(a)  Administrative procedures. If the ruling made by the building inspector and/or his designee is unsatisfactory to the applicant/owner, the applicant/owner may file a written appeal. The appeal of plans for soil erosion and sediment control shall be to the zoning board of review. Appeal procedures shall follow current requirements for appeal to the board above. During the period in which the request for appeal is filed, and until such time as a final decision is rendered on the appeal, the decision of the building inspector and/or his designee shall remain in effect. 
(b)  Expert opinion. The building inspector or his designee, the zoning board of review or other board of review may seek technical assistance on any soil erosion and sediment control plan. The expert opinion must be made available in the office of the building inspector and/or his designee as a public record prior to the appeals hearing. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1987, art. IV, § 1(e)) 
Sec. 26-86. - Preparation. 
    The erosion and sediment control plan shall be prepared by a registered engineer, or landscape architect or a soil and water conservation society certified erosion and sediment control specialist, and seven copies of the plan shall be submitted to the building inspector and/or his designee. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1987, art. V, § 1(a)) 
Sec. 26-87. - Contents. 
    The erosion and sediment control plan shall include sufficient information about the proposed activities and land parcels to form a clear basis for discussion and review and to ensure compliance with all applicable requirements of this chapter. The plan shall be consistent with the data collection, data analysis and plan preparation guidelines in the current "Rhode Island Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook," prepared by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, state department of environmental management, state conservation committee and, at a minimum, shall contain: 
(1)  A narrative describing the proposed land disturbing activity and the soil erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater management measures to be installed to control erosion that could result from the proposed activity. Supporting documentation, such as a drainage area, existing sites and soil maps shall be provided as required by the building inspector and/or his designee. 
(2)  Construction drawings illustrating in detail existing and proposed contours, drainage features and vegetation; limits of clearing and grading; the location of soil erosion and sediment control and stormwater management measures; detailed drawings of measures; stockpiles and borrow areas; sequence; and information needed for construction. 
(3)  Other information or construction plans and details as deemed necessary by the building inspector and/or his designee for thorough review of the plan prior to action being taken as prescribed in this chapter. Withholding or delay of such information may be reasons for the building inspector and/or his designee to judge the application as incomplete and grounds for disapproval. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1987, art. V, § 1(b)) 
Sec. 26-88. - Performance principles. 
    The contents of the erosion and sediment control plan shall clearly demonstrate how the principles, outlined in this section, have been met in the design and are to be accomplished by the proposed development project: 
(1)  The site selected shall show due regard for natural drainage characteristics and topography. 
(2)  To the extent possible, steep slopes shall be avoided. 
(3)  The grade of slopes created shall be minimized. 
(4)  Postdevelopment runoff rates shall not exceed predevelopment rates, consistent with other stormwater requirements which may be in effect. Any increase in storm runoff shall be retained and recharged as close as feasible to its place of origin by means of detention ponds or basins, seepage areas, subsurface drains, porous paving or similar technique. 
(5)  Original boundaries, alignment and slopes of watercourses within the project locus shall be preserved to the greatest extent feasible. 
(6)  In general, drainage shall be directed away from structures intended for human occupancy, municipal or utility use, or similar structures. 
(7)  All drainage provisions shall be of such a design and capacity so as to adequately handle stormwater runoff, including runoff from tributary upstream areas, which may be outside the locus of the project. 
(8)  Drainage facilities shall be installed as early as feasible during construction, prior to site clearance, if possible. 
(9)  Fill located adjacent to watercourses shall be suitably protected from erosion by means of riprap, gabions, retaining walls, vegetative stabilization or similar measures. 
(10)  Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect bare areas and stockpiles from erosion during construction. The smallest areas feasible shall be exposed at any one time. Disturbed areas shall be protected during the nongrowing months, November through March. 
(11)  Permanent vegetation shall be placed immediately following fine grading. 
(12)  Trees and other existing vegetation shall be retained whenever feasible. The area within the dripline shall be fenced or roped off to protect trees from construction equipment. 
(13)  All areas damaged during construction shall be resodded, reseeded or otherwise restored. Monitoring and maintenance schedules, where required, shall be predetermined. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1987, art. V, § 1(c)) 
Sec. 26-89. - Existing uses and facilities. 
    The building inspector and/or his designees shall accept plans for existing uses and facilities which by their nature may cause erosion and sedimentation, such as excavation and quarrying operations; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to section 26-4(b). Plans or satisfactory evidence to demonstrate that the existing operations accomplish the objectives of the statute shall be submitted to the building inspector and/or his designee within 120 days from the date of the determination of applicability. Implementation of the plan shall be initiated upon approval of the plan. When the preexisting use is a gravel extraction operation, the property owner shall conduct the operation in a manner so as not to devalue abutting properties, to protect abutting property from wind erosion and soil erosion from increased runoff, sedimentation of reservoirs and drainage systems and to limit the depth of extraction so as not to interfere with the existing nearby water table. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1987, art. V, § 1(d)) 
Secs. 26-90-26-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FEES 

Sec. 26-121. - Site plan review fees. 
(a)  Single-family subdivision site plan review fees shall be according to the number of lots as follows: 
One lot ..... $100.00 
Two-four lots ..... 150.00 
Five-nine lots ..... 275.00 
Ten-15 lots ..... 400.00 
16-25 lots ..... 525.00 
26-50 lots ..... 675.00 
51-100 lots ..... 825.00 
100+ lots ..... 825.00 
Plus $20.00/lot for each lot over 100 
(b)  Site plan fees for multifamily, commercial, industrial, parking lot, pipeline, utility, land grading, quarrying, mining, landfill and demolition areas shall be according to the acreage as follows: 
Up to 30,000 square feet ..... $150.00 
30,000 square feet, 1.5 acres ..... 200.00 
Two acres - five acres ..... 275.00 
Six acres-ten acres ..... 400.00 
11 acres-20 acres ..... 525.00 
21 acres-50 acres ..... 675.00 
51 acres-75 acres ..... 875.00 
76+ acres ..... 875.00 
Plus $20.00/acre for each acre over 75 acres 
Sec. 26-122. - Site inspection fees. 
(a)  Single-family subdivision site inspection fees shall be according to the number of lots as follows: 
One lot ..... $ 65.00 
Two-four lots ..... 100.00 
Five-nine lots ..... 125.00 
Ten-15 lots ..... 150.00 
16-25 lots ..... 175.00 
26-50 lots ..... 225.00 
51-100 lots ..... 325.00 
100+ lots ..... 425.00 
(b)  Site plan inspection fees shall be according to the acreage as follows: 
Up to 30,000 square feet ..... $ 75.00 
30,000 square feet, 1.5 acres ..... 100.00 
Two acres-five acres ..... 125.00 
Six acres-ten acres ..... 150.00 
11 acres-20 acres ..... 200.00 
21 acres-50 acres ..... 275.00 
51 acres-75 acres ..... 375.00 
76+ acres ..... 425.00 
Note: $25.00 of the above listed fees is to cover the town's administrative processing costs. 
Secs. 26-123-26-130. - Reserved 
ARTICLE V. - SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS AND FLOOD FRINGE LANDS 

Sec. 26-131. - Authority. 
    The Town of Foster has the authority to enact the ordinance from which this article is derived in accordance to the Town of Foster Town Charter, adopted 1976 and revised in 1980, 1988, 2000, 2002, 2004 and 2006. To wit "The Town shall have all powers possible for a Town to have under the constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Chapter." (article I, section 1.01; Powers of the Town) 
(Ord. of 3-2-2009) 
Sec. 26-132. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to ensure public safety; minimize hazards to persons and property from flooding, to protect watercourses from encroachment and to maintain the capability of floodplains to retain and carry off floodwaters. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2009) 
Sec. 26-133. - Applicability. 
(a)  The town elects to comply with the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended). The National Flood Insurance Program, established in the aforesaid act, provides that areas of the town having a special flood hazard be identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and that floodplain management measures be applied in such flood hazard areas. The requirements of this article shall apply to any construction or other development which lies wholly or partly within an area of special flood hazard, as identified as Zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-30, A99, V, V1-30, VE on the flood insurance rate map and flood hazard boundary map prepared by Federal Emergency Management Agency revised May 31, 2007 with an effective date of March 2, 2009. Said flood map, including any amendments adopted after the date hereof, is hereby made part of this article. The exact boundaries of the district may be defined by the 100-year base flood elevations shown on the FIRM and further defined by the flood insurance study booklet revised May 31, 2007 with an effective date of March 2, 2009. 
(b)  The degree of flood protection required by the article is considered reasonable but does not imply total flood protection. If any section, provision, or portion of this article is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court, the remainder of the article shall control. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, "other development" shall be defined as any action exclusive of that which requires the issuance of a building permit under the Rhode Island State Building Code. Such other development shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Earth, gravel or mineral removal or extraction. 
(2)  Alteration of the topography by cutting, filling or grading. 
(3)  Storage of bulk materials outside of a structure. 
(4)  Construction or placement of facilities or improvements not normally requiring a building permit. 
(d)  The requirements set forth in this article shall be in addition to any applicable requirements in this chapter and in any other regulation which may be applicable. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2009) 
Sec. 26-134. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this article pertain to floodplain management, have the same meaning as they have in common usage and to give this article it's most reasonable application. 
    Accessory/appurtenant structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
    Area of shallow flooding (for a community with AO or AH zones only) means A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of special flood hazard. See definition for Special flood hazard area. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also referred to as the 100-year flood, as published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) as part of a flood insurance study (FIS) and depicted on a flood insurance rate map (FIRM). 
    Base flood elevation (BFE) means the water surface elevation of the one percent annual chance flood. The height in relation to mean sea level expected to be reached by the waters of the base flood at pertinent points in the floodplains of coastal and riverine areas. 
    Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Building. See definition for Structure. 
    Contents coverage means the insurance on personal property within an enclosed structure, including the cost of debris removal, and the reasonable cost of removal on contents to minimize damage. 
    Cost means as related to substantial improvements, the cost of any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, alteration, repair or other improvement of a structure shall be established by a detailed written contractor's estimate. The estimate shall include, but not be limited to: The cost of materials (interior finishing elements, structural elements, utility and service equipment); sales tax on materials, building equipment and fixtures, including heating and air conditioning and utility meters; labor; built-in appliances; demolition and site preparation; repairs made to damaged parts of the building worked on at the same time; contractor's overhead; contractor's profit; and grand total. Items to be excluded include: Cost of plans and specifications, survey costs, permit fees, outside improvements such as septic systems, water supply wells, landscaping, sidewalks, fences, yard lights, irrigation systems, and detached structures such as garages, sheds, and gazebos. 
    Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
    Deductible means a fixed amount or percentage of any loss covered by insurance which is borne by the insured prior to the insurer's liability. 
    Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to the construction of buildings or structures; the construction of additions, alterations or substantial improvements to buildings or structures; the placement of buildings or structures; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment; the storage, deposition, or extraction of materials; and the installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities. 
    Dry floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural protection measures incorporated in a building that is not elevated above the base flood elevation that keeps water from entering the building to prevent or minimize flood damage. Note: For insurance purposes, a dry floodproofed, non-residential structure is rated based on the elevation of its lowest floor unless it is floodproofed to one foot above the BFE. 
    Eligible community or participating community means a community for which the administrator has authorized the sale of flood insurance under the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRM's effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
    Existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision means a manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured home are to be affixed (including, as a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or existing manufactured home subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufacturing homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) means the federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). 
    Finished living space means fully enclosed areas below the base flood elevation (BFE) that are not considered a basement cannot have finished living space and needs to be designed to be exposed to flood forces. These spaces can only to be used for parking, building access or limited storage. Finished living space can include, but is not limited to, a space that is heated and/or cooled, contains finished floors (tile, linoleum, hardwood, etc.), has sheetrock walls that may or may not be painted or wallpapered, and other amenities such as furniture, appliances, bathrooms, fireplaces and other items that are easily damaged by floodwaters and expensive to clean, repair or replace. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from either the overflow of inland or tidal waters, or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. The collapse of subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or any abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined above. 
    Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM) means the official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated the limits of the regulatory floodway and 100-year floodplain. 
    Flood insurance means the insurance coverage provided under the program. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means the official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated both the special flood hazard areas (100-year floodplain) and the insurance risk premium zones applicable to a community. FIRM published after January 1990 may also show the limits of the regulatory floodway. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS) means the official study of a community in which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has conducted a technical engineering evaluation and determination of local flood hazards, flood profiles and water surface elevations. The flood insurance rate maps (FIRM), which accompany the FIS, provide both flood insurance rate zones and base flood elevations, and may provide the regulatory floodway limits. 
    Flood proofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. For the purposes of these regulations, the term "regulatory floodway" is synonymous in meaning with the term "floodway." 
    Functionally dependent use or facility means a use or facility that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities. The term does not include seafood processing facilities, long-term storage, manufacturing, sales or service facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade (HAG) (only for community with AO/AH zones) means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: (a) listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (b) certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historic significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; (c) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (d) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: (1) by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or (2) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements. 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational vehicles and other similar vehicles or transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
    Manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision means a parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Market value means market value is the price of a structure that a willing buyer and seller agree upon. This can be determined by an independent appraisal done by a professional appraiser; the property's tax assessment, minus land value; the replacement cost minus depreciation of the structure; the structure's actual cash value. 
    New construction means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision means a manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain regulations adopted by the community. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: (a) built on a single chassis; (b) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; (c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Regulatory floodway. See definition for Floodway. 
    Riverine means relating to, formed by or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream or brook, etc. 
    Sheet flow area (for community with AO, AH, or VO zones only). See definition for Area of shallow flooding. 
    Special flood hazard area (SFHA) means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. SFHAs are determined utilizing the base flood elevations (BFE) provided on the flood profiles in the flood insurance study (FIS) for a community. BFEs provided on flood insurance rate map (FIRM) are only approximate (rounded up or down) and should be verified with the BFEs published in the FIS for a specific location. SFHAs include, but are not necessarily limited to, the land shown as Zones A, A1-30, AE, AO, AH, AR, A99, B, BE and the coastal high hazard areas shown as zones V, V1-30, and VE on a FIRM. The SFHA is also called the area of special flood hazard. 
    Start of construction means for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, substantial improvement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erections of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building which is principally above ground, including a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank, or other man-made facilities or infrastructures. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure, whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, rehabilitation, alterations, additions or other improvements to a structure, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure as determined at the beginning of such ten (10) year period. This term includes structures that have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. For purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either: (1) any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or (2) any alteration of a "historic" structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
    Variance means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of the floodplain management ordinance that allows construction in a manner otherwise prohibited and where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. 
    Violation means failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management ordinance. A structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, flood-proofing certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is resumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
    Wet floodproofing means measures designed to minimize damage to a structure or its contents by water that is allowed into a building. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2009) 
Sec. 26-135. - Permits. 
(a)  As of the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, no new construction of either a residential or commercial nature including accessory, appurtenant structures or systems will be allowed wholly or partly within an area of special flood hazard area as defined in section 26-134. The only type of construction allowed shall be that which repairs, or rehabs, or reconstructs a structure that was completed in accordance to the proper zoning and building standards prior to the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived (a pre-existing structure). No increases in the footprint of a pre-existing structure will be allowed. 
(b)  Any construction consisting of the repair, rehab, or reconstruction of a pre-existing structure shall require the issuance of a building permit by the building/zoning official. All such construction must meet or exceed the repair, rehab, or reconstruction standards set forth in section 26-136. 
(c)  The application for a building permit for the repair, rehab or reconstruction of a pre-existing structure in a special flood hazard area, shall be submitted to the building/zoning official (a/k/a code enforcement officer) and shall include: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  An address or a map indicating the location of the construction site; 
(3)  A site plan showing location of the existing structure (to be repaired, rehabbed, or reconstructed), sewage disposal facilities, water supply facilities, and the dimensions of the lot; 
(4)  A statement of the intended use of the structure; 
(5)  A statement as to the type of sewage system proposed must be located outside of the SFHA area; 
(6)  Specification of dimensions of the structure; 
(7)  The elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor, including basement, and if the lowest floor is below grade on one or more sides, the elevation of the floor immediately above; 
(8)  Base flood elevation data for all structures being repaired, rehabbed, reconstructed, relocated or substantially improved structures; 
(9)  The elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure will be floodproofed; 
(10)  The description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development. 
(d)  Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall submit evidence that all necessary permits and approvals have been received from all government agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law. 
(e)  A permit fee (based on the cost of the construction) shall be required to be paid to the Town of Foster and a copy of a receipt for the same shall accompany the application. An additional fee may be charged if the code enforcement officer and/or board of appeals need the assistance of a professional engineer. 
(f)  The building official or designee shall: 
(1)  Review all applications for flood hazard repair, rehab, or reconstruction permits to determine that all pertinent requirements as described in section 26-136 have been or will be met; 
(2)  Utilize, in the review of all flood hazard repair, rehab, or reconstruction permit applications, the base flood data contained in the "Flood Insurance Study-Town of Foster, Rhode, Island, Providence County, as described in section 26-136. 
(3)  Make interpretations of the location of boundaries of special flood hazard areas shown on maps described in section 26-134. 
(4)  In A Zones, in absence of FEMA BFE data and floodway data, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize other BFE and floodway data as a basis for elevating residential structures to or above the base flood level, and for floodproofing or elevating non-residential structures to or above the base flood level. 
(5)  In review of flood hazard area, repair, rehab, and reconstruction permit applications, determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state and local government agencies from which prior approval is required; 
(6)  Notify adjacent municipalities, the state department of environmental management and the state bureau of civil emergency preparedness prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and maintain carrying capacity of altered watercourse; and 
(7)  Maintain, as a permanent record, copies of all flood hazard repair, rehab, and reconstruction permit applications issued and data relevant thereto, including reports of the zoning board of review on variances. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2009) 
Sec. 26-136. - Special Flood Hazard Area Repair, Rehab, and Reconstruction Standards. 
    The following standards shall apply to the repair, rehab, reconstruction of a pre-existing structure, if any, located wholly or partly within an area of special flood hazard as defined in section 26-134. Also refer to the current Rhode Island State Building Code, One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code, Plumbing Code, Mechanical Code, and Electrical for state standards: 
(1)  No watercourse may be altered in a manner which will, in the opinion of the building official or designee, result in any decrease in the capacity of the watercourse, and no land shall be graded or altered in such a manner as to increase the base flood elevation within the Town of Foster. Where any alteration is permitted, the building official or designee will notify the adjacent communities, the Rhode Island Statewide Planning Program and the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(2)  In a regulatory floodway, any encroachment is prohibited which would cause any increase in the base flood level unless hydrologic and hydraulic analyses prove that the proposed encroachment would not increase flood levels during the base flood discharge. 
(3)  The filling or excavation of land may be permitted only under the following conditions: 
a.  Said action will not encroach upon a watercourse. 
b.  Said action will not result in an increase in the potential flood level. Where it is determined that said action may result in an increase in the potential flood level, the building official or designee shall require appropriate measures to offset the potential increase. Adequate drainage shall be provided so as to reduce the exposure of the site or any other land to flood hazard. 
(4)  No outdoor storage of materials or equipment which is likely to cause damage to property, create a potential obstruction to floodwaters, create a potential fire hazard or pollute the waters during flood periods shall be permitted in any special flood hazard area. Such materials or equipment shall include but not necessarily be limited to: lumber and other buoyant materials, water-soluble materials, volatile or flammable materials, acids or poisons. 
(5)  Provision shall be made for anchoring facilities, equipment or yard features which are capable of movement or flotation in floodwaters. Such items shall include but shall not necessarily be limited to: Fences, sheds, animal shelters, tanks, storage boxes, planters, vehicles, boats and other items normally positioned or stored on a site outside of a structure. 
(6)  The use of flood-resistant materials shall be used for structures within an area of special flood hazard as defined in section 26-134. 
(7)  Construction methods and practices shall be used that minimize flood damage. 
(8)  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located to prevent water entry to accumulation. 
(9)  Onsite waste disposal systems shall be designed to avoid impairment or contamination of the floodway, and must be located outside the special flood hazard area. 
(10)  New and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration, and must be located outside the special flood hazard area. 
(11)  Base flood elevation data is required for all repair, rehab or reconstruction of pre-existing structures within the special flood hazard area regardless of zoning or acreage. 
(12)  Reserved. 
(13)  Construction standards in special flood hazard areas (SFHA), zones A, A1-30, AE. 
a.  Residential repairs, rehabs or reconstruction. All repairs, rehabs, or reconstruction of pre-existing structures within a special flood hazard area and repairs, rehabs, or re-construction to pre-existing structures that have sustained substantial damage shall have the bottom of the lowest floor, including the basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation (BFE). 
b.  Non-residential repairs, rehabs, or reconstruction. All repairs, rehabs, or reconstruction of pre-existing structures within a special flood hazard area and repairs, rehabs, or re-construction to pre-existing structures that have sustained substantial damage which are commercial, industrial or non-residential structures shall: 
1.  Have the bottom of the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation (BFE); or 
2.  In lieu of being elevated, non-residential structures may be dry flood-proofed to one foot above the BFE provided that together with all attendant utilities and sanitary facilities the areas of the structure below the required elevation are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and provided that such structures are composed of structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. A Rhode Island registered professional engineer or architect shall review and/or develop structural design specifications and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with acceptable standards of practice or meeting the provisions of this section. Such certification shall be provided to the building official or designee. 
c.  Fully enclosed areas below the base flood elevation of elevated buildings. All construction regarding substantial improvements, or repair of substantial damage to pre-existing residential or non-residential structures that include fully enclosed areas formed by a foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood elevation (BFE) of an elevated building, shall be designed to preclude finished living space and be designed to allow for the entry and exit of flood waters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls (wet flood-proofing). Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a Rhode Island registered professional engineer or architect, or meet the following minimum criteria listed in sections 1.-7. below: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings (hydraulic flood vents) having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. These hydraulic openings must be located on at least two different walls. Only the area (square footage) that lies below the BFE can be used in the calculation of net area of vents required; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. At least one side of the structure's fully enclosed area must be at or above grade. Fill placed around the foundation walls must be graded so that the elevation inside the enclosed area is equal to or higher than the adjacent outside elevation on at least one side of the building. The foundation slab of a residential structure, including the slab of a crawlspace, must be set equal to the outside finished grade on at least one side of the building; 
3.  The openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of flood waters in both directions without any external influence or control such as human intervention, including the use of electrical and other non-automatic mechanical means. Other coverings may be designed and certified by an engineer or approved by the building official or designee. 
4.  The area cannot be used as finished living space. Use of the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary and shall only be used for the parking of vehicles, building access or limited storage. Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for the parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). The enclosed area shall not be used for human habitation or partitioned into separate rooms; 
5.  All interior walls, floor, and ceiling materials located below the BFE shall be unfinished and resistant to flood damage. 
6.  Electrical, plumbing, machinery or other utility equipment that service the structure (furnaces, oil or propane tanks, air conditioners, heat pumps, hot water heaters, ventilation, washers, dryers, electrical junction boxes, circuit breaker boxes and food freezers) are prohibited in the fully enclosed area below the BFE. Utilities or service equipment located in this enclosed area, even if elevated above the BFE in the space, will subject the structure to increased flood insurance rates. 
7.  A residential building with a structurally attached garage having the floor slab below the BFE is considered an enclosed area below the BFE and must meet the standards of this section. A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with the garage floor slab below the BFE, must be designed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters in both directions. Flood openings or vents are required in the exterior walls of the garage or in the garage doors. The human intervention necessary to open garage doors when flooding occurs is not an acceptable means of meeting the openings requirements. In addition to the automatic entry of floodwaters, the areas of the garage below BFE must be constructed with flood resistant materials. Garages attached to non-residential structures must also meet the aforementioned requirements or be dry floodproofed as per the requirements of this section. 
d.  Manufactured (mobile) homes and recreational vehicles (RVs). 
1.  In all special flood hazard areas (SFHA), any pre-existing manufactured (mobile) homes to be substantially repaired or rehabbed, whether or not the damage is due to substantially flooding or other cause, shall be elevated so that the bottom of the lowest floor is at or above the base flood elevation (BFE). This includes SFHAs outside a manufactured home park or subdivision, or on a site in an existing park which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood. 
2.  All pre-existing manufactured (mobile) homes within a SFHA shall be placed on a permanent foundation which itself is securely anchored and to which the structure is securely anchored so that it will resist flotation, lateral movement and hydrostatic pressures. Anchoring may include, but not be limited to, the use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. 
3.  All pre-existing manufactured (mobile) homes within a SFHA shall be repaired or rehabbed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. Adequate access and drainage should be provided. Elevation construction standards include piling foundations placed no more than ten feet apart, and reinforcement is provided for piers more than six feet above ground level. 
4.  Recreational vehicles placed on sites within a SFHA shall either (i) be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, and (ii) be fully licensed and ready for highway use, OR (iii) be elevated and anchored. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
5.  Public utilities and facilities in manufactured (mobile) homes or subdivisions with a SFHA shall be constructed so as to minimize flood damage. 
e.  Accessory structures. Detached accessory structures in zones A, AE, A1-30, AO, and AH (i.e., garages, sheds) do not have to meet the elevation or dry flood-proofing requirement if the following standards are met: 
1.  The structure is no more than 500 square feet and has a value less than $3,000.00. 
2.  The structure has unfinished interiors and must not be used for human habitation. An apartment, office or other finished space over a detached garage is considered human habitation and would require the structure to be elevated. 
3.  The structure is used solely for parking of vehicles and/or limited storage. 
4.  The accessory structure must be wet-floodproofed and designed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of flood water. 
5.  The accessory structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
6.  Service facilities such as electrical, mechanical and heating equipment must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the base flood elevation. 
7.  The structure must comply with the floodway encroachment provision in this section. 
8.  The structure does not provide shelter for livestock. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2009) 
Sec. 26-137. - Variance and enforcement. 
(a)  The zoning board of review may hear and grant a variance as prescribed in this section subject to the prerequisites contained therein. In addition to applying the criteria and requirements of said section, the board shall undertake the following in granting a variance from the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Describe in its decision the exact extent of the variance granted. 
(2)  Indicate in its decision that the granting of such variance may affect the flood insurance rates as they apply to the subject property up to amounts as high as $25.00 per $100.00 of insurance coverage, and further, that construction or other development below the base flood elevation may increase risk to life and property. 
(3)  Forward a copy of its written decision and findings to the applicant, the building official or designee, the Rhode Island Statewide Planning Program and the Federal Insurance Administration in the annual report of the town to the administration. 
(b)  No variance may be granted which will result in any increase in flood levels. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the building official or designee to enforce the provisions of this article. If the code enforcement officer finds that any provisions of this article are being violated, he shall notify, in writing, the person responsible for such violation indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. 
(d)  When the above action does not result in the correction or abatement of the violation, the municipal officers, upon notice from the code enforcement officer, are hereby authorized and directed to institute any and all actions, whether legal or equitable, necessary to the enforcement of this article. Any person who continues to violate any provision of this article after receiving notice of such violation shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter and subject to a fine of $500.00 for each violation. Each day such a violation is continued is a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2009) 
Chapter 28 - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 16; sanitary requirements of operation of mobile home or trailer park, § 16-123. 
State Law reference- Refuse disposal, G.L. 1956, § 23-18.9-1 et seq.; hazardous waste management, G.L. 1956, § 23-19.1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Discarding of rubbish or refuse on public highways, private property or town waters. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to discard any litter, rubbish, garbage, junk, bottles, cans or other refuse on or along the public highways, on private property or in the waters of the town. 
(Ord. of 8-6-1987, § 1) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 30. 
Sec. 28-2. - Penalty for violation of section 28-1. 
    Any person violating section 28-1 shall be punished in accordance with section 1-7. 
(Ord. of 8-6-1987, § 2) 
Secs. 28-3-28-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MANDATORY RECYCLING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of March 18, 2012, amended article II, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article II, §§ 28-31-28-46, pertained to recycling, and derived from an ordinance of September 7, 1995. 

Sec. 28-31. - Mandatory recycling. 
    A mandatory recycling program is hereby implemented in the Town of Foster pursuant to G.L. 1956, Chs. 23-18.8, 23-18.9 and 23-19 of the Rhode Island General Laws, regulations issued pursuant thereto by the Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management, the requirements of the Rhode Island Solid Waste Management Corporation, and the Charter of the Town of Foster. 
(Ord. of 3-18-2012, § 1) 
Sec. 28-32. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall be defined as follows: 
    Arrangements means the process by which the town plans for and carries out the separation, weighing, collection, hauling and disposal of solid waste generated within the town. 
    Hazardous waste means any waste as defined in the Rhode Island Hazardous Waste Management Act, 23-9.1-4 in regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and as may be amended. 
    Household Hazardous Waste" means hazardous municipal solid waste. 
    Local recycling program means a recycling program for municipal solid waste as set forth in a local recycling plan approved by the state pursuant to the municipal recycling regulations as amended. 
    Mixed recyclables means recyclable materials which are required to be removed from municipal solid waste at the source and placed in or on top of the set-out container provided by the state for transport to the nearest materials recovery facility for recycling. 
    Municipal solid waste means solid waste generated by the residents of the Town of Foster in the course of their daily living, the disposal of which the governing body of the town has undertaken in the discharge of its duties to protect the health of the town. Municipal solid waste does not include solid waste generated by residents of the town in the course of their employment or that generated by any manufacturing or commercial enterprise. 
    No bin, no barrel pick-up policy means the Town of Foster reserves the right not to collect any non-recyclable material or refuse unless the approved recycling containers are present at curbside and properly prepared for collection on the designated collection day. The recycling containers may be less than full but not empty of recyclable material. Residents are required to prepare all recyclable materials in accordance with subsection entitled "recyclable materials" and set out at least one recycle bin on their collection day. 
    Recyclable materials means materials separated from municipal solid waste for reuse as specified by the director of DEM and listed in Section 4 of municipal recycling regulations and within section 28-37 of this article. The materials to be included may change from time to time depending upon new technologies, economic conditions, waste stream characteristics, environmental effects or mutual agreement between the state and municipalities. 
    For the purpose of defining those components which must be segregated from municipal solid waste, the following materials are defined as recyclable: 
Metals: 
Aluminum and tin cans, foil and pie plates. 
Scrap metal-In lengths no longer than four feet. 
Empty aerosol cans. 
Empty paint cans with lids removed. 
White goods [per definition of white goods of this section]. 
Glass: 
Glass bottles and jars. 
Cartons: 
Milk and juice cartons. 
Drink boxes. 
Plastics: 
HDPE plastic bottles and jugs with a #2 recycling symbol on the bottom, excluding tubs such as butter and yogurt containers. Examples include milk jugs, laundry detergent bottles, shampoo bottles, etc.. 
PETE plastic containers with a #1 recycling symbol on the bottom. Examples include soda and juice bottles, etc.. 
Paper: 
Mail. 
Magazines. 
Catalogs. 
Telephone books. 
Paper books. 
Writing paper. 
Corrugated cardboard-flattened and bundled with string or rope. Not to exceed three feet by three feet by 12 inches in size. 
Paperboard-including shoe boxes, cereal boxes and toilet paper rolls. 
Newspaper. 
Textiles: 
Towels. 
Linens. 
Clothing. 
Cloth scrap. 
Stockings. 
Rags. 
Belts. 
Handbags. 
Shoes, excluding women's heels. 
Organics: 
Leaf and yard waste [per definitions of "yard waste" and "recyclable, reusable or disposable biodegradable containers" listed below]. 
    "Recyclable, reusable or disposable biodegradable containers" means: 
(1)  Barrels. Clean refuse containers, each of a size (no larger than 64 gallons) and weight, (not more than 35 pounds), so that they can be lifted by one person and transported from curbside to the collection vehicle. Barrels must have lids to prevent water to add unwanted weight also, to prevent birds and animals from tearing bags and making a mess. 
(2)  Other recyclable containers. Any and all containers which may become available and which are approved by the director of public works. 
    Resident means anyone residing in the Town of Foster for any period of time who generates solid waste for which the town accepts responsibility for disposal. 
    Solid waste means garbage, refuse or other discarded solid materials generated by residential sources but not including solids or dissolved materials in domestic sewage or sewage sludge, nor hazardous waste as defined in the Hazardous Waste Management Act, G.L. 1956, 19.1. 
    Source separation means the removal by the generator of recyclable materials including mixed recyclables from other solid waste generated by the household, and conveyance of the recyclables to the curbside or other designated location by the municipality or its agents. 
    White goods mean major kitchen or laundry appliances, including but not limited to stoves, washers, refrigerators and dryers. Nothing in this definition shall waive compliance with the rules and regulations for generation, transportation, storage and disposal of hazardous waste. 
    Yard waste means organic material such as, but not limited to, leaves, grass clippings, hedge clippings, brush and branches and other small vegetative material such that may be naturally biodegradable. The Town of Foster does not collect yard waste. 
(Ord. of 3-18-2012, § 2) 
Sec. 28-33. - Program established. 
    There is hereby established a program for the mandatory separation of certain recyclable materials from municipal solid waste by the residents of the Town of Foster and the collection of such recyclable materials at the resident's curbside, or such other locations as the town may direct from time to time. The collection of separated recyclables shall be made pursuant to a schedule to be approved by the director of public works. 
(Ord. of 3-18-2012, § 3) 
Sec. 28-34. - Implementation. 
(a)  The director of public works or his or her designee, under the supervision of the town council, shall oversee the implementation of this article. 
(b)  The director of public works is hereby authorized and directed to prepare and publish, subject to council approval, regulations for the implementation of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-18-2012, § 4) 
Sec. 28-35. - Reporting requirement. 
    The director of public works, or his or her designee, shall establish an accurate system to keep monthly records of weights of total municipal solid waste and of recyclables which are separated from the total municipal solid waste stream, which records shall be submitted to DEM as required. 
(Ord. of 3-18-2012, § 5) 
Sec. 28-36. - Mandatory recycling requirements. 
(a)  Recyclable materials. Recyclable materials shall be deposited at the curb or beside the public highway which is adjacent or nearest to a resident's dwelling, as the case may be, in recycling containers. If there are more recyclables than can be accommodated in the container, these shall be placed in containers stacked close to such special recycling container to facilitate collections with recyclable materials. Recyclable materials shall be prepared for collection according to regulations established by the director of public works and published by the town. 
(b)  Recycling containers. Containers for recyclable materials shall be provided by the town or the Solid Waste Management Corporation to the residents. Said containers shall be the property of the town. The town shall provide such containers to residents free of charge and thereafter for a fee specified by the town council for replacements. Free "Extra Recycling" stickers are available at Foster Town Hall to attach to any barrel. 
(c)  No bin, no barrel pick-up policy. Residents shall be required to separate recyclable material and properly place it in the approved recycling containers. If found non-compliant in accordance with the no bin, no barrel pick-up policy it shall be the responsibility of the resident to remove from the curbside by 11:59 p.m. on the designated trash collection day, all refuse that has not been collected by the hauler due to non-compliance with the no bin, no pick-up policy or any other department of public works regulations. In such event, the resident shall prepare the recyclable and non-recyclable refuse in a compliant manner for collection by the hauler for collection in two weeks. Failure to remove from curbside by said deadline may result in the issuance of a fine for each subsequent day from the time the violation occurred. 
(d)  Recycling by businesses or firms engaged in commerce. Commercial or business firms shall be subject to state and federal recycling regulations. 
(e)  Compliance required. All residents in the Town of Foster shall separate recyclables from the non-recyclable portion of their solid waste and prepare such recyclables for recycling according to directions established by the director and published by the town. 
(f)  Collection by private parties and nonprofit groups. Residents are allowed to give recyclables to individuals and to private and nonprofit organizations that have been duly licensed and whose collections are reported in a manner specified by the director of public works or his or her designee to be used in compliance with DEM reporting requirements. 
(Ord. of 3-18-2012, § 6) 
Sec. 28-37. - Collection of recyclables. 
    The town shall provide a schedule for the collection of recyclables from residents. Such materials shall be placed in designated containers at the curb, or at the side of the public highway which is adjacent or nearest to a resident's dwelling, as the case may be. For the purposes of this section, the recyclables to be collected are: 
(1)  Mixed recyclables: Aluminum and steel/tin cans; aluminum foil and scrap (e.g. pie plates), metal lids; empty aerosol and paint cans; scrap metal; scrap wood; glass bottles and jars; #1 PET plastic containers; #2 HDTE plastic bottles and jugs; paper milk cartons and juice boxes; and 
(2)  Paper recyclables: Mail magazines and catalogs; writing paper, corrugated cardboard; paperboard (e.g. cereal boxes); newspaper; brown (Kraft) paper bags; telephone directories; and textiles. 
(Ord. of 3-18-2012, § 7) 
Sec. 28-38. - White goods. 
    The director of public works or his or her designee of the town shall provide by regulation for mandatory recycling of white goods. 
(Ord. of 3-18-2012, § 8) 
Sec. 28-39. - Publication of collection schedule. 
    The director of public works or his or her designee shall prominently publish the initial schedule for collection and shall publish a new schedule thereafter whenever there is a change in either materials to be collected, regulations, collection procedures, or schedules. 
(Ord. of 3-18-2012, § 9) 
Sec. 28-40. - Solid waste hazard or nuisance prohibited. 
    No person having custody or control of residential, industrial or business premises from which solid waste, including recyclables, is collected shall permit or cause any solid waste, including recyclables, within his or her control to become a hazard to public travel, to endanger the public health or safety, or to become a nuisance of any kind. 
(Ord. of 3-18-2012, § 10) 
Sec. 28-41. - Licensing of haulers. 
    All persons engaged in the business of collection or hauling of solid waste in the Town of Foster, including recyclables, shall be licensed in compliance with the state's rules and regulations pertaining thereto. 
(Ord. of 3-18-2012, § 11) 
Sec. 28-42. - Handling of or tampering with recyclables, offenses. 
    No recyclable material which has been placed, deposited or otherwise offered for collection as provide herein, be it curbside or otherwise, shall be handled, taken, converted or otherwise disturbed by any person, except such persons licensed by the town as provided herein. Once recyclable materials have been deposited or otherwise offered for collection as provided herein, said recyclable materials become the property of the Town of Foster. No person engaged in the business of separation, recovery, collection, removal, storage or disposition of solid waste shall pick up or produce any recyclable materials as defined under this article or a valid regulation within the town except as specifically authorized by the director of public works. This restriction shall also include any resident, taxpayer, or other person who might engage in such practice. Nothing in this section shall be construed as exculpating or discharging any generator of recyclable materials from its duties under law, or as subjecting the Town of Foster to any liability for any materials deemed non-recyclable, under law. 
(Ord. of 3-18-2012, § 12) 
Sec. 28-43. - Enforcement. 
    Penalties for noncompliance: 
(1)  On the first violation for failure to separate recyclables and nonrecyclable materials or for leaving these materials prepared in a manner inconsistent with department of public works regulations, the hauler shall not pick up solid waste for two weeks, and the director of public works shall notify the hauler of the non-compliant issue. The director of public works shall issue a warning to the resident and keep a record of said violation. 
(2)  Those residents who, after receiving the initial notice of noncompliance, refuse to separate their solid waste and refuse to prepare recyclable materials in a manner as prescribed by the department of public works, or who fail to remove solid waste from curbside by the 11:59 p.m. deadline, (no bin-no barrel pickup policy), may be fined up to $200.00 for noncompliance. 
(3)  Commercial recycling. Any person who generates commercial solid waste, shall contract for recycling services as part of any agreement between a private waste hauler and the commercial establishment for the disposal of solid waste (G.L. 1956, § 23-18.8-2). A commercial establishment of any size may work with the town to consider options that would allow the town to collect the recyclables generated by the commercial establishment. All business(s) that enter into a system, plan, or, contract, at the discretion of the director of public works in which the town picks up recyclables from said business(s), must also separate recyclables. 
(4)  Compliance required. All residents, taxpayers and others doing business in the town shall separate recyclables from the nonrecyclable portion of their solid waste and prepare them for recycling according to directions published by the town. 
(Ord. of 3-18-2012, § 13) 
Sec. 28-44. - Volunteer collection. 
    The director of public works or his designee may issue permits to private parties or charitable organizations to collect recyclable materials on the condition that a report is filed by such party or organization detailing the amount of each material collected, in compliance with the Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management reporting requirements and provided that the director of public works or his designee determines that said collection does not defeat the purpose or cost effectiveness of the town's recycling program, nor conflict with the town's local implementation program. 
(Ord. of 3-18-2012, § 14) 
Sec. 28-45. - Licensed public events and festivals. 
    The town shall require the separation of recyclables as a condition of licensing or authorizing public events at which significant quantizes of solid waste will be generated for which the town accepts the responsibility for ensuring proper disposal. With such license the town shall require sufficient collection receptacles for expected recyclables and/or shall provide specially marked containers to be used for such recyclables at certain municipal facilities where such events normally occur. 
(Ord. of 3-18-2012, § 15) 
Chapter 30 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, preparing or vacating any street, alley or public way in the town saved from repeal, § 1-10(4); any ordinance establishing or prescribing the street grades in the town saved from repeal, § 1-10(5); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor saved from repeal, § 1-10(7); buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; hawkers, peddlers and door-to-door salespersons, § 12-136 et seq.; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 16; parks and recreation, ch. 22; planning, ch. 24; soil erosion and sediment control, ch. 26; discarding of rubbish or refuse on public highways, § 28-1; subdivision regulations, ch. 32; traffic, ch. 36; zoning, ch. 38. 
State Law reference- Improvement and grading by towns, G.L. 1956, § 24-3-1 et seq.; federal aid to towns, G.L. 1956, § 24-4-1 et seq.; maintenance of town highways, G.L. 1956, § 24-5-1 et seq.; abandonment by towns, G.L. 1956, § 24-6-1 et seq.; sidewalks, G.L. 1956, § 24-7-1 et seq. 

Sec. 30-1. - Maintenance of public roads within the town which are not town highways. 
(a)  The following roads will be maintained by the public works department over their currently established widths and lengths in the manner and to the extent of maintenance set forth by the town council: 
(1) Rounds Lane 0.3 mile  (2) Spear's Path 0.55 mile (3) Pine Tree Road 0.5 mile  (4) Simula's Driveway 0.2 mile  (4) Abbey Lane x mile   
(b)  The extent of maintenance shall be plowing, sanding and grading not to exceed twice a year and gravel at the discretion of the director of public works, as needed; however, not to exceed 30 yards per road, per year. 
(c)  The town shall not assume any liability for any persons traveling on the roads described in subsection (a) of this section and accepts no other responsibility expressed or implied except as contained in this section. 
(Ord. of 11-9-1989) 
Sec. 30-2. - Unimproved roads. 
(a)  This section applies to the following unimproved town highways: 
(1)  Tom Wood Road, from Shippee Schoolhouse Road to Danielson Pike. 
(2)  Cucumber Hill Road. A portion of the old town road runs parallel to the new state road. 
(3)  Moosup Valley Road. Portions of the old town road run parallel to the new state road. 
(4)  Rickard Road from Danielson Pike to Balcom Road. 
(5)  Wetherbee Road, from Central Pike to North Road. 
(6)  Central Pike, west from Balcom Road to Cucumber Hill Road. 
(7)  Biscuit Hill Road from Plainfield Pike to Victory Highway and across Route 102. 
(8)  Luther Road, from Briggs Road to Plainfield Pike. 
(9)  Tray Hollow Road, from Plainfield Pike to Isthmus. 
(10)  Howard Hill Road, from Briggs Road to Howard Hill Road. 
(11)  Gold Mine Road. 
(12)  T. Parker Road. 
(b)  In the event that an owner or owners (hereinafter the "landowner") of land fronting on any said highway shall desire to have the same or a section of the same improved to provide access to the landowner's land for the purpose of a residence thereon, or for other permitted use, the landowner shall file an application to the director of public works setting forth the particulars of the request upon a form provided by the director. 
(c)  The director shall refer the request to the Foster Planning Board for review and recommendations by the board, after notice to all landowners abutting said highway and public hearing; the recommendations shall include a cost estimate and a construction schedule. 
(d)  Upon receipt of the recommendations of the planning board the director shall advise the landowner of the same and shall give a choice of either of the following two procedures: 
(1)  The highway may be added to the town's five-year highway plan for commencement of improvement in accordance with the five-year plan. Improvement by the town at the scheduled time shall proceed over a time period as determined by the director, taking into account the recommendation of the planning board. The decision of the director as to the construction time-table shall be final. 
(2)  At the election of the petitioning landowner, the landowner may enter into an agreement with the town to perform the improvements as the landowner's own expense and on the landowner's proposed schedule. The agreement shall specify that the road improvements shall meet the standards and specifications for a town highway as set forth by the director (with the approval of the planning board) in the annexed addendum to this section. The construction schedule shall be set forth in the agreement. The landowner shall post a performance bond covering the full cost of the construction as determined by the director with the approval of the planning board; the bond shall provide for payment of the balance of the cost to complete the work as specified in the event that the landowner shall not do so within the time scheduled. In lieu of a bond, the landowner may grant the town a first mortgage lien on the property, provided that the property shall have sufficient value to cover the cost of the improvement. The construction agreement shall be effective upon approval by the town council. 
(e)  No building permits shall be issued until such time as the director of public works has certified that the subject road has been improved in accordance with the procedures set forth herein. 
(Ord. of 3-24-2005, §§ 1-5) 
Chapter 32 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the town saved from repeal, § 1-10(8); administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; subdivision, zoning and other regulations related to building code, § 10-37; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 16; planning, ch. 24; soil erosion and sediment control, ch. 26; streets and sidewalks, ch. 30; zoning, ch. 38. 
State Law reference- Rhode Island Land Development and Subdivision Review Enabling Act of 1992, G.L. 1956, § 45-23-25 et seq.; municipalities required to enact land development and subdivision regulations, G.L. § 45-23-46. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 32-1. - Authority of chapter. 
    These subdivision and land development regulations are adopted pursuant to G.L. 1956, § 45-23-25 et seq., known as the state Development and Subdivision Review Enabling Act of 1992. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § I(A)) 
Sec. 32-2. - Purpose of chapter. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish a procedure to provide thorough, orderly and expeditious processing of land development and subdivision project applications that is in keeping with the provisions of the town's comprehensive plan and zoning ordinance and accomplish the following: 
(1)  Promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the town; 
(2)  Promote high quality and appropriate design and construction of subdivisions and land developments; 
(3)  Protect existing natural and built environment and mitigate all significant negative impacts of any proposed development on the existing environment; 
(4)  Provide for the design of subdivisions and land developments which are well integrated with the surrounding districts with regard to natural and built features, and which concentrate development in areas which can best support intensive use by reason of natural characteristics and existing infrastructure; 
(5)  Establish design and improvement standards to reflect the intent of the town's comprehensive plan with regard to the physical character of the various districts of the town; 
(6)  Promote thorough technical review of all proposed subdivisions and land developments by appropriate town officials; 
(7)  Provide requirements for dedications of land, impact mitigation and payment-in-lieu thereof, which will be based on clear documentation of needs and fairly applied and administered; and 
(8)  Establish procedures for consistent recordkeeping on all matters of subdivision and land development review, approval and construction. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § I(B)) 
Sec. 32-3. - Effective date. 
    This chapter shall take effect on December 20, 1995, and shall supersede all other subdivision regulations in effect at the time of such adoption. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § I(C)) 
Sec. 32-4. - Vested rights; continuation of prior regulations. 
    Subdivisions which have been submitted to the planning board for approval under the provisions of the regulations in effect prior to December 20, 1995, may be continued to be reviewed by the planning board and approved under those regulations in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Final approvals. Any land developments or subdivision which, at the time of adoption of this chapter, has received final approval, or final approval with conditions, from the planning board, may initiate or construct any part of the development, or record such plans in accordance with the subdivision regulations in effect at the time final approval was granted. The planning board may, in its discretion, grant extensions to any such final approval in accordance with the procedure for such extensions as set forth in the regulations in effect at the time of final approval. 
(2)  Preliminary approvals. Any land developments or subdivision which, at the time of adoption of this chapter, has received preliminary approval, or preliminary approval with conditions, from the planning board, may continue to be reviewed by the planning board in accordance with the subdivision regulations in effect at the time preliminary approval was granted; provided any one of the following conditions have been met: 
a.  The final plat, including all the material required in the final plat checklist, is filed with the planning department within one year from the date of preliminary approval; 
b.  The land development or subdivision is located within an area and is of a nature to be within the jurisdiction of the state department of environmental management (RIDEM) and the preliminary plans as approved by the planning board have been filed with RIDEM for approval as required by the Freshwater Wetlands Act, G. L. 1956, § 2-1-18 et seq.; or 
c.  The applicant has expended significant monies in the preparation of preliminary subdivision plans in an amount that, if preliminary approval were to become void and reapplication under the revised subdivision regulations were to be required, a significant economic hardship would result. The planning board shall determine what constitutes significant economic hardship. 
(3)  Other status. Any land development or subdivision which, at the time of adoption of this chapter, has not received final or preliminary approval; or has been reviewed by the planning board for preliminary review but no approval therefor has been granted; or has received preliminary approval more than one year prior to the date of adoption of this chapter; or for which only preapplication conferences have been conducted shall be required to be reviewed under the revisions to the land development and subdivision regulations adopted on December 20, 1995, pursuant to the state Land Development and Subdivision Review Enabling Act of 1992, G.L. 1956, § 45-23-25 et seq. 
The planning board shall determine vested rights for land developments or subdivisions submitted for approval prior to December 20, 1995. Appeals from a decision regarding the application status and vested rights of any subdivision shall be made to the planning board of appeal as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § I(D)) 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, G.L. 1956, § 45-23-32. 
Sec. 32-5. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Administrative officer means the town planner, the municipal official designated by local regulations, who will administer the land development and subdivision regulations and coordinate with the building inspector, local boards and commissions, other municipal staff and state agencies. 
    Board of appeal means the local review authority for appeals of actions of the town planner and the planning board on matters of land development or subdivision, which shall be the local zoning board of review constituted as the board of appeal. 
    Bond means a security instrument accepted by a municipality to ensure that all improvements, facilities or work required by the land development and subdivision regulations, or required by the municipality as a condition of approval, will be completed in compliance with the approved plans and specific actions of a development. (See Improvement guarantee. ) 
    Buildable lot means a lot where construction for the use permitted on the site under the local zoning ordinance is considered practicable by the planning board, considering the physical constraints to development of the site as well as requirements of the pertinent federal, state and local regulations. 
    Certificate of compliance means a notice issued by the town planner informing an applicant that the application is complete and meets the requirements of this chapter, and that the applicant may proceed with the approved process. 
    Concept plan means a drawing with accompanying information showing the basic elements of a proposed land development plan or subdivision as used for preapplication meetings, early discussions and classification of the project within the approval process. 
    Consistency with the comprehensive plan means a requirement of all local land use regulations which means that all such regulations and subsequent actions shall be in accordance with the public policies arrived at through detailed study and analysis and adopted by the town as the comprehensive community plan as specified in section 32-2. 
    Dedication, fee-in-lieu-of, means payments of cash, which are authorized in this chapter, when requirements for mandatory dedication of land are not met because of physical conditions of the site or other reasons. The conditions under which such payments will be allowed and all formulas for calculating the amount are specified in section 32-110. 
    Development regulation means zoning, subdivision, land development plan, development plan review, historic district, official map, floodplain regulation, soil erosion control or any other governmental regulation of the use and development of land. 
    Division of land means a subdivision. 
    Environmental constraints means natural features, resources or land characteristics that are sensitive to change and may require conservation measures or the application of special development techniques to prevent degradation of the site, or may require limited development, or in certain instances, may preclude development. (See also Physical constraints to development. ) 
    Final plan means the final stage of land development and subdivision review. (See section 32-161(c).) 
    Final plat means the final drawings of all or a portion of a subdivision to be recorded after approval by the planning board and any accompanying material as described in the community's regulations and/or required by the planning board. 
    Floor area, gross, means the floor area within the perimeter of the outside walls of the building under consideration, without deduction for hallways, stairs, closets, thickness of walls, columns or other features. (See section 806.0 of the state building code.) 
    Governing body means the town council, the local government having the power to adopt ordinances, accept public dedications, release public improvement guarantees and collect fees. 
    Improvement means any natural or built item which becomes part of, is placed upon, or is affixed to real estate. 
    Improvement guarantee means a security instrument accepted by a municipality to ensure that all improvements, facilities or work required by the land development and subdivision regulations, or required by the municipality as a condition of approval, will be completed in compliance with the approved plans and specifications of a development. (See article VIII of this chapter.) 
    Local regulations means the land development and subdivision review regulations adopted under the provisions of this chapter. For purposes of clarification, throughout this chapter, where reference is made to local regulations, it shall be understood as the land development and subdivision review regulations and all related ordinances and rules properly adopted pursuant to this chapter. 
    Low or moderate income (LMI) housing means any housing whether built or operated by any public agency or any nonprofit organization or by any limited equity housing cooperative or any private developer, that is subsidized by a federal, state, or municipal government subsidy under any program to assist the construction or rehabilitation of housing affordable to low or moderate income households, as defined in the applicable federal or state statute, or local ordinance and that will remain affordable through a land lease and/or deed restriction for 99 years or such other period that is either agreed to by the applicant and town or prescribed by the federal, state, or municipal government subsidy program but that is not less than 30 years from initial occupancy. 
    Maintenance guarantee means any security instrument which may be required and accepted by a municipality to ensure that necessary improvements will function as required for a specific period of time. (See Improvement guarantee. ) 
    Major land development plan means any land development plan not classified as a minor land development plan. 
    Master plan means an overall plan for a proposed project site outlining general, rather than detailed, development intentions. It describes the basic parameters of a major development proposal, rather than giving full engineering details. Required in major land development or major subdivision review. (See section 32-183.) 
    Minor land development plan means a development plan for a residential project as defined in local regulations, provided that such development does not require waivers or modifications as specified in this chapter. All nonresidential land development projects shall be considered as major land development plans. 
    Modification of requirements. See section 32-47(b). 
    Open space means any parcel or area of land or water set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space; provided, however, that the area may be improved with only those buildings, structures, roads and off-road parking, and other improvements that are designated to be incidental to the natural openness of the land. 
    Parcel and tract mean a lot or contiguous group of lots in single ownership or under single control, and usually considered a unit for purposes of development. 
    Parking area or lot means all that portion of a development that is used by vehicles, the total area used for vehicular access, circulation, parking, loading and unloading. 
    Permitting authority means the planning board, the local agency of government empowered by the state enabling law and local ordinance to hear and decide on specific matters pertaining to local land use. 
    Phased development means development, usually for large-scale projects, where construction of public and/or private improvements proceeds by sections, subsequent to the approval of a master plan for the entire site. (See section 32-109.) 
    Physical constraints to development means characteristics of a site or area, either natural or manmade, which present significant difficulties to construction of the uses permitted on that site, or would require extraordinary construction methods. (See also Environmental constraints. ) 
    Planning board means the local review board as defined by G.L. 1956, § 45-22.2-4(24), and designated by the zoning ordinance as the board to act on comprehensive permits for the town, in place of the zoning board of review. 
    Plat means a drawing of a land development or subdivision plan showing the location, boundaries and lot lines of individual properties, as well as other necessary information as specified in the local regulations. 
    Preapplication conference means an initial meeting between developers and municipal representatives which affords developers the opportunity to present their proposals informally and to receive comments and directions from the municipal officials and others. (See section 32-161.) 
    Preliminary plan means the required stage of land development and subdivision review which shall require detailed engineered drawings and all required state and federal permits. (See section 32-161(b).) 
    Public improvement means any street or other roadway, sidewalk, pedestrian way, tree, lawn, off-road parking area, drainage feature or other facility for which the town or other governmental entity either is presently responsible, or will ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation upon municipal acceptance. 
    Public informational meeting means a meeting of the town planning board preceded by a notice, open to the public and at which the public shall be heard. 
    Resubdivision means any change of an approved or recorded subdivision plat or in a lot recorded in the municipal land evidence records, or that affects the lot lines of any areas reserved for public use, or that affects any map or plan legally recorded prior to the adoption of the local land development and subdivision regulations. For the purposes of this chapter, any such action shall constitute a subdivision. 
    Right-of-way means an easement or other legal right associated with land entitling one to pass through, over or upon property belonging to another. 
    Road means a public or private thoroughfare used, or intended to be used, for passage or travel by motor vehicles. Roads are further classified by the functions they perform. (See Road classification. ) 
    Road, access to, means an adequate and permanent way of entering a lot. All lots of record shall have access to a public road for all vehicles normally associated with the uses permitted for that lot. 
    Road classification means a method of roadway organization which identifies a road hierarchy according to function within a road system, that is, types of vehicles served and anticipated volumes, for the purposes of promoting safety, efficient land use and the design character of neighborhoods and districts. Local classifications shall use the following as major categories: 
(1)  Arterial means a major road that serves as an avenue for the circulation of traffic into, out of, or around the municipality and carries high volumes of traffic. 
(2)  Collector means a road the principal function of which is to carry traffic between local roads and arterial roads but that may also provide direct access to abutting properties. 
(3)  Local means roads the primary function of which is to provide access to abutting properties. 
    Road, cul-de-sac, means a local road with only one outlet and having an appropriate vehicular turnaround, either temporary or permanent, at the closed end. 
    Road, limited access highway, means a freeway or expressway providing for through traffic. Owners or occupants of abutting property on lands and other persons have no legal right to access, except at such points and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over the highway. 
    Road, private, means a thoroughfare established as a separate tract for the benefit of multiple, adjacent properties and meeting specific, municipal improvement standards. This definition shall not apply to driveways. 
    Road, public, means all public property reserved or dedicated for street traffic. Town roads are roads that have been duly accepted as such by the town pursuant to state law. 
    Road, stub, means a portion of a road reserved to provide access to future development, which may provide for utility connections. 
    Stormwater detention means a provision for storage of stormwater runoff and the controlled release of such runoff during and after a flood or storm. 
    Stormwater retention means a provision for storage of stormwater runoff. 
    Subdivider means any person who: 
(1)  Having an interest in land, causes it, directly or indirectly, to be divided into a subdivision; 
(2)  Directly or indirectly sells, leases or develops, or offers to sell, lease or develop, or advertises to sell, lease or develop, any interest, lot, parcel, site, unit or plat in a subdivision; or 
(3)  Engages directly or through an agent in the business of selling, leasing, developing or offering for sale, lease or development a subdivision or any interest, lot, parcel, site, unit or plat in a subdivision. 
    Subdivision means the division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, tracts or parcels. Any adjustment to existing lot lines of a recorded lot by any means shall be considered a subdivision. All resubdivision activity shall be considered a subdivision. The division of property for purposes of financing constitutes a subdivision. 
    Subdivision, administrative, means resubdivision of existing lots which yields no additional lots for development, and involves no creation or extension of roads. Such resubdivision shall only involve divisions, mergers, mergers and division or adjustments of boundaries of existing lots. 
    Subdivision, major, means any subdivision not classified as either an administrative subdivision or a minor subdivision. 
    Subdivision, minor, means a plan for a residential subdivision of land consisting of five or fewer units or lots, provided that such subdivision does not require waivers or modifications as specified in this chapter. All nonresidential subdivisions shall be considered as major subdivisions. 
    Temporary improvement means improvements built and maintained by a developer during construction of a development project and prior to release of the improvement guarantee, but not intended to be permanent. 
    Vested rights means the right to initiate or continue the development of an approved project for a specified period of time, under the regulations that were in effect at the time of approval, even if, after the approval, the regulations change prior to the completion of the project. 
    Waiver of requirements. See section 32-47. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § II; Ord. of 10-8-2009, Pt. 2(A)) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 32-6-32-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 32-41. - Administrative officer. 
(a)  Town planner designated. Administration of this chapter shall be under the direction of the administrative officer, who shall report to the planning board. The town planner is hereby designated as the administrative officer. 
(b)  Appointment. The town planner shall be appointed by the town council. 
(c)  Duties and responsibilities. The duties and responsibilities of the administrative officer shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Coordination of the review, approval, recording and enforcement of this chapter; 
(2)  Coordination of the review and approval procedures for subdivisions and land development projects with adjacent municipalities as is necessary to be consistent with applicable federal, state and local laws and as directed by the planning board; and 
(3)  Enforcement of this chapter as provided in section 32-45. 
(d)  Qualifications. The qualifications of the administrative officer shall be determined by the town council, as provided by the official job description for the town planner. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § XI(A)) 
Sec. 32-42. - Planning board of appeals. 
    Appeals of decisions of the planning board or the administrative officer on matters of review and approval of land developments and subdivision projects shall be made to the planning board of appeals in accordance with the provisions of G.L. 1956, § 45-23-1 et seq., and as provided in Charter § 9.03. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § XI(B)) 
Sec. 32-43. - Administrative fees. 
    The following administrative fees are required to be paid by an applicant for approval of any subdivision and land development project, for the adequate review and hearing of applications, issuance of permits and the recording of the decisions thereon: 
(1)  The administrative subdivision fee shall be $100.00. 
(2)  Minor land development and minor subdivision fees shall be as follows: 
a.  Preapplication meeting and concept review: $100.00. 
b.  Preliminary: $200.00, plus $20.00 per unit. 
c.  Final: $100.00, plus $20.00 per unit. 
(3)  Major land development and major subdivision fees shall be as follows: 
a.  Preapplication meeting and concept review: $100.00. 
b.  Master plan: $200.00, plus $20.00 per unit. 
c.  Preliminary: $200.00, plus $20.00 per unit. 
d.  Final: $100.00, plus $20.00 per unit. 
(4)  The fee for recording of a subdivision plan shall be as provided in G.L. 1956, § 34-13-1 et seq. 
(5)  Inspection fees shall be two percent of the total amount of the original performance bond including all required improvements. In the absence of a performance bond, inspection fees in the amount of two percent of the total estimated cost of all required improvements as estimated in accordance with the procedure established in section 32-258. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § XI(C)) 
Sec. 32-44. - Meetings, votes, decisions and records. 
(a)  All records of the planning board proceedings and decisions shall be written and kept permanently available for public review. Completed applications for proposed land development and subdivision projects under review by the planning board shall also be available for public review. 
(b)  Participation in a planning board meeting or other proceedings by any party shall not be a cause for civil action or liability except for acts not in good faith, intentional misconduct, knowing violation of law, transactions where there is an improper personal benefit or malicious, wanton or willful misconduct. 
(c)  All final written comments to the planning board from the administrative officer, municipal departments, state and federal agencies and local boards or commissions shall be part of the permanent record of the development application. 
(d)  All votes of the planning board shall be made part of the permanent record and shall show the members present and their votes. A decision by the planning board to approve any land development or subdivision application shall require a vote for approval by a majority of the current planning board membership. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § XI(D)) 
Sec. 32-45. - Enforcement; penalties for violation of chapter. 
(a)  Violations. Any person who fails or refuses to adhere to all of the terms and conditions of any subdivision of land or development plan that has been approved by the planning board or the administrative officer shall be in violation of this chapter. Any owner or agent of the owner, who transfers, sells or negotiates to sell any land by reference to or exhibition of, or by other use, a plat of the subdivision before the plat has been approved by the planning board and recorded in the land evidence records, shall be in violation of this chapter. Any person who, having submitted an application for subdivision or development approval, begins construction of the subdivision or development, or constructs any structure or improvement on the parcel, without having first received approval from the planning board or the administrative officer, shall be in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  Penalties for violation. Any person adjudged in violation of this chapter shall be liable for penalties not to exceed $500.00 per day, and each day of existence of a violation shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  Injunctive relief. The town shall have the authority to bring suit in the county superior court to restrain the violation of, or compel compliance with, the provisions of this chapter. An action for injunctive relief brought by the town in the county superior court may be consolidated with an action seeking penalties for violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § XII) 
Sec. 32-46. - Procedure for approvals between planning board and other local permitting authorities. 
(a)  Zoning board. Where an applicant requires both a variance from the zoning ordinance and planning board approval, the applicant shall first obtain an advisory recommendation from the planning board as well as conditional planning board approval for the approval stage for the proposed project, which may be simultaneous, then obtain conditional zoning board relief, and then return to the planning board for the subsequent required approvals. Where an applicant requires both a special use permit under the zoning ordinance and planning board approval, the applicant shall first obtain an advisory recommendation from the planning board, as well as conditional planning board approval for the first approval stage for the proposed project, which may be simultaneous, then obtain a conditional special use permit from the zoning board, and then return to the planning board for the subsequent required approvals. 
(b)  Town council. Where an applicant requires both planning board approval and town council approval for a zoning ordinance or zoning map change, the applicant shall first obtain an advisory recommendation on the zoning change from the planning board as well as conditional planning board approval for the first approval stage for the proposed project, which may be simultaneous, then obtain a conditional zoning change from the council, and then return to the planning board for the subsequent required approvals. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § XIII) 
Sec. 32-47. - Waivers and modifications. 
(a)  Waiver of development plan approval. The planning board may waive requirements for development plan approval where there is a change in use or occupancy and no extensive construction of improvements is sought. This waiver may be granted only by a decision by the planning board finding that the use will not affect existing drainage, circulation, relationship of buildings to each other, landscaping, buffering, lighting and other considerations of development plan approval, and that the existing facilities do not require upgraded or additional site improvements. 
(b)  Waiver or modification of requirements. The planning board shall have the authority to waive or modify one or more of the requirements for subdivision or land development approval contained in this chapter if the planning board finds that: 
(1)  The waiver or modification is reasonable and within the general purposes and intents of this chapter; and 
(2)  Literal enforcement of the particular regulations is impracticable and will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question or where such waiver or modifications in the best interest of good planning practice or design as evidenced by consistency with the comprehensive plan. 
(c)  Reinstatement of applications. When an applicant has exceeded a deadline established by this chapter for submission of material for a subdivision or land development, thereby rendering a previously granted approval invalid, the application may be reinstated by the planning board under the following conditions: 
(1)  The subdivision is consistent with the comprehensive community plan; 
(2)  The subdivision regulations are substantially the same as they were at the time of original approval; 
(3)  The zoning of the subdivision parcel is substantially the same as it was at the time of original approval; 
(4)  Physical conditions on the subdivision parcel are substantially the same as they were at the time of original approval; and 
(5)  Any applicable state or federal regulations are substantially the same as they were at the time of original approval. 
Application for reinstatement of a previously approved subdivision shall be made to the planning board in writing by the subdivider. The planning board, in approving or denying the request for an extension, shall make findings of fact which shall be made part of the record. 
(d)  Decision on waivers and modifications. The planning board shall approve, approve with conditions or deny a request for a waiver or modification by the following procedure: 
(1)  The planning board's decision shall be made within 45 days of the date the request for the waiver on modification was first considered by the planning board unless the applicant waives the deadline. 
(2)  The planning board's decision shall be in writing, and shall contain findings of fact addressing the conditions contained in subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § XIV) 
Sec. 32-48. - Recording of plats and plans. 
(a)  Signing and recording. Signing and recording shall be done as follows: 
(1)  Endorsement. All approved final plans for subdivision and land development projects shall be endorsed (signed) by the appropriate planning board or town official as an indication of final approval. Plats and plans for major subdivisions and major land developments and for minor subdivisions and minor land developments shall be signed by the planning board chairperson or, in his absence, by the secretary of the planning board. Plats and plans for administrative subdivisions shall be signed by the administrative officer. All endorsements shall include the date of such endorsement. No endorsement of plats or plans shall be made until the administrative officer has certified, in writing, that all of the required improvements have been made, or the finance director has certified, in writing, that acceptable improvement guarantees have been received in accordance with the provisions of article VIII of this chapter. 
(2)  Recording. Upon endorsement, all plans and plats shall be submitted to the administrative officer prior to recording in the town clerk's office and filing in the land evidence of the town. The material to be recorded for all plans and plats shall include all plat drawings and other pertinent information as indicated on the appropriate final plat and plan checklist. 
A copy of the board's decision endorsed by the appropriate planning board member or town official shall be recorded along with all special conditions of approval. The administrative officer shall certify, in writing, that all required fees have been paid before the above-mentioned documents may be recorded. Other parts of the applications record for subdivision and land development projects, including all meeting records, approved master plan and preliminary plans, site analyses, impact analyses, all legal agreements, records of the public hearing and the entire final approval set of drawings shall be kept permanently by the town departments responsible for implementation and enforcement. One complete copy shall be kept on file in the planning department. Construction on drawings need not be recorded. However, a complete blueline or photo copy set of construction drawings, including road plans and profiles, cross sections, grading plans, drainage plans, landscaping plans, soil erosion and sediment control plans, utility plans and other construction plans, details and specifications required as a condition of approval shall be filed with the administrative officer prior to recording of the plat. One copy of all construction drawings shall be kept by the department of public works. The administrative officer shall notify the statewide 911 emergency authority and the local police and fire authorities servicing the new plat with the information required by each of the authorities. 
(b)  Changes to recorded plats and plans. For all changes to the approved plans of subdivisions or land development subject to this chapter, an amendment of the final development plans is required prior to the issuance of any building permits. Any changes approved in the final plan shall be recorded as amendments to the final plan in accordance with the procedure established for recording of plats and plans as provided in subsection (a) of this section. Major and minor changes may be made as follows: 
(1)  Minor changes. Minor changes to subdivision or land development plans may be approved administratively by the administrative officer. Such changes may be authorized at the discretion of the administrative officer without review and approval of the planning board and without additional public hearings. All such changes shall be made part of the permanent record of the project application. This subsection shall not prohibit the administrative officer from requesting a recommendation from the planning board. Denial of the proposed changes shall be referred to the planning board for a review as a major change according to the provisions in subsection (b)(2) of this section. A building permit may be issued upon the written approval of a minor change by the administrative officer. For the purpose of this chapter, the term "minor changes" shall mean any changes which, in the opinion of the administrative officer, is consistent with the intent of the original approval. Such minor changes shall include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following: 
a.  Amendments to utility plans which are acceptable to the town utilities director or to the appropriate utility company; 
b.  Lot line revisions which can be reviewed and approved as an administrative subdivision according to the provisions of section 32-146; 
c.  Amendments to grading plans or drainage plans which are acceptable to the director of public works and which do not require approval of any state or federal reviewing authorities; 
d.  Modifications to any construction plan for off-site improvements which are acceptable to the director of public works; or 
e.  Modifications which are required by outside permitting agencies such as, but not limited to, the state department of environmental management, the state coastal resources management council and the state department of transportation. 
(2)  Major changes. Major changes to subdivision or land development may only be approved by the planning board and must follow the same review and public hearing process required for approval of preliminary plans as described in section 32-185. For the purpose of this chapter, the term "major changes" shall mean changes which, in the opinion of the administrative officer, are clearly contrary to the intent of the original approval. Such major changes shall include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following: 
a.  Changes which would have the effect of creating additional lots or dwelling units for development; 
b.  Changes which would be contrary to any applicable provision of the zoning ordinance or which require a variance or special use permit from the zoning board of review; or 
c.  Changes which may have significant negative impacts on abutting property or property in the vicinity of the proposed subdivision or land development project. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § XV) 
Secs. 32-49-32-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - APPEALS 

Sec. 32-71. - Procedure. 
(a)  Any decision or action of the planning board or administrative officer on matters of subdivision or land development may be appealed by an aggrieved party. The board of appeals or review authority for appeals to these decisions shall be the zoning board of review. The following procedure shall apply for all appeals: 
(1)  The appeal must be taken within 20 days of the day the decision was recorded and posted in the office of the town clerk. 
(2)  The appeal shall be in writing, on a form provided by the clerk of the board of appeal, and shall state clearly and unambiguously the issue or decision that is being appealed, the reason for the appeal and the relief sought. 
(3)  Any person may appear in person or may be represented by an agent or attorney. 
(4)  The appeal shall either be sent by certified mail, with a return receipt requested, or hand delivered to the clerk of the board of appeal. 
(5)  Upon receipt of an appeal, the clerk of the board of appeal shall require the planning board or administrative officer to transmit forthwith to the board of appeal, all papers, documents and plans, or a certified copy thereof, constituting the record of the action that is being appealed. 
(b)  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action being appealed. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § XVI(A)) 
Sec. 32-72. - Public hearing. 
(a)  The board of appeals shall hold a public hearing on the appeal within 45 days of receipt of the appeal by the clerk of the board. The public hearing shall be conducted at a meeting called and advertised especially for any zoning board of review meeting that may be advertised for the same date and place. The planning board of appeals shall maintain a complete record of all its proceedings including minutes of meetings and records of votes taken, which shall be separate from the minutes and records of the zoning board of review. 
(b)  Any party may appear in person, or may be represented by an agent or attorney. 
(c)  Notice of the public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the town at least one week prior to the date of the public hearing. Notice shall be sent by certified mail to the parties to the appeal and to those abuttors within 400 feet, pursuant to section 32-185. The party who filed the appeal shall bear the cost of advertising and notice. 
(d)  The board of appeals shall render a decision within ten days of the close of the public hearing. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § XVI(B)) 
Sec. 32-73. - Standards for review. 
(a)  The board of appeals shall not substitute its own judgment for that of the planning board or administrative officer. The board of appeals shall not reverse a decision of the planning board or administrative officer except on a finding of prejudicial procedural error, clear error or lack of support by the weight of the evidence in the record. 
(b)  The concurring vote of three of the five members of the board of appeals sitting at a hearing shall be necessary to reverse any decision of the planning board or administrative officer. 
(c)  In the instance where the board of appeals overturns a decision of the planning board or administrative officer, the proposed project application shall be remanded to the planning board or administrative officer, at the stage of processing from which the appeal was taken for further proceedings before the planning board or administrative officer and/or for final disposition, which shall be consistent with the board of appeal's decision. 
(d)  Appeals to the superior court shall be made as follows: 
(1)  Decisions of the planning board of appeals shall be appealed as follows: 
a.  An aggrieved party may appeal a decision of the board of appeals to the county superior court by filing a complaint setting forth the reasons of appeal within 20 days after the decision has been recorded and posted in the office of the town clerk. When the complaint is filed by someone other than the original applicant or appellant, such original applicant or appellant and the members of the planning board shall be made parties to the proceedings. 
b.  The board of appeals shall file the original documents acted upon by it and constituting the record of the case appealed former certified copies thereof, together with such other facts as may be pertinent, with the clerk of the court within 30 days after being served with a copy of the complaint. 
c.  The appeal shall not stay proceedings upon the decision appealed from, but the court may, in its discretion, grant a stay on appropriate terms and make such other orders as it deems necessary for an equitable disposition of the appeal. 
d.  The superior court shall review the appeal pursuant to G.L. 1956, § 45-23-71. 
(2)  Enactment of or amendment of local regulations may be appealed as follows: 
a.  Any legal resident or landowner, or any association of residents or landowners of the town, may appeal an enactment for an amendment of local regulations by filing a complaint in the county superior court within 30 days after such enactment or amendment has become effective. 
b.  The complaint shall set forth with specificity the areas in which the enactment or amendment is not consistent with the Comprehensive Planning and Land Use Regulation Act (G.L. 1956, § 45-22.2-1 et seq.); the Zoning Enabling Act of 1991 (G.L. 1956, § 45-24-27 et seq.); the Foster Comprehensive Plan of 1992; or the town zoning ordinance (chapter 38). 
c.  The appeal shall not stay the enforcement of the regulations, as enacted or amended, but the court may, in its discretion, grant a stay on appropriate terms, which may include the filing of a bond, and make such other orders as it deems necessary for an equitable disposition of the appeal. 
d.  The review shall be conducted by the court without a jury. If the court finds that the enactment or amendment is not consistent with any of the regulatory provisions in the town documents enumerated in subsection (d)(2)b of this section, the court shall invalidate the enactment or the amendment, or those parts of such enactment or amendment which are not consistent. The court shall not revise the regulations to be consistent, but may suggest appropriate language as part of its decision. 
e.  The court may, in its discretion, upon motion of the parties or on its own motion, award reasonable attorney's fees to any party to an appeal, as set forth in this section, including a municipality. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § XVI(C)) 
Secs. 32-74-32-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 32-106. - Standards applicable to all land developments and subdivisions. 
    The requirements listed in this section shall be applicable to all land developments and subdivisions submitted for approval, unless otherwise specifically provided. Prior to approval of any subdivision or land development project, (if planning board approval is required) the board shall make positive findings on all of the standards listed in this section, as part of the proposed project's record. If a negative finding for any of the following standards is made, the planning board shall have grounds for denial of the project design: 
(1)  Each land development or subdivision shall be consistent with the requirements of the town comprehensive community plan and/or shall satisfactorily address the issues where there may be inconsistencies. 
(2)  Each lot in the land development or subdivision shall conform to the standards and provisions of the town zoning ordinance; provided, however, that lots not being created for the purpose of present or future development need not meet the area and other dimensional requirements of the zoning ordinance, provided that: 
a.  A notation is shown on the recorded plat that the lot being created is not a buildable lot; and 
b.  A conservation or preservation easement pursuant to G.L. 1956, § 34-39-1 et seq. is granted to the town prohibiting any such present or future development. 
(3)  There will be no significant negative environmental impacts from the proposed development as shown on the final plan, with all required conditions for approval. 
(4)  The land development or subdivision, as proposed, will not result in the creation of individual lots with such physical constraints to development that building on those lots according to pertinent regulations and building standards would be impracticable. See the definition of the term "buildable lot," as provided in section 32-5. Lots with such physical constraints to development may be created only if identified as permanent open space or permanently reserved for a public purpose on the approved, recorded plans. 
(5)  All proposed land developments and all subdivision lots shall have adequate and permanent physical access to a public road. Lot frontage on a public road without physical access shall not be considered compliance with this requirement. 
(6)  Each land development or subdivision shall provide for safe circulation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, for adequate surface water runoff, for suitable building sites and for preservation of natural, historical or cultural features that contribute to the attractiveness of the community. 
(7)  The design and location of roads, building lots, utilities, drainage improvements and other improvements in each land development or subdivision shall minimize flooding and soil erosion. 
(8)  The design shall allow for the adequate delivery of municipal services including, but not limited to: fire vehicle access, safety, rescue, solid waste and recyclables collection, school bus service and road maintenance/snow plowing. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § III(A)) 
Sec. 32-107. - Certificate of completeness. 
(a)  An application shall be complete for the purposes of commencing the applicable time period for action when so certified by the planning board, with input from the administrative officer. If such certification of the application is not made within the time specified in this chapter for the type of plan, the application shall be deemed complete for purposes of commencing the review period unless the application lacks the information required for such applications as specified in this chapter, and the administrative officer has notified the applicant, in writing, of the deficiencies in the application. 
(b)  The planning board may subsequently require correction of any information found to be in error and submission of additional information specified in this chapter, but not required by the administrative officer, prior to certification, as is necessary to make an informed decision. 
(c)  Where the review is postponed with the consent of the applicant, pending further information or revision of information, the time period for review shall be stayed and shall resume when the planning board determines that the required application information is complete. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § III(B)) 
Sec. 32-108. - Preapplication meeting and concept review. 
(a)  One or more preapplication meetings shall be held for all major land development or subdivision applications and minor subdivisions and land development projects. Preapplication meetings may be held for administrative subdivision applications, upon request of either the municipality or the applicant. Preapplication meetings shall allow the applicant to meet with the appropriate officials, boards and/or commissions, planning staff and, where appropriate, state agencies, for advice as to the required steps in the approvals process, the pertinent local plans, ordinances, regulations, rules, and procedures and standards which may bear upon the proposed development project. 
(b)  At the preapplication stage the applicant may request the planning board for an informal concept plan review for a development. The purpose of the concept plan is also to provide the planning board input in the formative stages of major subdivision and land development concept design. 
(c)  Applicants seeking a preapplication meeting or an informal concept review shall submit materials ten days in advance of the meeting as requested by town officials. 
(d)  Preapplication meetings shall aim to encourage information sharing and discussion of project concepts among the participants. Preapplication discussions are intended for the guidance of the applicant and shall not be considered approval or commitment of approval of a project or its elements. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § III(C)) 
Sec. 32-109. - Phasing of major land developments and major subdivisions. 
(a)  When a major land development and major subdivision is submitted for master plan approval as provided in article VI of this chapter, the planning board shall review the adequacy of existing and projected future public improvements, services and facilities which may be impacted by the proposed development in its entirety. If the planning board determines that such improvements, services and facilities including, but not limited to, water supply, sewerage, roads and associated drainage facilities, schools, recreational facilities and fire and police protection will not be adequate to serve the residents of the subdivision or development at the time of recording of the plat, the planning board shall have the authority to establish a rate of development of the entire subdivision by requiring it to be built in phases. 
(b)  When an application is submitted for master plan approval, the applicant shall submit to the applicable municipal, state or private agency, as provided in the master plan checklist for major land developments and major subdivisions, a copy of the master plan narrative report for their review and comment. Each agency so notified by the applicant shall be requested to provide its comments in writing to the planning board. Comments shall be received from each agency prior to the date of the informational meeting. If comments are not received by the administrative officer by that date, it shall be assumed that the agency does not wish to comment. If the public informational meeting on the master plan and the public hearing on the preliminary plan are combined as provided in article VI of this chapter, all comments from reviewing agencies shall be received prior to the date of the public hearing. 
(c)  Each department or agency to which such a request for comments is made shall deliver to the administrative officer, in addition to the written correspondence, any supplementary material, which shall describe: 
(1)  An estimate of the impact of the subdivision on the facilities and/or services provided by the department or agency; 
(2)  Whether existing facilities and/or services are adequate to serve the subdivision's residents; 
(3)  Whether plans for the necessary improvements to existing facilities and/or services are included in the town's capital improvement program, or are otherwise planned; and 
(4)  An estimate of how long it would take to provide any necessary improvements to existing facilities and/or services. 
(d)  Based on the responses received from the various departments and agencies, the planning board shall establish, at the time of master plan approval, a rate of development of the entire subdivision or development that will permit residential construction only when improvements, services and facilities will be adequate to serve the residents of the subdivision or development. As part of such a growth rate plan, the planning board may require that improvements be installed, or lots sold, in two or more phases. 
(e)  If phasing is required, the planning board shall approve the entire master plan first. Thereafter, the applicant shall be required to submit plans for preliminary and/or final review and/or approval indicating the development of the entire site in two or more phases as required by the planning board in subsection (d) of this section. In such review and approval, the board may, in its discretion, impose conditions for determining the physical limits of phases, for allowing progression to additional phases, for allowing two or more phases to proceed in review or construction simultaneously, for interim public improvements or construction conditions, for changes to master or preliminary plans, and may include other provisions as necessitated by special conditions. 
(f)  The master plan documents may contain information on the physical limits of the phases, the schedule and sequence of public improvement installation, improvement guarantees, and the work and completion schedules for approvals and construction of the phases. 
(g)  The master plan shall remain vested as long as it can be proved, to the satisfaction of the planning board, that work is proceeding on either the approval stages or on the construction of the development as shown in the approved master plan documents. Vesting shall extend to all information shown on the approved master plan documents. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § III(D)) 
Sec. 32-110. - Dedication of land for public purposes. 
(a)  Subdivider must provide open space. The planning board shall require all land developments and subdivisions subject to the provisions of this chapter to dedicate a portion of the land being subdivided for the purpose of providing open space, conservation, park and recreational facilities to serve present and future residents of the proposed land development or subdivision. The planning board may, in its discretion, require the payment of a fee in lieu of land dedication, or a combination of land dedication and payment of a fee as an alternative to the dedication of land in connection with any dedication of land or easement, or fee in lieu of dedication required by the planning board under this chapter, the required dedication must be shown to be related both in nature and extent to the impact of the proposed development. 
(b)  Relationship to comprehensive plan. No dedication of land to the public or payments-in-lieu of such dedications shall be required unless the need for such is documented in the adopted plans of the town, i.e., the comprehensive community plan, the local recreation, conservation and open space plan, or the capital improvement program (CIP). The requirement for dedication of land for open space, conservation, park and recreation facilities shall be based upon the policies and standards set forth in the above plans or in the CIP and shall reflect the character defined for the neighborhood or district in which the subdivision is located by the comprehensive community plan. The nature of the land dedication must reflect the character of the land being subdivided and must be suitable for the intended use. If payments in lieu of land dedication are required, they must be kept in a restricted account and shall only be spent for the intended purpose of providing open space, conservation, park and recreational facilities. 
(c)  Amount of land to be dedicated. The minimum amount of land to be dedicated shall be based upon the following formula: 
Amount of Land to be Dedicated = Land 
Need (1) × Max. no. of D.U.'s (2) × Persons per D.U. (3)  
(1) Land need shall mean the adopted town standards for open space and outdoor recreation area as provided in the comprehensive plan. See subsection (g) of this section. 
(2) The maximum number of dwelling units to be constructed in the subdivision. 
(3) The average number of persons expected to be living in the dwelling units to be constructed. See subsection (h) of this section. 
(d)  Ownership of land. Land dedications required by this article may be made by transfer of fee simple ownership to any of the following: 
(1)  The town; 
(2)  The state; 
(3)  The United States government; 
(4)  A private homeowner's association; or 
(5)  A private nonprofit conservation or recreation group. 
(e)  Fees-in-lieu of land dedication. Where a fee is required by the planning board to be paid in lieu of land dedication, the amount of such fee shall be based on the fair market value of the amount of land which would otherwise be required to be dedicated under section 32-109(c). The amount of such fee shall be determined by the following formula: 
Fees-in-lieu 
of 
dedication = Fair Market 
Value of 
Land (1) × Land 
Need (2) × Max. no. 
of D.U.'s (3) × Persons 
per D.U. (4)  
(1) Fair market value of land in the parcel being subdivided after subdivision approval has been granted, and which is suitable for use as open space, conservation, park and recreation facilities. See subsection (f) of this section. 
(2) Land need shall mean the adopted town standards for open space and outdoor recreation area as provided in the comprehensive plan. See subsection (g) of this section. 
(3) The maximum number of dwelling units to be constructed in the subdivision. 
(4) The average number of persons expected to be living in the dwelling units to be constructed. See subsection (h) of this section. 
(f)  Fair market value. Fair market value of the land assuming subdivision approval has been granted shall be determined at the time of filing of the final plan in accordance with the following: 
(1)  The fair market value shall be set by the town tax assessor's annual review of comparable sales of vacant lots of at least 200,000 square feet in area in the town. 
(2)  If the subdivider objects to such amount of evaluation, he may, at his own expense, obtain an appraisal of the property by a qualified real estate appraiser which appraisal may be accepted by the planning board if found to be reasonable; or 
(3)  The planning board and subdivider may agree as to the fair market value. 
(g)  Land need. The actual need for open space, conservation and open space land as expressed in acres per 1,000 population in the plan for recreation, conservation and open space. The 1994 townwide need is five acres per 1,000 people. 
(h)  Persons per dwelling unit. The applicant may provide an estimate of the projected number of persons per dwelling unit (D.U.) in the proposed land development project or subdivision and shall state the basis for such estimate. The planning board shall review and approve of such estimate. Otherwise, the figure of three persons per household from the 1990 census shall be used. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § III(E)) 
Sec. 32-111. - Fees-in-lieu of public improvements or mitigation of negative impacts. 
    The town and land developer may agree on payment in-lieu-of specified improvements or construction to mitigate significant negative impact. Such negative impact of the proposed project on existing conditions shall be clearly documented and payment in lieu shall only be spent on the mitigation of the identified impact for which it is required. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § III(F)) 
Sec. 32-112. - Impact assessment. 
(a)  The planning board may require the applicant to prepare an impact assessment to assess the potential shortterm and longterm affects of the proposed subdivision or land development project under either of the following conditions: 
(1)  The planning board finds that there is reasonable expectation that the proposed subdivision or land development project will have a significant negative environmental impact on natural systems located on the property that is the subject of the application, or upon nearby properties or natural systems. 
(2)  Applicants for major land development or subdivision projects within the farmland-rural conservation district shall be required to prepare an impact assessment under this chapter. 
(b)  The board shall make findings of fact in writing and shall identify the environmental resources it finds to be potentially threatened. The board's findings shall be made a part of the record of the application. 
(c)  An impact assessment required under this article shall include research and documentation describing and assessing shortterm and longterm environmental impacts which may include, but not be limited to, impacts upon: 
(1)  Freshwater wetlands; 
(2)  Scenic areas; 
(3)  Noise and air quality; 
(4)  Solid waste generation; 
(5)  Historic/archaeologic areas; 
(6)  Unique natural areas or areas of critical conservation concern; 
(7)  Traffic; 
(8)  Soils; 
(9)  Vegetation; 
(10)  Wildlife; 
(11)  Groundwater; and 
(12)  Scituate Reservoir and watershed. 
(d)  If an impact assessment is required, the applicant shall be so informed at the preliminary meeting for a minor subdivision, or the master plan stage for a major subdivision, and shall be advised at that meeting as to the specific information that the impact assessment must contain. 
(e)  For any subdivision or land development project for which an impact assessment is required, the board shall have the authority to impose conditions on approval that, based on the findings and analysis of the impact assessment, are reasonably necessary to minimize adverse impacts that the development may have on the natural or manmade environment. 
(f)  All impact assessments shall be referred to the conservation commission for its review and comment. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § III(G)) 
Secs. 32-113-32-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 32-146. - Generally. 
(a)  Defined. Administrative subdivisions shall be the resubdivision of existing lots which yields no additional lots for development, and involves no creation or extension of roads. Such resubdivision shall only involve divisions, mergers, mergers and divisions, or adjustments of boundaries of existing lots. 
(b)  Application. Any applicant requesting approval of a proposed administrative subdivision shall submit to the administrative officer the items required by the checklist for administrative subdivision. (See the appendix on file in the town clerk's office.) 
(c)  Certification. The application shall be certified as complete or incomplete by the administrative officer within a 15-day period from the date of submission according to the provisions of article III of this chapter. 
(d)  Review process. Within 15 days of certification of completeness, the administrative officer shall review the application and approve or deny, or refer it to the planning board with recommendations. The officer shall report his actions to the planning board at its next regular meeting, and such report shall be made part of the record. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § IV) 
Secs. 32-148-32-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MINOR LAND DEVELOPMENT AND MINOR SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 32-161. - Minor land development and minor subdivision. 
(a)  Generally. Minor subdivisions consist of five or fewer units or lots. Minor subdivision consists of two stages, a preliminary review stage and a final review stage, which may be combined providing requirements for both stages have been met by the applicant. Developers or their representatives are encouraged to schedule a preapplication conference with the planning board and municipal officers to present their proposals informally and to receive comments and directions. 
(b)  Preliminary review. Preliminary review shall be conducted according to the following provisions: 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of the preliminary review stage is to explore the best lot configuration and requirements consisting of the following: 
a.  Conceptual plan; 
b.  Proposed and existing lot lines; 
c.  Lot zoning requirements and setbacks; 
d.  At the planning board's discretion, approximate location of major features (including, but not limited to, wetlands, waterbodies, hydric soils, natural habitats, slopes and other building constraints using available data from USGS maps, soil survey, comprehensive plan, etc.); and 
e.  Abuttors within 200 feet of any boundaries of proposed lots must be notified by certified mail paid for by the applicant in accordance with planning board policy. 
(2)  Application. The applicant shall first submit to the administrative officer the items required by the local regulations per the appropriate checklist for minor land developments and subdivisions. (See the appendix on file in the town clerk's office.) 
(3)  Certification. The application shall be certified complete or incomplete by the administrative officer within 25 days, according to the provisions of article III of this chapter. 
(4)  Technical review. If the administrative officer has certified the application as complete, it will be referred as a whole to the planning board for technical review. 
(5)  Reassignment to major review. The planning board may reassign a proposed minor project to major review if it is unable to make the positive findings required in section 32-106. 
(6)  Decision. If no road creation or extension is required, the planning board shall approve, deny or approve with conditions the preliminary plan within 65 days of certification of completeness, or within such further time as is agreed to by the applicant and the board, according to the requirements of article IX of this chapter. If a road extension or creation is required, the planning board shall hold a public hearing prior to approval according to the requirements in section 32-185 shall approve, deny or approve with conditions the preliminary plan within 95 days of certification of completeness, or within such further time as is agreed to by the applicant and the board, according to the requirements of article III of this chapter. 
(7)  Failure to act. Failure of the planning board to act within the period prescribed shall constitute approval of the preliminary plan and a certificate of the administrative officer as to the failure of the planning board to act within the required time, and the resulting approval shall be issued on request of the applicant. 
(c)  Final plan review. Final plan review shall be conducted according to the following: 
(1)  Requirements. This final plan stage of review may be delegated to the administrative officer who shall report its action to the planning board at its next regular meeting, and shall be made part of the record. Additional requirements consist of the following: 
a.  Technical survey based on configuration of lots discussed at preliminary review per existing checklist. 
b.  Approved ground percolation tests and ISDS for each lot as well as general building location. 
c.  At the board's discretion, DEM verification or biologist delineation of wetlands within 200 feet of ISDS. 
(2)  Vesting. Approval of a minor land development or subdivision plan shall expire 90 days from the date of approval, unless within such period a plat or plan, in conformity with such approval, and as defined in this chapter, is submitted for signature and recording as specified in G.L. 1956, § 45-23-64. Validity may be extended for a longer period, for cause shown, if requested by the applicant in writing and approved by the planning board. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § V) 
Secs. 32-162-32-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MAJOR LAND DEVELOPMENT AND MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 32-181. - Preapplication meetings and concept review; general procedure. 
(a)  Major land development and subdivisions shall have six or more lots or units, or have been assigned to a major subdivision in accordance with section 32-161(b)(5). One or more preapplication meetings with the planning board shall be held for all major subdivisions. Applicants should obtain a checklist from the administrative officer of materials to be provided to town officials prior to the meetings. The procedure and criteria for preapplication meetings and concept review are specified in this article. 
(b)  Following the preapplication meeting, major plan review consists of three stages: master plan review, preliminary plan review and final plan review. 
(c)  The planning board may vote to combine stages after it determines that all necessary requirements have been met by the applicant. The planning board may also modify and/or waive requirements as specified in section 32-47. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § VI) 
Sec. 32-182. - Preapplication meeting with planning board. 
    The applicant shall first provide the planning board with a detailed review of the characteristics of the property to be developed. Such a review shall include: 
(1)  A verbal and mapped description of the land and its environmental features including, but not limited to, the overall context of the area and its relationship to adjoining property, the geology of the site and soil conditions, topography, the approximate location of wetlands and waterbodies, groundwater resources, existing vegetation, historic and scenic resources, critical areas of conservation concern, if any, and past and present uses of the site. 
(2)  A general development concept. 
(3)  The planning board may schedule a site visit with the applicant to further evaluate the property and the proposed development and may provide preliminary guidance for the future development of the property and the review process at this time. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § VI(A)) 
Sec. 32-183. - Master plan submission requirements. 
(a)  The applicant shall first submit to the administrative officer; i.e., town planner, the items required by the local regulations per the master plan checklist. (See the appendix on file in the town clerk's office.) 
(b)  Supporting material which shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Natural and built features. Information on the natural and built features of the surrounding neighborhood, existing natural and manmade conditions of the development site including topographic features, freshwater wetland boundaries, the floodplain, as well as the proposed design concept, proposed public improvements and dedication tentative construction phasing, and potential neighborhood impacts. 
(2)  Certification of master plan application. The application shall be certified complete or incomplete by the administrative officer within 90 days of its receipt according to the provisions of article III of this chapter. 
(3)  Review and comment. The administrative officer shall coordinate review and comments by local officials, adjacent communities and state and federal agencies at the direction of the planning board. A letter including property location and description of lot and locus map will be sent to solicit these comments. A response will be required within 30 days of the date of the letter. Initial comments shall be solicited from: 
a.  Local agencies including, but not limited to, the planning department, the department of public works, fire and police departments, conservation and recreation commissions; 
b.  Adjacent communities within 1,000 feet of proposed subdivision; 
c.  State agencies, as appropriate, including DEM and DOT; 
d.  Federal agencies, as appropriate; 
e.  The county water supply board, as appropriate; and 
f.  Owners of public wells within their designated wellhead protection zone. 
(4)  Informational meeting. A public information meeting shall be held prior to the planning board decision on the master plan, unless the master plan and preliminary plan approvals are being combined, in which case the public informational meeting will be optional based upon planning board determination. 
a.  Public notice for the information meeting is required and shall be given at least seven days prior to the date of the meeting in a newspaper of general circulation within the town. Postcard notice shall be mailed to the applicant and to all property owners within the notice area. 
b.  At the public informational meeting, the applicant shall present the proposed development project. The planning board shall allow oral and written comments from the general public. All public comments shall be made part of the public record of the project application. 
(5)  Decision. The planning board shall, within 120 days of certification of completeness, or within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant, approve of the master plan as submitted, approve with changes and/or conditions, or deny the application, according to the requirements of subsection (a) of this section. 
(6)  Failure to act. Failure of the planning board to act within the period prescribed shall constitute approval of the master plan and a certificate of the administrative officer as to the failure of the planning board to act within the required time, and the resulting approval shall be issued on the request of the applicant. 
(7)  Vesting. The approved master plan shall be vested for a period of one year with a one-year extension upon a written request by the applicant, who must appear before the planning board for the annual review. Vesting may be extended for a longer period, for good cause shown, if requested by the applicant in writing, and approved by the planning board. Master plan vesting shall include the zoning requirements, conceptual layout and all conditions shown on the approved master plan drawings and supporting materials. The initial two-year vesting for the approved master plan shall constitute the vested rights for the development as required in G.L. 1956, § 45-24-44. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § VI(B)) 
Sec. 32-184. - Preliminary plan submission requirements. 
(a)  The applicant shall first submit to the administrative officer the items required by the local regulations per the preliminary plan checklist. (See the appendix on file in the town clerk's office.) 
(b)  Requirements for the preliminary plan and supporting materials for this review shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Engineering plans depicting the existing site conditions; 
(2)  Engineering plans depicting the proposed development project perimeter survey; 
(3)  Permits related to freshwater wetlands, floodplain, preliminary suitability for ISDS and connections to state roads. 
(c)  Final written comments and/or approvals of the department of public works, town solicitor, other local government departments, commissions or authorities, as appropriate. 
(d)  Prior to approvals of the preliminary plan, copies of all legal documents describing the property, proposed easements and rights-of-way shall be submitted as follows: 
(1)  Certification. The application shall be certified as complete or incomplete by the administrative officer within 60 days, according to the provisions of article III of this chapter. 
(2)  Public hearing. Prior to planning board decision on the preliminary plan, a public hearing, which adheres to the requirements for notice described in section 32-185, must be held. 
(3)  Public improvement guarantees. Proposed arrangements for completion of the required public improvements, including construction schedule and/or financial guarantees, shall be reviewed and approved by the planning board at the stage of preliminary plan approval. 
(4)  Decision. A complete application for a major subdivision or development plan shall be approved, approved with conditions or denied within 120 days of the date when it is certified complete, or within such further time as may be consented by the developer. 
(5)  Failure to act. Failure of the planning board to act within the period prescribed shall constitute approval of the preliminary plan, and a certificate of the administrative officer as to the failure of the planning board to act within the required time and the resulting approval shall be issued on the request of the applicant. 
(6)  Vesting. The approved preliminary plan shall be vested for a period of one year, and vesting may be extended for a longer period, for good cause shown, if requested in writing by the applicant, and approved by the planning board. The vesting for the preliminary plan approval shall include all general and specific conditions as shown on the approved preliminary plan drawings and supporting material. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § VI(C)) 
Sec. 32-185. - Public hearing and notice requirements. 
(a)  Public hearing. A public hearing shall be required for a major land development project or a major subdivision or where a road extension or creation requires a public hearing for a minor land development project or minor subdivision. Public notice of the hearing shall be given at least 14 days to the date of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the town according to regular practice. The applicant shall receive a copy of the notice from the administrative officer. The notice will be sent by the applicant, upon forms to be provided by the town, to each owner of property within the notice areas as specified in this section. Notice shall be mailed, by certified mail, not less than ten days prior to the date of the hearing. A copy of all return receipts shall be provided to the administrative officer by the applicant prior to or at the time of the public hearing. All mail and newspaper notices shall specify: 
(1)  The date, time and place of the public hearing; 
(2)  The assessor's plat and lot number of the property; 
(3)  The road address of the property. If the road address is not available, the name of the road on which or near which the property is located, and the distance and direction from the nearest existing road intersection in tenths of a mile; 
(4)  Advise interested parties where and when a copy of plans of the proposed subdivision or major land development project may be examined; and 
(5)  Contain a statement that the proposed major subdivision or major land development project may be revised by the planning board as a result of further study or because of the views expressed at the public hearing. 
(b)  Notice area and requirements. The notice area and requirements shall be as follows: 
(1)  The distance for notice of the public hearing shall be 400 feet from the perimeter of the lot being subdivided in all zoning districts. The applicant is responsible for determining correct names and addresses of all property owners required to be notified and shall, at a minimum, be as accurate as the most current names and addresses listed by the tax assessor. 
(2)  If the lots fall within a watershed area, additional notice shall also be sent according to the following: 
a.  Notice of the public hearing shall be sent by certified mail to the planning board of any municipality where there is a public or quasipublic water source, or private water source, that is suitable for use as a public water source, located within 2,000 feet of the municipal boundaries. 
b.  Notice of a public hearing shall be sent to the governing body of any state or municipal water department or agency (county water supply board), special water district or private water company that has riparian rights to a surface water resource and/or surface watershed that is used or is suitable for use as a public water source located within either the municipality or 2,000 feet of the municipal boundaries; provided, however, that a map survey has been filed with the building inspector as specified in G.L. 1956, § 45-24-53. 
(3)  Notice of the public hearing shall be sent by the administrative officer to the administrative officer of an adjacent municipality if the notice area extends into the adjacent municipality, the development site extends into the adjacent municipality or there is a potential for significant negative impact on the adjacent municipality. 
(4)  The cost of such notice shall be borne by the applicant. 
(5)  The above requirements are to be construed as minimum requirements. 
(c)  Filing of copies of legal documents. Prior to approvals of preliminary plan, copies of all legal documents describing the property, proposed easements and rights-of-way shall be filed with the administrative officer and the planning board as follows: 
(1)  Certification. The application shall be certified as complete or incomplete by the administrative officer within 60 days, according to the provisions of article III of this chapter. 
(2)  Public hearing. Prior to the planning board decision on the preliminary plan, a public hearing, which adheres to the requirements for the notice described in this section must be held. 
(3)  Public improvement guarantees. Proposed arrangements for completion of the required public improvements, including the construction schedule and/or financial guarantees, shall be reviewed and approved by the planning board at the stage of preliminary plan approval. 
(4)  Decision. A complete application for a major subdivision or land development plan shall be approved, approved with conditions or denied within 120 days of the date when it is certified complete, or within such further time as may be consented to by the developer. 
(5)  Failure to act. Failure of the planning board to act within the period prescribed shall constitute approval of the preliminary plan and a certificate of the administrative officer as to the failure of the planning board to act within the required time and the resulting approval shall be issued on request of the applicant. 
(6)  Vesting. The approved preliminary plan shall be vested for a period of one year, and vesting may be extended for a longer period, for good cause shown, if requested in writing by the applicant and approved by the planning board. The vesting for the preliminary plan approval shall include all general and specific conditions as shown on the approved preliminary plan drawings and supporting material. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § VI(D)) 
Sec. 32-186. - Final plan; submission requirements. 
(a)  Submissions. The applicant shall submit to the administrative officer the following: 
(1)  The items required by the local government per the final plan checklist; 
(2)  All material required by the planning board when the application was given preliminary approval; 
(3)  Arrangements for completion of the required public improvements, including construction schedule and a financial guarantee; 
(4)  Certification by the tax collector that all property taxes are current; and 
(5)  For phased projects, the final plan for phases following the first phase shall be accompanied by copies of as-built drawings not previously submitted of all existing public improvements for prior phases. 
(b)  Certification. The application for final plan approval shall be certified complete or incomplete by the administrative officer within 45 days, according to the provisions of article III of this chapter. If the administrative officer certifies the application as complete and does not require submission to the planning board as per subsection (c) of this section, the final plan shall be considered approved and shall be recorded by the applicant. 
(c)  Referral to the planning board. If the administrative officer determines that an application for final approval does not meet the requirements set by local regulations or by the planning board at preliminary approval, the administrative officer shall refer the final plans to the planning board for review. The planning board shall, within 45 days after the certification of completeness, or within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant, approve or deny the final plan as submitted. 
(d)  Failure to act. Failure of the planning board to act within the period prescribed shall constitute approval of the final plan and a certificate of the administrative officer as to the failure of the planning board to act within the required time and the resulting approval shall be issued on request of the applicant. 
(e)  Recording. The final approval of a major subdivision or land development project shall expire one year from the date of approval unless, within that period, the plat or plan shall have been submitted for signature and recording as specified in section 32-48. The planning board may, for good cause shown, extend the period for recording for an additional period. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § VI(E)) 
Secs. 32-187-32-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PHYSICAL DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 32-221. - Conformance with article provisions. 
    All land developments and subdivisions must conform to the design standards described in this article. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § VII) 
Sec. 32-222. - Road; road design standards. 
    The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all roads shall conform to the circulation plan of the town and to the typical roadway sections in this chapter, and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned roads, to topographical conditions and public convenience and safety, to road classifications for use and to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such roads. 
(1)  Frontage. Each lot in the subdivision shall abut on a public road having access to an existing town or state road. Where a subdivision abuts an existing or proposed state or federal highway, the planning board may require access roads parallel to the state or federal highway, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of properties and for separation of through and local traffic. 
(2)  Intersections and centerlines. Road intersection centerlines shall coincide precisely or be offset by at least 150 feet. Road centerlines shall intersect as nearly at right angles as practicable. No intersection shall contain an angle of less than 60 degrees. Where a deflection angle occurs along the centerline of a road, a centerline curve having a radius of not less than 300 feet shall be introduced. Corners at intersections shall be rounded to provide right-of-way radius of not less than 20 feet. 
(3)  Road classification. Road design within a proposed subdivision shall conform to a street hierarchy system as established in this article. Requirements for right-of-way and pavement width, on-street parking, drainage and other utilities, sidewalks, bicycle path and other design standards shall be tailored to road function. Road classification shall be determined by the planning board. The following references are used in making the determinations: 
a.  Technical Paper Number 130 Highway Functional Classification System For the State of Rhode Island 1995-2005 (Adopted May 1988), October 1988, Division of Planning, Rhode Island Department of Administration, 265 Melrose Street, Providence, RI 02907. 
b.  A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets 1990. American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. 
c.  Recommended Guidelines for Subdivision Streets. Institute of Transportation Engineers, Washington, D.C.: ITE, 1984. 
d.  Trip Generation, 1987 edition, Washington, D.C.: Institute of Transportation Engineers. 
(4)  Major categories of road classification. The following major categories of road classification are established: 
a.  Arterial. A major public road that serves as an avenue for the circulation of traffic into, out of or around the town and carries high volumes of traffic and provides for high levels of mobility. 
b.  Collector. A public road the principal function of which is to carry traffic between local roads and arterial roads but that may also provide direct access to abutting properties. These roads provide a balance between land access and mobility. 
c.  Local access. Public roads the primary function of which is to provide access to abutting properties. 
d.  Minor subdivision: Roads the primary function of which is to provide access to abutting properties. Roads within minor residential subdivisions serving up to five residential dwellings on a private road also fall within this classification. 
(5)  Roadway typical sections and design criteria. Roadway typical sections and design criteria are as follows: 
a.  Specific design criteria will be determined by the board on a case-by-case basis, in consultation with the director of public works. Refer to section 32-223(5) entitled "Surface and Subsurface Drainage" for more specific design guidelines. 
b.  Right-of-way width, pavement width, and pavement type vary depending upon the number of lots served, the potential for future access and slope. 
Table 1 
Figure No. Collector 1 Local Access 2 Minor Subdivision 3  
(6)  Geometric data. Tables 2 and 3 shall be used as a guide in designing roads within a subdivision as follows: 
Table 2 
Collector Public Local Access Roads Minor Subdivision R.O.W. width 50 feet 50 feet 40 feet Pavement width (includes berms) Varies, see table no. 3 below Maximum grades Centerline 9 percent 10 percent 10 percent Within 150 feet of centerline intersections 2.5 percent N/A N/A Minimum grades Centerline 1 percent 0.5 percent 0.5 percent Minimum length for vertical curves 100 feet* As determined by DPW Minimum radius of 150 feet and a 
minimum of 
100 foot 
tangent between 
curves 100 feet 100 feet Centerline curve minimum sight distance 200 feet 100 feet 100 feet Cul-de-sac turnaround R.O.W. diameter N/A 100 feet 100 feet Pavement diameter** N/A 80 feet 80 feet Maximum grade N/A 4.5 percent 4.5 percent Minimum grade N/A 2.0 percent 2.0 percent Intersection fillet curve R.O.W. minimum radius 15 feet 15 feet 10-15 feet Pavement minimum radius 25 feet 25 feet 25 feet Pavement crown 5 inches 3 inches 3 inches  
 *Less than 30 feet for each one percent algebraic difference in grade 
**Where approved by the planning board, cul-de-sacs may be designed with a circle with a 40-foot unpaved center. The board will determine landscape requirements for the unpaved center. 
Table 3 
# of Units Served <5 5-15 15-50 >50 Pavement 
width 18 feet 20 feet 22 feet 24 feet  
(7)  Road layout and arrangement. The arrangement of roads shall be considered in relation to the existing road system, and to existing topographic and natural conditions. The road system shall be designed to permit the safe, efficient and orderly movement of traffic; to meet, but not exceed the needs of the present and future population served; to have a simple and logical circulation pattern; to respect natural features and topography; and to create an attractive streetscape. Wherever possible in residential subdivisions, the road system shall be designed to serve the needs of the neighborhood. However, in major subdivisions, access shall be designed to avoid road systems which have only one principal means of egress. In order to provide for alternative access, at least two vehicular access roads may be required by the planning board, in major subdivisions when determined by the board to be feasible. Proposed roads within a major subdivision shall provide for their continuation or projection to intersect with principal roads on the perimeter of the subdivision or with adjacent vacant property in order that the roads may be extended at a future time. 
(8)  Private roads. Private roads shall not be permitted. 
(9)  Dead-end roads (cul-de-sacs). All dead-end roads shall end in a cul-de-sac, modified cul-de-sac, hammerhead or turnaround constructed according to the table of geometric data in table 4, and shall be clearly marked at their entrances. The planning board may limit the length of the dead-end road (cul-de-sac), where necessary, to ensure the adequate and safe circulation of vehicular traffic. Dead-end roads shall not be more than 1,200 feet in length. Where a dead-end road is to provide access to adjacent property, the planning board may require provision for a temporary turnaround or tee until such time as the adjacent tract is developed and the road is extended. Reservation of strips of land, or any physical barrier controlling access to a road, will not be permitted. 
(10)  Road names. An extension of an existing road shall have the same name as the existing road. Names of other proposed roads shall be substantially different from any existing road name in the town. 
(11)  Access to adjoining property. When considered desirable by the planning board to provide access to adjoining property, proposed roads shall be continued and improved to the property line. The reservation of strips of land preventing such access shall not be permitted. The planning board may require provision of a temporary turnaround until such time as the adjacent tract is developed. An improvement guarantee may be required to ensure completion of the road or construction of a permanent cul-de-sac within a reasonable period of time. Access to adjoining property for pedestrian and/or bicycle circulation shall be required wherever the planning board determines that such connection will increase accessibility between adjoining subdivisions, to existing or proposed sidewalks or bicycle paths, from subdivisions to major public or private schools, recreation areas or other facilities or where the public safety will be significantly enhanced by such pedestrian and/or bicycle connections. 
(12)  Road grades. Grades of minor roads shall not be less than 0.5 percent. Arterial roads shall not exceed five percent in grade nor be less than 0.5 percent in grade. 
(13)  Pedestrian rights-of-way. Where it is deemed appropriate to the design, the planning board may require provisions for pedestrian rights-of-way. All such rights-of-way shall be ten feet in width and shall be conveyed to the town. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § VII(A)) 
Editor's note- Table 4, a table of geometric data, is not printed in this Code but is on file and available in the town offices. 
Sec. 32-223. - Construction improvements. 
    The subdivider shall, at his own expense, construct improvements to the land according to specifications of this chapter and construction plans approved by the planning board or other designated town officials. "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction," the latest revision, or as amended, as prepared by the state department of transportation, division of public works is hereby made a part of this section. This specification shall be used as a basis for all required materials, methods and construction of roads and related appurtenances, unless otherwise specified in this section. 
(1)  Road construction. 
a.  Dimensions. All roads planned and constructed within a subdivision shall conform to the design standards as listed in this article. The minimum requirements for the roadway cross section are illustrated on plate 1 in the appendix on file in the town clerk's office. 
b.  Clearing. The existing ground shall be cleared and grubbed along the alignment of the improved roadway including the area six feet along either side. Within these limits, all objectionable or unsuitable material shall be removed. Loam and subsoil shall be stockpiled for later use in dressing side slopes and embankments. Special features (such as unique trees, stone walls, etc.) may be designated by the board for preservation with the right-of-way clear zone. Where possible with consideration for cuts and fills, the existing natural features and vegetation shall be preserved within the remainder of the right-of-way limits. 
c.  Earth excavation. Earth excavation shall include, but not be limited to, the removal and satisfactory disposal of materials such as clay, sand, gravel, loam, soft or disintegrated rock which can be removed without blasting, boulders of less than one-half cubic yard in volume, drainage excavation and all unacceptable material producing unsatisfactory subsidence in the fill or embankment to be constructed in the road. All excavations shall be to a depth and width as shown on the accepted plans, profiles and cross sections. 
d.  Rock and ledge excavation. It shall include removal and disposal of all boulders and one-half cubic yard or more in volume and all hard ledge rock which can be removed only by blasting. Existing rock and ledge shall be removed within three feet of the road design finish grade. 
e.  Subsurface water. Where free water is encountered within three feet of finished grade, adequate subdrains shall be constructed at a depth of at least four feet below finished grade on at least one side of the improved roadway. Subdrains shall be part of the road drainage design and adequate provisions shall be made for disposing of the collected water. Sufficient data shall be submitted with the preliminary plat documents to establish maximum (highest) groundwater levels for road design purposes. Sufficiency of groundwater level data shall be subject to approval by the board in consultation with the director of public works. 
f.  Description of material for improved roads. Materials used for improving roads are as follows: 
i.  Surface treatment. This item shall consist of three inches of three-quarter inch bituminous base and one inch of three-eighths inch asphaltic concrete and class 1, type I-1 asphalt, or equivalent, as approved by the director of public works. 
ii.  Gravel base. Gravel borrow for construction of the required roadway base shall conform to the requirements of M.01.02 of the state standard specifications. The gravel base shall be of the minimum thickness indicated in the "Typical Roadway Section" and shall be of greater depth in fill sections and wet soils, a required, but not to exceed, two feet. 
iii.  Common borrow. Common borrow may be used in fill sections to within two feet of the finished grade. The material for common borrow shall conform to M.01.01 of the state standard specifications. 
g.  Roadway construction methods. Roadway construction methods are as follows: 
i.  After clearing and grubbing, all trees, stumps, brush, boulders and any other debris shall be removed from the right-of-way and disposed of according to law. 
ii.  Before any gravel borrow is placed to its proposed elevation, the subgrade and drainage facilities shall be approved by the town's director of public works. 
iii.  The gravel borrow base course shall be spread and compacted in two, four-inch layers for the full road width and in such volume as to provide an eight-inch cross section after compaction with a ten-ton roller. At the discretion of the public works director, up to two feet of gravel may be required in wet soils or when other adverse conditions are present. 
iv.  After gravel base course has been approved by the director of public works, type A processed gravel shall be spread over the full road width to a depth of four inches after compaction with a ten-ton roller. 
v.  Base surface preparation: The base surface shall be swept clean of all sand and debris, and any holes, ripples or unevenness in the surface shall be brought back to true line and cross section by the spot application and compaction of class I mix. 
vi.  Surface treatment binder course: Three inches of three-quarter inch bituminous binder base shall be placed in sufficient quantity to provide a compacted cross section of two inches. 
vii.  Surface treatment finish course: Class I, type I, three-eighths inch asphaltic concrete shall be placed in sufficient quantity to provide a compacted depth of one inch. 
viii.  Treatment of side slopes and embankments: Generally, all side slopes beyond the limits of the improved roadway, unless undisturbed, shall be shaped to the approved lines and grades and finish landscaped with loam and grass seed or an approved mulch material. Embankment placed in fill sections of the roadway and slopes shall be obtained from acceptable road excavation areas, approved borrow pits or may be base course material. Embankment material so placed shall be spread and compacted in layers not exceeding six inches in thickness until the subbase elevation is reached. Rock or stones exceeding six inches shall not be allowed. The moisture of the material shall be controlled so that maximum compaction is attained. 
ix.  Traffic limitation: Traffic passing over newly constructed roads shall be limited to wheeled vehicles only and no tracked equipment shall be allowed to pass. Roads will be open for public use at the approval and acceptance of the director of public works. 
x.  Seasonal limits: No bituminous material shall be laid when the temperature of the air is 50 degrees Fahrenheit or less and falling or during unfavorable weather conditions. 
xi.  The contractor shall be required to provide 72 hours' notice to the director of public works and the administrative officer to schedule the various phases of roadway construction inspections. The director of public works shall report the results of each roadway inspection to the administrative officer. 
(2)  Curbs. Curbs may be required for controlling surface drainage. When required, roads shall be curbed with asphalt curbing. Curbing shall conform to the requirements of the public works director for drainage and to the state standard specifications for road and bridge construction, applicable sections. 
(3)  Guardrails. Roadside guardrails of a design acceptable to the public works director may be required at fill sections less than eight feet in depth (see typical road section) where conditions may warrant their use. 
(4)  Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be required to meet particular circumstances and specifications to be determined by the planning board. If no sidewalks are to be constructed, the area back of the road line shall be loamed to a depth of four inches, seeded with a suitable grass seed. 
(5)  Surface and subsurface drainage. Surface and subsurface storm drainage structures and facilities shall be installed connected to dry wells, or watercourses or to the public storm sewer system if such connection is as deemed necessary by the planning board. Such materials and installations shall conform to the typical roadway sections as provided in the appendix to these regulations and to the state standard specifications for road and bridge construction. Wherever possible, drainage solutions should rely upon drainage swales, sheet flow, pervious surfaces, retention and detention ponds, rather than on contained systems utilizing pipes, culverts and catchbasins and oil separators. Appropriate best management practices (BMPs) as described in the RIDEM Rhode Island Stormwater Design Manual shall be utilized in the design for all projects. 
(6)  Sanitary sewers. Sanitary sewers shall be installed where connection to a public or community system is deemed necessary by the planning board. 
(7)  Installation of utilities. All utility lines and other subsurface facilities within road rights-of-way shall be installed underground and the backfill allowed to settle for a minimum of 30 days prior to the preparation of road subbase. Water lines shall be installed when a public or community water system is planned for or close to or adjacent to the land to be subdivided. Such installation shall conform to the American Water Works Association Standard Specifications for Residential Subdivisions. 
(8)  Permanent monuments. Permanent boundary monuments shall be placed where angles are turned in the survey; at all points of curvature and tangency; at all corners in the exterior boundary for the subdivision, except at such corners which are inaccessible due to topography; and at such other locations as the planning board may designate. Permanent monuments shall be installed and constructed in the following manner: 
a.  Materials. Permanent monuments shall be quarry split or peen-hammered granite, all of which shall conform in size and shape to the specifications in subsection (8)b of this section. 
b.  Dimensions. Monument dimensions shall be as follows: 
i.  Monuments shall be 30 inches in length and six inches square, and otherwise generally conforming to state standard 14.2. 
ii.  A drill hole, one-half inch in diameter and three-quarter inch deep shall be placed and centered on the top surface of the monument. 
c.  Setting monuments. All monuments shall be set flush with the finished grade. 
d.  Construction method. Installation of monuments shall conform to the state standard specifications for road and bridge construction, section 914. 
(9)  Road signs. Road signs, having sufficient support and of a type acceptable to the director of public works, shall be erected by the subdivider at each road intersection in the subdivision. Dead-end roads shall be clearly indicated as such at their entrance. 
(10)  Road trees. Where natural tree growth is insufficient, the planning board shall require that road trees hardy to the area be planted within road rights-of-way. In these cases, the planning board will specify tree type, location spacing, tree pits and other details as may be appropriate. Plantings are to be located with a sufficient buffer to prevent root system encroachment into ditch and drainage systems. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § VII(B)) 
Sec. 32-224. - Lots. 
(a)  Boundaries. All lots shall conform to the provisions of the zoning regulations of chapter 38 adopted by the town, and: 
(1)  Lots will not extend through to another existing or proposed road. 
(2)  Except on those sides bordering a road, new lot boundaries shall have no interior angles greater than 200 degrees. 
(3)  All side lot lines shall be as near right angles as practicable to road right-of-way lines or radial in arrangement when the right-of-way is a curve. 
(b)  Area. The minimum lot area established by this chapter or by any zoning ordinance adopted by the town may be increased by the planning board if the report from the state department of environmental management that greater lot areas are warranted for provisions of individual sewage disposal systems and/or water supply. 
(c)  Easements. Easements may be required by the planning board where necessary for the proper location and placement of improvements on private land as described in this subsection (c). The board may, at its discretion, require the dedication of land to the town in lieu of easements if such dedication would provide greater control over and access to the intended use. 
(1)  Drainage easements. Easements to install and maintain underground drainage facilities on private land shall be dedicated to the town where required. The nominal width for such a drainage easement shall be 20 feet. Where aboveground drainage flows are directed over private property which does not contain natural watercourses or wetlands, or where publicly owned and maintained drainage systems outfall on private land, a drainage easement shall be dedicated to the town over the area and at a location adequate for the intended purpose. Easements into and upon aboveground drainage facilities such as stormwater detention or retention basins shall be granted to the town wherever stormwater from town-owned roads or other improvements is intended to be directed to such basins. 
(2)  Grading easements. The planning board may require the dedication of an easement to the town in order to grade or maintain grading on private property where such grading is necessary to establish or maintain adequate drainage, sight distances or topographic features required as a condition of subdivision approval. 
(3)  Sight distance easements. Where deemed necessary by the planning board to establish or maintain adequate sight distances for vehicular traffic, the dedication of an easement to the town may be required which would prohibit the erection or maintenance of any visual obstruction such as a structure, tree, shrub, wall, earthen embankment, hill or any other obstruction. 
(4)  Bicycle or pedestrian access easements. Bicycle and pedestrian access shall be provided where necessary on a separate strip of land dedicated to the town or on an easement having a width of 15 feet. 
(5)  Other easements. All other required easements shall be of sufficient width and area for the intended purpose. All utility easements shall be a minimum width of 20 feet and contain at least one concrete bound. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § VII(C)) 
Secs. 32-225-32-255. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEES 

Sec. 32-256. - Security instrument; determination of nature and extent of improvements. 
(a)  An improvement guarantee is a security instrument accepted by the town to ensure that all improvements, facilities or work required by the land development and subdivision regulations or required as a condition of approval by the planning board during the preliminary review phase shall reflect the physical character and design of that district as specified by the town's comprehensive plan. 
(b)  The nature and extent of the improvements shall be determined by the planning board during the preliminary review phase and shall reflect the physical character and design of that district as specified by the municipality's comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § VIII) 
Sec. 32-257. - Procedures generally. 
(a)  Prior to the final plan approval, the planning board shall approve agreements for the completion of all required public improvements in the form of completion of actual construction of all improvements, improvement guarantees, or a combination thereof. If the improvements are constructed without a financial guarantee, the work is to be completed prior to final approval. 
(b)  All construction shall be inspected by the director of public works at each stage of construction and shall be approved under the direction of the administrative officer. Upon completion, the administrative officer shall certify, in writing to the developer, that all improvements have been completed in accordance with plan. Final plans, after certification, must be signed and dated by the appropriate planning board member prior to recording with the town clerk (see section 32-48). 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § VIII(A)) 
Sec. 32-258. - Amount of guarantee. 
    Improvement guarantees shall be in an amount and with all necessary conditions to secure for the town the actual construction and complete installation of all required improvements, within the time specified by the planning board. The amount shall be based on actual cost estimates for all required public improvements reviewed and approved by the planning board. The board may fix the guarantee in a reasonable amount in excess of the estimated costs to anticipate for economic or construction conditions, but will not exceed 110 percent of the estimate originally approved by the planning board. If at any time during the guarantee period the implementation measures and procedures, materials and/or construction schedule do not adhere to the approved plan, the board may, after written notification to the subdivider, authorize the use of guarantee funds to ensure proper compliance. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § VIII(B)) 
Sec. 32-259. - Phased subdivisions. 
    In the case of land development projects or subdivisions which are approved and constructed in phases, the planning board shall specify improvement guarantees related to each particular phase. If each phase has separate improvements or conditions of approval, the board shall clearly specify when guarantees are to be provided in setting the guarantee amount for each phase. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § VIII(C)) 
Sec. 32-260. - Improvement guarantee form. 
    The security shall be in the form of a financial instrument acceptable to the approving authority and shall enable the town to gain timely access to the secured funds, for cause. Performance and maintenance guarantees may be provided by a variety of means including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Letter of credit. The subdivider may provide an irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or other reputable institution. 
(2)  Escrow account. The subdivider may deposit cash or other instruments readily convertible into cash at face value, either with the town or in escrow with a bank. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § VIII(D)) 
Sec. 32-261. - Releases. 
    At the expiration of the final plan approval period, if all required improvements are complete, any improvement reductions in the guarantee amount may also be authorized at any time prior to the expiration of final approval. A written request for release or reduction of any improvement guarantee shall be made to the administrative officer, who shall refer such request to the planning board. After inspection of all required improvements by the director of public works, the board shall authorize that the finance director shall return all improvement guarantees to the subdivider, that the amount of the guarantee being held by the town shall be reduced to cover the estimated cost of remaining improvements or that no releases or reductions shall be made. The planning board shall act on all such releases or reductions of improvement guarantee. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § VIII(E)) 
Sec. 32-262. - Maintenance guarantees. 
    The planning board may also require that a maintenance guarantee be provided by the subdivider for all improvements which are being dedicated to the town for public acceptance and maintenance. The amount of the maintenance guarantee shall be five percent of the original improvement guarantee or other original guarantee amount. In the absence of such a guarantee, five percent of the total estimated cost of all required improvements shall be required. The initial period for such maintenance guarantee shall be one year. At the end of the one-year maintenance period, the director of public works shall inspect all improvements subject to the guarantee and shall certify in writing to the administrative officer as to their condition. If found to be unacceptable, the administrative officer shall recommend an extension of the guarantee period to the finance director, and the original funds shall not be returned to the subdivider. If public improvements are in good condition and have not been damaged due to the fault of the subdivider, or through faulty workmanship or design, the maintenance guarantee shall be returned to the subdivider. In cases where the planning board finds there are extenuating circumstances, the initial maintenance period may be established for a period longer than one year. The reasons for establishing a longer maintenance period and the nature of the extenuating circumstances shall be made a part of the record. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § VIII(F)) 
Sec. 32-263. - Acceptance of improvements. 
    Upon completion, the subdivider shall convey all required public improvements to the town for ownership and maintenance. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § VIII(G)) 
Sec. 32-264. - Procedures for completion. 
(a)  The applicant shall notify the administrative officer, in writing, upon final completion of improvements. 
(b)  The director of public works shall conduct a final inspection and certify to the administrative officer that all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed. 
(c)  Upon certification of completeness of all required improvements, and upon receipt of all required information from the applicant, the administrative officer shall refer the acceptance of improvements to the planning board at its next scheduled meeting. All required information should be accompanied by an accurate description of roads, easements, land or other facilities by metes and bounds and by reference to the final plan drawings and by a warranty deed transferring ownership to the town and describing any special conditions or requirements. 
(d)  If all requirements of this chapter have been met, the planning board shall recommend acceptance by the town council of all such improvements. In such recommendation for acceptance, the planning board shall also recommend to the town council an amount for a maintenance bond and that no public improvements or facilities be accepted for ownership and maintenance until such maintenance bond has been submitted as required in section 32-262. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § VIII(F)) 
Secs. 32-265-32-295. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - SPECIAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 32-296. - Minor subdivision involving no road creation or extension. 
(a)  Applicability of section. Any subdivision of a parcel of land into at least two but no more than five lots for the purpose of development, all of which have frontage on a public road, which meet all applicable area and dimensional requirements of the zoning ordinance, but which do not require the extension or creation of a road, shall be considered to be a minor subdivision and shall be reviewed according to the applicable provisions of section 32-161, and this article. Subdivisions in this section which create more than five lots for the purpose of development shall be considered to be major subdivisions, and shall be reviewed according to the provisions of article VI of this chapter. 
(b)  Minor subdivisions involving the creation of two lots. Minor subdivisions described above involving the creation of no more than two lots (one original lot plus one new lot) shall first be reviewed by the administrative officer in accordance with the procedure established in section 32-161. The applicant shall be required to submit to the administrative officer all plans and supporting materials as required by the preliminary plat checklist for minor subdivisions. Any further subdivision of either of the two lots created under this section at any time after December 20, 1995, whether immediate or future, shall be considered to be a minor subdivision of three or more lots or a major subdivision and shall be reviewed under the applicable provisions of this chapter. The option of land dedication in lieu of fees, as provided by section 32-110 shall not be available to minor subdivisions involving the creation of two lots pursuant to this subsection. The subdivider shall be required to pay a fee in lieu of land dedication. 
(1)  Criteria for review. The following criteria shall be used by the planning board in its review of any two-lot minor subdivision: 
a.  Potential for further subdivision. The planning board shall consider whether the parcel being subdivided has the potential for further subdivision under current applicable zoning regulations. If it has such potential, the planning board shall consider the impacts from such future development in its review of the proposed subdivision and may impose any or all of the lot development standards provided in subsection (b)(2) of this section as necessary to mitigate such impacts. 
b.  Adequacy of the road on which the proposed lots front. The lots must be provided with access to a road which is adequate for access for vehicular traffic, and the frontage must provide safe and adequate access to a public road. 
c.  Adequacy of the access from the lots onto the road. The lots must be accessible by the fire department, police department and other agencies charged with protection of the public peace, safety and welfare, and the lots must be physically accessible from the road upon which it fronts i.e., they cannot be isolated by topographic or natural features which prevent adequate physical access from the road. 
d.  Relationship to scenic highways. Adequate provision shall be made to preserve scenic values along the road frontage of local or state-designated scenic highways in accordance with standards adopted by the state scenic highway board pursuant to G.L. 1956, § 24-15-9 et seq. 
e.  Conformity to zoning. The proposed lots must be in conformity with all applicable zoning ordinance requirements. 
f.  Conformity with the comprehensive plan. The proposed lots shall be in conformity with the town's comprehensive community plan including, but not limited to, discouraging the development of residential lots having direct frontage on major roads, encouraging residences to take access from local roads, and preserving visual quality and rural character. 
g.  Relationship to adjacent or nearby uses. The proposed lots and access thereto shall be designed so as to minimize conflict with existing adjacent uses, driveways, buildings or other structures, roads, intersections, hills, curves or other similar existing features. 
(2)  Lot development standards. Standards which may be imposed by the planning board on any two-lot minor subdivision as a condition of approval may include the following: 
a.  Relocating or modifying proposed access driveway along the road frontage; 
b.  Modifying or limiting the proposed number of access driveways onto any road from any lot or group of lots; 
c.  Combining driveways of adjacent lots, or groups of contiguous lots and the use of common driveways, where feasible; 
d.  Screening, buffering or landscaping of the lot and/or driveway from adjacent public roads; 
e.  Preserving existing unique natural and/or historic features such as trees or stone walls; and 
f.  Ensuring adequate sight distances from the proposed access driveway along adjacent public roads in order to alleviate any potentially hazardous situation. 
(c)  Minor subdivisions involving the creation of three to five lots. Minor subdivisions described in section 32-161 involving the creation of three, four or five lots for the purpose of development shall first be reviewed by the administrative officer in accordance with the procedure established in section 32-161. The applicant shall be required to submit to the administrative officer all plans and supporting materials as required by the preliminary plat checklist for minor subdivisions (see section 32-48). Any further subdivision of any lots at any time after December 20, 1995, whether immediate or future, so as to create a total of six lots or more from the original lot, after December 20, 1995, shall be considered to be a major subdivision and shall be reviewed under the provisions of article VI of this chapter. 
(1)  Criteria for review. In their review of any three-lot to five-lot minor subdivision, the planning board shall use the same criteria for review of a two-lot minor subdivision involving no road creation or extension as provided in subsection (b)(1) of this section. In addition, the planning board may also consider the following: 
a.  Preservation of agricultural land. The preservation of land in agricultural use (including forestry/silvicultural uses) or which contains prime farmland or farmland of statewide importance soils shall be maximized wherever possible by means of locating lots and/or buildings on portions of the parcel being subdivided which are not being used for agriculture or which are not suitable for agricultural use. 
b.  Internal access roads on major arterial roads. Wherever possible and practical, the lots shall be developed on remaining portions of the parcel being subdivided so as to avoid creation of individual lots having direct frontage on an existing public arterial or collector road. In such cases, the planning board may require the applicant to submit alternative plans to demonstrate the feasibility of creating other types of subdivisions, such as a three-lot to five-lot minor subdivision with an internal road, a residential cluster development or a conventional subdivision. If the planning board determines that such development is feasible and practical, the creation of frontage lots may be rejected and the applicant shall be required to develop the property in an alternative fashion, acceptable to the planning board. 
(2)  Lot development standards. Standards which may be imposed by the planning board as a condition of approval of any three-lot to five-lot minor subdivision involving no road creation or extension may include the following: Any of the standards for the development of a two-lot minor subdivision as provided in subsection (b)(2)a.-f. of this section, plus any of the following: 
a.  Improvements to the road on which the proposed lot fronts may be required in order to provide safe vehicular access; provided, however, that the standards for construction or upgrading of any such access roads shall not exceed those standards required by article VII of this chapter for construction of roads in minor subdivisions. 
b.  Provisions shall be made for construction of an access road or shared driveway to provide vehicular access to multiple frontage lots from a common access point on to the public road on which the lots front. Minimum standards for the design and construction of such service roads may be imposed by the planning board in order to provide safe vehicular access; provided, however that such standards shall not exceed those standards required by article VII of this chapter for construction of roads in minor subdivisions. 
c.  If adequate provision is made for access from individual lots to service roads as required in subsection (c)(2)b of this section, then a restriction may be required that prohibits individual driveway access from lots onto the frontage roads. 
d.  Provisions may be made for incorporating proposed frontage lots into future subdivision of contiguous land, if such future subdivision is determined to be feasible by the planning board. Such provisions may include the following: 
1.  Preparation of a concept plan to indicate future access to and development of residual land contiguous to proposed frontage lots. 
2.  Reservation of land or easements to provide for future access from access roads to contiguous land; and/or 
3.  Temporary driveways for frontage lots with provisions made for future permanent driveways to be connected to future roads in subdivision of contiguous land. 
4.  The provision or submission by the applicant of such plans shall under no circumstances create vested rights to any such proposed future subdivision. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § IX(A)) 
Sec. 32-297. - Minor subdivisions involving road creation or extension. 
    Any subdivision of a parcel of land into at least two but no more than five lots for the purpose of development and which requires the creation or extension of a public road shall be considered a minor subdivision and shall be reviewed by the planning board in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 32-161. Standards for the design and required improvements of such minor subdivisions shall be as follows: 
(1)  Creation or extension of a public road. Creation or extension of a public road shall be effected as follows: 
a.  Any minor subdivision which proposes the creation or extension of a public road shall be required to meet the design improvement standards for public roads as provided in article VII of this chapter. 
b.  In minor subdivisions of three to five lots, the board may require a road right-of-way width of 50 feet if it is determined by the board that the potential for additional development on adjacent property exists and that access through the minor subdivision to such adjacent property is necessary or desirable. 
(2)  Frontage on improved roads. The area to be subdivided shall have frontage on an existing, improved public road. If such an existing road has not been improved to the standards and specifications as required in this chapter, the board may require the subdivider to make certain improvements along the part of the road abutting the property or leading to the property being subdivided where necessary for drainage, safety, traffic or other reasons as deemed proper by the board. 
For purposes of this chapter, roads platted, but not officially accepted by the town, shall not be considered existing improved public roads. Where these roads are incorporated within the subdivision, they shall be improved by the developer to meet the chapter standards. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § IX(B)) 
Secs. 32-298-32-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF CONSTRUCTION OF LOW OR MODERATE INCOME (LMI) HOUSING 

Sec. 32-301. - In general. 
    Any applicant proposing to build LMI housing may submit to the planning board a single application for a comprehensive permit to build that housing in lieu of separate applications to the zoning board. This procedure is only available for proposals in which at least 25 percent of the housing is low or moderate income housing. The application and review process for a comprehensive permit shall be as follows. 
(Ord. of 10-8-2009, Pt. 2(B)) 
Sec. 32-302. - Submission requirements. 
    Applications for a comprehensive permit shall include: 
(1)  A letter of eligibility issued by the Rhode Island Housing Mortgage Finance Corporation, or in the case of projects primarily funded by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development or other state or federal agencies, an award letter indicating the subsidy, or application in such form as may be prescribed for a municipal government subsidy; and 
(2)  A written request to the planning board to submit a single application to build or rehabilitate LMI housing in lieu of separate applications to the applicable local boards. The written request shall identify the specific sections and provisions of applicable local ordinances and regulations from which the applicant is seeking relief; and 
(3)  A proposed timetable for the commencement of construction and completion of the project; and 
(4)  A sample land lease or deed restriction with affordability liens that will restrict use as LMI housing in conformance with the guidelines of the agency providing the subsidy for the LMI housing, but for a period of not less than 30 years; and 
(5)  Identification of an approved entity that will monitor the long-term affordability of the LMI housing units; and 
(6)  A financial pro-forma for the proposed development; and 
(7)  For comprehensive permit applications: (A) not involving major land developments or major subdivisions including, but not limited to, applications seeking relief from specific provisions of the zoning ordinance, or involving administrative subdivisions, minor land developments or minor subdivisions, or other local ordinances and regulations: those items required by local regulations promulgated pursuant to applicable state law, with the exception of evidence of state or federal permits; and for comprehensive permit applications; and (B) involving major land developments and major subdivisions, unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant and the town; those items included in the checklist for the master plan in section 32-183 of this chapter. Subsequent to master plan approval, the applicant must submit those items included in the checklist for a preliminary plan for a major land development or major subdivision project in section 32-184 of this chapter, with the exception of evidence of state or federal permits. All required state and federal permits must be obtained prior to the final plan approval or the issuance of a building permit; and 
(8)  The planning board may impose fees on comprehensive permit applications that are consistent with but do not exceed fees that would otherwise be assessed for a project of the same scope and type such as a conventional subdivision or land development project, provided, however, that the imposition of such fees shall not preclude a showing by a non-profit applicant that the fees make the project financially infeasible; and 
(9)  Notwithstanding the submission requirements set forth above, the planning board may request, at the applicant's expense, additional, reasonable documentation throughout the public hearing, including, but not limited to, opinions of experts, credible evidence of application for necessary federal and/or state permits, statements and advice from other local boards and officials. 
(10)  Further detailed design standards/requirements as may be adopted by the planning board from time to time. 
(Ord. of 10-8-2009, Pt. 2(B)) 
Sec. 32-303. - Certification of completeness. 
    The application must be certified complete or incomplete by the administrative officer provided, however, that for a major land development or major subdivision, the certificate for a master plan shall be granted within 30 days and for a preliminary plan shall be granted within 45 days. The running of the time period set forth herein will be deemed stopped upon the issuance of a certificate of incompleteness of the application by the administrative officer and will recommence upon the resubmission of a corrected application by the applicant. However, in no event will the administrative officer be required to certify a corrected submission as complete or incomplete less than 14 days after its resubmission. If the administrative officer certifies the application as incomplete, the officer shall set forth in writing with specificity the missing or incomplete items. 
(Ord. of 10-8-2009, Pt. 2(B)) 
Sec. 32-304. - Pre-application conference. 
    Where the comprehensive permit application proposal is a major land development project or a major subdivision, the administrative officer may require an applicant proposing a project under this chapter to first schedule a pre-application conference with the planning board, (or technical review committee). To request a pre-application conference, the applicant shall submit a short description of the project in writing including the number of units, type of housing, as well as a location map and a map showing soil types indicating areas suitable for septic systems based on soil types and other existing mapped features i.e. wetlands. The purpose of the pre-application conference shall be to review a concept plan of the proposed development. Upon receipt of a request by an applicant for a pre-application conference, the planning board has 30 days to schedule and hold the pre-application conference. If 30 days has elapsed from the filing of the pre-application submission and no pre-application conference has taken place, nothing shall be deemed to preclude an applicant from thereafter filing and proceeding with an application for a comprehensive permit. 
(Ord. of 10-8-2009, Pt. 2(B)) 
Sec. 32-305. - Review of applications. 
    An application filed in accordance with this section shall be reviewed by the planning board at a public hearing in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Notification. Upon issuance of a certificate of completeness for a comprehensive permit, the planning board shall immediately notify each local board, as applicable, of the filing of the application, by sending a copy to the local boards and to other parties entitled to notice of hearings on applications under the zoning ordinance and/or land development and subdivision regulations as applicable. 
(2)  Public notice. Public notice for all public hearings will be the same notice required under local regulations for a public hearing for a preliminary plan promulgated in accordance with section 32-185 of this chapter. The cost of notice shall be paid by the applicant. 
(3)  Review of minor projects. The review of a comprehensive permit application involving only minor land developments or minor subdivisions or requesting zoning ordinance relief or relief from other local regulations or ordinances not otherwise addressed in this section, shall be conducted following the procedures in the applicable local regulations, with the exception that all minor land developments or minor subdivisions under this section are required to hold a public hearing on the application, within 95 days of issuance of the certificate of completeness, or within such further time as is agreed to by the applicant and the planning board. 
(4)  Review of major projects. In the review of a comprehensive permit application involving a major land development and/or major subdivision, the planning board shall hold a public hearing on the master plan and shall, within 120 days of issuance of the certification of completeness, or within such further amount of time as may be agreed to by the planning board and the applicant, render a decision. Preliminary and final plan review shall be conducted according to local regulations promulgated pursuant to sections 32-184 (Preliminary plan submission requirements) and 32-186 (Final plan; submission requirements) of this regulations except as otherwise specified in this section. 
(5)  Required findings. In approving an application, the Planning Board shall make positive findings, supported by legally competent evidence on the record which discloses the nature and character of the observations upon which the fact finders acted, in accordance with each of the following standard provisions, where applicable: 
a.  The proposed development is consistent with local needs as identified in the Foster Comprehensive Plan, as amended, with particular emphasis on the Housing Element - Foster Affordable Housing Plan and/or has satisfactorily addressed the issues where there may be inconsistencies. 
b.  The proposed development is in compliance with the standards and provisions of the Foster Zoning Ordinance and this chapter, and/or where expressly varied or waived local concerns that have been affected by the relief granted do not outweigh the state and local need for low and moderate income housing. 
c.  All low and moderate income housing units proposed are integrated throughout the development; are compatible in scale and architectural style to the market rate units within the project; and will be built and occupied prior to, or simultaneous with the construction and occupancy of any market rate units. 
d.  There will be no significant negative environmental impacts from the proposed development as shown on the final plan, with all required conditions for approval. 
e.  There will be no significant negative impacts on the health and safety of current or future residents of the community, in areas including, but not limited to, safe circulation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, provision of emergency services, sewerage disposal, availability of potable water, adequate surface water run-off, and the preservation of natural, historical or cultural features that contribute to the attractiveness of the community. 
f.  All proposed land developments and all subdivisions lots will have adequate and permanent physical access to a public street in accordance with the requirements of section 32-106(5) of this chapter. 
g.  The proposed development will not result in the creation of individual lots with any physical constraints to development that building on those lots according to pertinent regulations and building standards would be impracticable, unless created only as permanent open space or permanently reserved for a public purpose on the approved, recorded plans. 
(Ord. of 10-8-2009, Pt. 2(B)) 
Sec. 32-306. - Powers of the board. 
    The planning board has the same power to issue permits or approvals that any local board or official who would otherwise act with respect to the application, including, but not limited to, the power to attach to the permit or approval, conditions, and requirements with respect to height, site plan, size, or shape, or building materials, as are consistent with the terms of this section. 
(Ord. of 10-8-2009, Pt. 2(B)) 
Sec. 32-307. - Review process. 
(a)  In reviewing the comprehensive permit request, the planning board may deny the request for any of the following reasons: (A) if the Housing Element - Foster Affordable Housing Plan notes that the Town of Foster is meeting housing needs, and the proposal is inconsistent with the affordable housing plan; (B) the proposal is not consistent with local needs, including, but not limited to, the needs identified in the comprehensive plan, and/or the zoning ordinances and procedures promulgated in conformance with the comprehensive plan; (C) the proposal is not in conformance with the comprehensive plan; (D) the Town of Foster has met or has plans to meet the goal of ten percent of the year-round units as defined herein as LMI housing; or (E) concerns for the environment and the health and safety of current residents have not been adequately addressed. 
(b)  All planning board decisions on comprehensive permits shall be by majority vote of the membership of the board and may be appealed by the applicant to the state housing appeals board. 
(c)  If the public hearing is not convened or a decision is not rendered within the time allowed herein, the application is deemed to have been allowed and the relevant approval shall issue immediately; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to any application remanded for hearing in any town where more than one application has been remanded for hearing provided for in G.L. 1956, § 45-53-6(f)(2). 
(d)  Any person aggrieved by the issuance of an approval may appeal to the superior court within 20 days of the issuance of approval. 
(e)  A comprehensive permit shall expire unless construction is started within 12 months and completed within 60 months of final plan approval unless a longer and/or phased period for development is agreed to by the planning board and the applicant. Low and moderate income housing units shall be built and occupied prior to, or simultaneous with the construction and occupancy of market rate units. 
(Ord. of 10-8-2009, Pt. 2(B)) 
Secs. 32-308-32-330. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - PROCEDURE FOR ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of October 8, 2009, renumbered article X as article XI. 

Sec. 32-331. - Authority of planning board. 
    The planning board is authorized to adopt, modify and amend this chapter according to the procedures described in this article. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § X) 
Sec. 32-332. - Public hearing notification requirements; publication. 
    Notice of a public hearing on any proposed adoption or amendment shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the town at least once each week for three successive weeks prior to the date of the hearing, which may include the week in which the hearing is to be held. This notice shall be published as a display advertisement, using a type size at least as large as the normal type size used by the newspaper in its news articles, and shall: 
(1)  Specify the place, date and time of the public hearing; 
(2)  Indicate that adoption, amendment or repeal of this chapter is under consideration; 
(3)  Contain a statement of the proposed amendment that may be printed once in its entirety, or may summarize or describe the matter under consideration; 
(4)  Advise those interested where and when a copy of the matter under consideration may be obtained or examined and copied; and 
(5)  State that the proposals shown thereon may be altered or amended prior to the close of the public hearing without further advertising as a result of further study or because of the views expressed at the public hearing, provided that any such alteration or amendment was presented for comment in the course of such hearing. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § X(A)) 
Sec. 32-333. - Public hearing notification requirements; mail. 
    Notice of the public hearing shall be sent by first class mail to the following: 
(1)  The associate director of the division of planning of the state department of administration. Such notice, which may be a copy of the newspaper advertisement, shall be sent at least two weeks prior to the public hearing. 
(2)  The city or town planning board of any municipality where there is a public or quasipublic water source, or private water source, that is used or is suitable for use as a public water source, located within 2,000 feet of the municipal boundaries. 
(3)  The governing body of any state or municipal water department or agency, special water district or private water company that has riparian rights to a surface water resource and/or a surface water resource and/or a surface watershed that is used or is suitable for use as a public water source located within either the town or 2,000 feet of the town's boundaries; provided, however, that a map survey has been filed with the building inspector as specified in G.L. 1956, § 45-24-53. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § X(B)) 
Sec. 32-334. - Public hearing. 
    The planning board shall conduct a public hearing at the place, date and time specified in the newspaper advertisement and notices. Opportunity shall be given, at the hearing, to all persons interested to be heard upon the matter of the proposed regulations. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § X(C)) 
Sec. 32-335. - Availability of chapter. 
    Printed copies of this chapter, including all appendices, shall be available to the general public and shall be revised to include all amendments. A reasonable charge shall be made for copies. Upon publication of adoption or of any amendment, copies shall be sent to the division of planning, department of administration and to the state law library. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1995, § X(D)) 
Secs. 32-336-32-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - SEVERABILITY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of October 8, 2009, renumbered article XI as article XII. 

Sec. 32-351. - Severablity. 
    If any provisions of these regulations or of any rule, regulation or determination made thereunder, or the application thereof to any person, agency or circumstances, is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of these regulations, rules or determiantion and the application of such provisions to other persons, agencies, or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. The invalidity of any section or sections of these regulations shall not affect the validity of the remainder of the regulations. 
Chapter 34 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any appropriation ordinance or any ordinance levying or imposing taxes saved from repeal, § 1-10(6); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor saved from repeal, § 1-10(7); any ordinance creating special districts or assessing taxes therefor saved from repeal, § 1-10(12); any ordinance granting specific tax exemption saved from repeal, § 1-10(13); administration, ch. 2; businesses, ch. 12. 
State Law reference- Taxation, G.L. 1956, § 44-1-1 et seq.; power to tax property, G.L. 1956, § 45-2-2; local taxes, G.L. 1956, § 44-5-1 et seq.; levy and assessment of local taxes, G.L. 1956, § 44-5-3 et seq.; exemptions, G.L. 1956, § 44-3-3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Tax classification plan. 
    Pursuant to G.L. 1956 § 44-5-11.8 the town council hereby adopts a tax classification plan as follows: 
(1)  Upon completion of any comprehensive revaluation or statistical update thereof, the tax assessor will adopt a tax classification plan with the following limitations: 
a.  The designated classes of property shall be limited to the four classes as defined herein. 
b.  The effective tax rate applicable to any class shall not exceed by 50 percent the rate applicable to any other class. 
c.  Any tax rate changes from one year to the next shall be applied such that the same percentage rate change is applicable to all classes, except as provided by law. 
d.  Notwithstanding subsections (1)b. and c. above, the tax rates applicable to wholesale and retail inventory within Class 3 as defined below in subsection (2) are governed by § 44-3-29.1. 
e.  Notwithstanding subsections (1)b. and c. above, the tax rates applicable to motor vehicles within Class 4 as defined in subsection (2) are governed by § 44-34.1-1. 
(2)  Classes of property: 
a.  Class 1: Residential real estate consisting of no more than five dwelling units, land classified as open space, and dwellings on leased land including mobile homes. 
b.  Class 2: Commercial and industrial real estate, residential properties containing partial commercial business uses and residential real estate of more than five dwelling units and utilities. 
c.  Class 3: All ratable tangible personal property. 
d.  Class 4: Motor vehicles and trailers subject to the excise tax. 
(3)  The tax assessor is hereby directed to implement the plan within the above guidelines: 
a.  Residential real estate: $________* per $1,000.00. 
b.  Commercial and industrial property: $________* per $1,000.00. 
c.  Tangible personal property: $________* per $1,000.00. 
d.  Motor vehicles: $36.95 per $1,000.00. 
*To be established by the tax assessor each year. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2006) 
Sec. 34-2. - Tax relief for elderly and totally disabled persons. 
    Any owner of an owner-occupied single-family dwelling that has attained the age of 67 years, or more, or who is totally disabled and who is a resident of the Town of Foster, as provided herein, shall be entitled to a tax credit equal to the lesser of: (i) $500.00, or (ii) any increase in the "dollar amount" required to be paid by such owner on the said property above the "dollar amount" required to be paid in taxes during the tax assessment next following such owner's 67th birthday, or following the filing of a certificate evidencing disability, subject to the following definitions and conditions. 
(1)  This credit shall apply only to the dwelling house and the assessment lot on which it is situated as shown on the tax assessor's plats of the Town of Foster, together with any out buildings used in connection with the dwelling house and not used for business purposes or for production of income, other than agricultural uses or a customary home occupation. 
(2)  "Resident" as used herein shall mean a person residing within the Town of Foster for at least seven months per calendar year, and for a period of ten years ending with the date of assessment for the year for which such credit is claimed. Mere seasonal or temporary resident within the town of whatever duration shall not constitute residence for the purpose of this act. Absence from the town for a period of 12 months or greater, or the maintenance of a vehicle, driver's license, or voter registration in a location other than the Town of Foster, shall be prima facie evidence of abandonment of residence. The burden of establishing residence shall be upon the applicant. 
(3)  "Disability" as used herein shall mean a person who is unable to engage in any gainful activity whatsoever because of medically determinable physical or mental impairment which can be expected to result in death or has lasted or can be expected to last for a continuous period of not less than 12 months. Evidence of such disability must be established by a certificate of a physician licensed to practice medicine in this or a neighboring state. 
(4)  No income bearing residential property, business property or combination of business and residential property, shall be entitled to the credit herein provided (except for properties used for agricultural uses or a customary home occupation). It is the express purpose of this section to confine said credit to residential property exclusively used as such by the owners thereof. 
(5)  Application for such credit shall be made during the month of January when the owner of such property shall first become eligible for the same and such credit shall remain in effect so long as the applicant shall continue to own the property. 
(6)  The provisions of this section shall be in addition to any other exemption or credit provided by law including the exemption provided pursuant to Public Laws 1964, Chapter 33. 
(7)  Such credit shall apply in the case of co-tenants and joint tenants if any one of them shall be 67 years of age or over or shall be totally disabled. 
(8)  Appeals from any determination of the tax assessor concerning eligibility and other matters hereunder shall initially be made to the tax board of review of the Town of Foster (established pursuant to Public Laws 1960, Chapter 19) and shall follow the same procedures and be subject to the same time limits as other appeals to said board. Further appeal shall be to the superior court in accordance with the laws providing for relief from the assessment as originally made by the tax assessor. 
(9)  The ordinance from which this section is derived shall apply to assessments of taxes made on and after December 31, 2016 and applications for the credit provided herein may first be made during the month of January 2017. 
(10)  The ordinance from which this section is derived shall take effect on January 1, 2017. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 1) 
Secs. 34-3-34-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXEMPTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Exemptions, G.L. 1956, § 44-3-3 et seq. 

Sec. 34-31. - Household furniture. 
(a)  Beginning with the December 31, 1979, assessments, the following property shall be exempt from taxation: The household furniture and family stores of a housekeeper in the whole, including clothing, bedding and other white goods, books and all other such tangible personal property items which are common to the normal household not exceeding in value the sum of $20,000.00. 
(b)  The exemption granted by this section shall be in addition to any other exemptions provided by statute or ordinance. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, G.L. 1956, § 44-3-3. 
Sec. 34-32. - Elderly and totally disabled persons. 
    The dollar amount paid in taxes to the town on an owner-occupied single-family dwelling by any such owner who has attained the age of 65 years or more, or who is totally disabled and who is a resident of the town, as provided in this section, shall be no greater than the dollar amount required to be paid by such owner on the property in accordance with the tax assessment next following such owner's 65th birthday, or following the filing of a certificate evidencing disability, subject to the following definitions and conditions: 
(1)  This stabilization of the rate and valuation shall apply only to the dwelling house and the assessment lot on which it is situated as shown on the tax assessor's plats of the town, together with any outbuildings used in connection with the dwelling house and not used for business purposes or for production of income. 
(2)  The term "resident," as used in this section, shall mean a person residing within the town for a period of one year ending with the date of assessment for the year for which such stabilization is claimed. Mere seasonal or temporary residents within the town, of whatever duration, shall not constitute residence for the purpose of this section. Absence from the town for a period of 12 months or greater shall be prima facie evidence of abandonment of residence. The burden of establishing residence shall be upon the applicant. 
(3)  The term "disability," as used in this section, shall mean a person who is unable to engage in any gainful activity whatsoever because of medically determinable physical or mental impairment which can be expected to result in death or has lasted or can be expected to last for a continuous period of not less than 12 months. Evidence of such disability must be established by a certificate of a physician licensed to practice medicine in this state. 
(4)  No income bearing residential property, business property or combination of business and residential property shall be entitled to the stabilization provided in this section. It is the express purpose of this section to confine such stabilization to residential property, exclusively used as such by the owners thereof. 
(5)  Application for such stabilization shall be made during the month of January when the owner of such property shall first become eligible for the stabilization, and such stabilization shall remain in effect so long as the applicant shall continue to own the property. 
(6)  The provisions of this section shall be in addition to any other exemption or credit provided by law including the exemption provided pursuant to Public Laws 1964, chapter 33. 
(7)  Such stabilization shall apply in the case of cotenants and joint tenants if any one of them shall be 65 years of age or over, or shall be totally disabled. 
(8)  Appeals from any determination of the tax assessor concerning eligibility and other matters hereunder shall initially be made to the tax board of review of the town (established pursuant to Public Laws 1960, chapter 19) and shall follow the same procedures and be subject to the same time limits as other appeals to such board. Further appeal shall be to the superior court in accordance with the laws providing for relief from the assessment as originally made by the tax assessor. 
(Ord. of 6-6-1974, § 1) 
Sec. 34-33. - Real property owned and occupied by one or more persons 65 years of age and over up to $1,000.00 of valuation. 
(a)  Real property situated in the town and owned and occupied by any one or more persons over the age of 65 years, as of the date of assessment of the annual taxes, shall be exempt from taxation up to an amount not exceeding $1,000.00 of valuation. Such exemption shall be prorated among the owners of the real property who shall qualify for such exemption in addition to any and all other exemptions from taxation to which such persons may be otherwise entitled. 
(b)  Such exemption referred to in subsection (a) of this section shall be applied uniformly and without regard to ability to pay. 
(c)  Such persons entitled to the exemption shall file with the tax assessor in the year 1964 within 30 days after the date of the passage of the ordinance from which this section is derived and in subsequent years within 30 days after the date set by the General Laws for the assessment of real estate a statement containing the following information: 
(1)  The name of the person claiming exemption. 
(2)  The real estate owned by such person claiming such exemption together with the names of the other owners of such real estate and their ages. 
(3)  A statement that the real estate was occupied by the person claiming such exemption on the date set by law for the assessment of the real estate. 
(4)  The date such person filing the statement first occupied the real estate, and a statement showing whether such real estate has been occupied continuously. If the person occupies any other real estate in any other place whatsoever, a statement shall be filed to that effect. 
(5)  The age, place of birth and date of birth of the person claiming the exemption. 
Secs. 34-34-34-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TAX STABILIZATION INCENTIVE FOR INDUSTRIAL, COMMERCIAL AND MANUFACTURING FACILITIES 

Sec. 34-51. - Authorization. 
    The town council has the authority under G.L. 1956, § 44-3-9 to exempt from tax payment, in whole or in part, real and personal property which has undergone environmental remediation, or is used for manufacturing or commercial purposes, or to determine a stabilized amount of taxes to be paid on account of the property, notwithstanding the valuation of the property or the tax rate. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2016, § I) 
Sec. 34-52. - Purpose. 
    In order for the town to grow economically, it must support the rehabilitation and reuse of existing commercial and industrial buildings, as well as incentivize new construction on vacant/unused space, in order to return them to productive use. The purpose of this article is to provide the town with a tool to promote and encourage the use of vacant space through new construction and development and the expansion, relocation, or renovation of industrial, commercial and manufacturing facilities in the town through tax stabilization with the goal of continuing the town's revitalization and promoting job creation. The high cost of rehabilitating, developing and/or remediating these buildings or parcels for productive use is prohibitively expensive and cannot be achieved without both private and public investment. It is therefore in the public interest to provide property tax incentives for owners of qualifying properties in order that there may be substantial redevelopment of the properties for industrial, manufacturing and commercial uses, and the commercial portion of mixed use developments. This will result in an improved physical plant for the town and long term economic growth and benefits, including job creation. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2016, § II) 
Sec. 34-53. - Definitions. 
    Any capitalized terms used herein but not separately defined herein shall have the definition set forth in the Rules and Regulations for the Tax Stabilization Incentive Program promulgated by the Rhode Island Commerce Corporation pursuant to G.L. 1956, tit. 42, ch. 64.22 (the "Commerce Corporation Rules and Regulations"). 
    Cost means expenses by a developer incurred after an application for a tax stabilization agreement for: 
(1)  Site preparation and construction, repair, renovation, improvement, equipping, or furnishing on real property or of a building, structure, facility, or improvement to real property; and/or 
(2)  Obtaining and installing furnishings and machinery, apparatus, or equipment, including but not limited to material goods for the operation of a business on real property or in a building, structure, facility, or improvement to real property. 
The term "cost" includes any capital investment, as such term is defined in the Commerce Corporation Rules and Regulations. 
    Developer means the owner, prospective owner, or tenant for life or for a term of ten or more years that is deemed to be the owner for the purposes of taxation under G.L. 1956, § 44-4-6, proposing to construct a Project on a Property. 
    Project means the expansion of an existing facility, or construction of a new facility, or renovation work, to be performed on a property. 
    Property means the following types of real property: An industrial, commercial or manufacturing facility, or vacant parcel, located in the Town of Foster where a tax stabilization agreement is being sought. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2016, § III) 
Sec. 34-54. - Eligibility/criteria. 
(a)  For a property to be eligible for this tax stabilization program, the project must be: 
(1)  Eligible for tax relief under G.L. 1956, § 44-3-9; 
(2)  Located in the general business mixed use, manufacturing industrial or neighborhood commercial zoning district; 
(3)  In need of substantial rehabilitation or construction, and/or vacant for a period of 12 months. Rehabilitation and construction shall be considered "substantial" if the cost of such rehabilitation or construction is greater than or equal to the lesser of: (a) 25 percent of the then current assessed value of the property (as assessed by the town), or (b) $100,000.00; and 
(4)  The developer of the property must begin construction of the project within 12 months of the granting of the subject stabilization agreement, and must complete construction of the project and obtain a certificate of occupancy for such construction within 36 months of the granting of the stabilization agreement. Developers of the property that fail to meet these deadlines will be required retroactively to pay the difference between their actual stabilized tax payments and what they would have paid if ineligible for the specified tax considerations (unless granted an extension of such applicable deadline due to events of force majeure, as determined by the town council). 
(b)  Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, the following types of projects are ineligible for this tax stabilization program: 
(1)  Projects that would have a material adverse impact on the environment, as determined by the town council in its sole discretion; 
(2)  Residential projects; 
(3)  New retail construction, including without limitation so-called "big box" stores, as well as new restaurants, but excluding the expansion or rehabilitation of existing retail stores or restaurants, the construction of a restaurant as part of a larger, mixed-use development under section 34-57(c) below, the construction of one or more grocery stores or food markets, or stores selling second-hand or artisan produced goods; 
(4)  Projects that, once completed, would render the property exempt from taxation under G.L. 1956, § 44-3-3; and 
(5)  Renewable energy systems that are potentially eligible for exemption under G.L. 1956, § 44-3-21. 
(c)  As set forth in section 34-55 below, the tax assessor shall process applications made under this article. To qualify for tax stabilization under this article, the finance director must certify that the applicant and its affiliates owning property in the town are current with regard to all taxes and assessments due and payable to the town. The tax assessor will concurrently confirm the then current pre-construction assessed value of land and building at the time of application (based on the applicable assessment at the time). 
(d)  Projects consisting of multiple buildings on one lot, or multiple buildings on multiple lots, where such projects are being performed by the same developer, can be consolidated and treated as one project for the purposes of this article and the requirements hereof. For the purposes of this article, a project involving multiple buildings on one lot shall be deemed "completed" as of the date of issuance of the final building certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2016, § IV) 
Sec. 34-55. - Conditions. 
    Tax stabilizations for eligible properties shall run with the land and be transferable to new owners or tenants, but the duration of the tax consideration period shall not be extended (unless otherwise approved by the town council). If the applicant (or the successor fee owner of a property subject to a stabilization agreement granted hereunder) defaults on any quarterly tax or other payment due and payable to the town (i.e., real estate, motor vehicle, or personal property) that is not the subject of a lawful and unresolved appeal process, the town council may, after a 30-day notice and cure period, order the subject stabilization agreement be terminated. In the event that the town council shall terminate a stabilization agreement for such failure to pay taxes (after applicable notice and cure periods), the applicant (or then current owner, if the applicant is no longer the fee owner) shall thereafter be required to repay all of the taxes which it did not pay as a result of the stabilization agreement granted under this article. The applicant, on its behalf and the behalf of its successors and assigns, shall agree in the applicable stabilization agreement to permit the town to place a lien against the subject property immediately following any such termination by the town council for all such unpaid amounts. Furthermore, the tax stabilization shall cease immediately upon the vacating of the property or if the industrial, commercial or manufacturing facility ceases operation; and if the property is vacated or operations cease prior to the expiration of the stabilization period, the applicant shall owe the town all of the taxes, and interest thereon which it did not pay as a result of the tax stabilization granted under this article. The applicant, its successors and assigns agree to allow the town to place an annual lien against the property which is benefitting from tax stabilization to secure any taxes and interest owed if the property is vacant or operations cease prior to the expiration of the stabilization period. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2016, § V) 
Sec. 34-56. - Procedure. 
    Any developer may apply for tax stabilization at the office of the tax assessor. The tax assessor and finance director shall develop such forms and additional procedures consistent with this article, as the tax assessor deems necessary and proper to effectuate their respective obligations under the terms and provisions contained herein. The procedure for eligible properties under this article shall be as follows: 
(1)  No person shall be entitled to any exemption herein authorized without first filing an application for tax stabilization at the office of the tax assessor. No application shall be considered unless: 
a.  The application is filed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy (or temporary certificate of occupancy); 
b.  The applicant certifies that the project will involve "substantial construction or rehabilitation" (as defined in this article) of an eligible property; and 
c.  A non-refundable application fee in the amount of one-hundredth of a percent of the estimated cost of the project is paid to the town; 
(2)  Within 15 days of receipt of a completed application (together with the application fee), the tax assessor shall forward a copy of such application to the finance director, the town building official, and the town council. The town council shall review the application and direct the appropriate town departments to conduct required due diligence. All due diligence must be completed within 30 days of the completed application's submission to the tax assessor. 
(3)  If the town building official reports a violation of the town building code with respect to the subject property, said violations shall be reported to the town council and notice shall be given to the applicant within 30 days. No tax stabilization agreement shall be issued unless and until any and all such violations have been cured, or unless the plans for such project establish that such violation will be cured in connection with such work (and such stabilization agreement shall state that such work shall be a condition of such agreement continuing). 
(4)  If the town finance director reports that an applicant owes taxes to the town with respect to the property which the tax stabilization agreement would apply, notice shall be given to the town council and the applicant within 30 days. The applicant shall have 30 days to make the required tax payment(s). Failure by the applicant to cure any tax deficiencies associated with the subject property shall result in cancellation of the application as an incomplete application (unless an extension is granted by the town council) without a prejudicial effect as to the ability of the applicant to reapply. 
Note: Steps (3) and (4) shall be performed concurrently. 
(5)  The town council shall review each application and, if all eligibility requirements established in this article are satisfied, shall authorize the tax assessor to grant a tax stabilization for the subject property in accordance with the guidelines set forth below. Without limiting the foregoing, and notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, prior to granting an exemption or a stabilization of taxes, the town council shall determine that: (A) granting of the exemption or stabilization of taxes will inure to the benefit of the town by reason of: (i) the willingness of the manufacturing or commercial firm concern to locate in the town; or (ii) the willingness of a manufacturing or commercial firm or concern to expand facilities with an increase in employment, or the willingness of a commercial or manufacturing concern to retain or expand its facility in the city or town and not substantially reduce its work force in the city or town; or (iii) an improvement of the physical plant of the town which will result in a long-term economic benefit to the town and state; or (iv) an improvement which converts or makes available land or facility that would otherwise be not developable or difficult to develop without substantial environmental remediation; or (b) granting of the exemption or stabilization of taxes will inure to the benefit of the town by reason of the willingness of a manufacturing or commercial firm or concern to replace, reconstruct, expand, or remodel existing buildings, facilities, fixtures, machinery, or equipment with modern buildings, facilities, fixtures, machinery or equipment resulting in an increase in plant or commercial building investment by the firm or concern in the town. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2016, § VI) 
Sec. 34-57. - Stabilization amounts. 
(a)  Projects between $100,000.00-$1,000,000.00. If the cost of a project is over $100,000.00, but less than $1,000,000.00, the effect of the tax stabilization shall be to exempt from taxation, according to the guidelines set forth herein, a percent of the increase in value over the assessed value of the property prior to the commencement of the project. The number of tax stabilization agreements issued in connection with this subsection shall be limited to 20. The following tax stabilization guidelines shall apply to applicants who meet the criteria contained herein and is granted tax stabilization pursuant to this subsection: 
Percent of Increase in 
Value Exempt from Taxation Year 1 100 Year 2 75 Year 3 50 Year 4 25 Year 5 0  
(b)  Projects between $1,000,000.00-$10,000,000.00. If the cost of the project is over $1,000,000.00, but less than $10,000,000.00, or if the cost of the project is over $10,000,000.00, but the project does not result in the creation of at least 50 new full-time jobs or is otherwise ineligible for the tax stabilization incentives set forth in the commerce corporation rules and regulations, the effect of the tax stabilization shall be to exempt from taxation, according to the guidelines set forth herein, a percent of the increase in value over the assessed value of the property prior to the commencement of the project. The number of tax stabilization agreements issued under in connection with this subsection shall be limited to ten. The following tax stabilization guidelines shall apply to applicants who meet the criteria contained herein and is granted tax stabilization pursuant to this subsection: 
Percent of Increase in 
Value Exempt from Taxation Year 1 100 Year 2 87.5 Year 3 75 Year 4 62.5 Year 5 50 Year 6 37.5 Year 7 25 Year 8 12.5 Year 9 0  
(c)  Projects above $10,000,000.00. If the project results in the creation of at least 50 new full-time jobs, and the developer has committed a capital investment of not less than $10,000,000.00 towards the project cost, and the project otherwise meets the eligibility criteria set forth in the commerce corporation rules and regulations, the effect of the tax stabilization shall be to exempt from taxation, according to the guidelines set forth herein, a percent of the increase in value over the assessed value of the property prior to the commencement of construction of the project. The number of tax stabilization agreements issued in connection with this subsection shall be limited to five. The following tax stabilization guidelines shall apply to applicants who meet the criteria contained herein and is granted tax stabilization pursuant to this subsection: 
Percent of Increase in 
Value Exempt from Taxation Year 1 100 Year 2 100 Year 3 100 Year 4 90 Year 5 80 Year 6 70 Year 7 60 Year 8 50 Year 9 40 Year 10 30 Year 11 20 Year 12 10 Year 13 0  
(Ord. of 7-12-2016, § VII) 
Sec. 34-58. - Revocation. 
    The town council shall terminate an exemption granted hereunder prior to the expiration thereof in the event of fraud or misrepresentation by an applicant regarding any statements or representations contained in the application or the materials provided therewith. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2016, § VIII) 
Sec. 34-59. - Number of projects. 
    The number of tax stabilization agreements issued under or in connection with this article shall be limited as set forth in each subsection above. Applications shall be considered on a first come, first serve basis (considering only those applications that are deemed complete by the town council). The tax assessor shall keep a list of all applications filed, and shall remove applications that are deemed incomplete by the town council. Upon removal of an incomplete application, the tax assessor shall provide the applicant with notice of such action. The applicant shall not be prejudiced from reapplying for tax consideration. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2016, § IX) 
Sec. 34-60. - Sunset limitation. 
    Owners of qualifying properties shall have 48 months from the effective date contained herein to apply to the town council for tax stabilization under this article by submitting an application to the tax assessor. The application must be certified as complete by the tax assessor on or before the aforementioned date in order to be considered by the town council. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2016, § X) 
Chapter 36 - TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Operation of motor vehicle by animal control officer, § 8-35; law enforcement, ch. 14; streets and sidewalks, ch. 30; vision clearance at corners, § 38-275; supplementary zoning regulations for off-street parking requirements, § 38-286; supplementary zoning regulations for off-street loading requirements, § 38-287. 
State Law reference- Uniformity of vehicle regulations, G.L. 1956, § 31-12-11; powers of local authorities, G.L. 1956, § 31-12-12; local regulations to be posted, G.L. 1956, § 31-12-13; traffic-control devices on local highways, G.L. 1956, § 31-13-3; nonmoving traffic violations, G.L. 1956, § 45-6.1-1 et seq.; service of notice, summons, G.L. 1956, § 31-27-12 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 36-1. - Speed limits; penalty for violation of section. 
(a)  On oil surface roads. The speed limit of all motor-driven vehicles on the oil surface roads of the town shall be 30 miles per hour, unless otherwise posted. 
(b)  Other roads. The speed limit on all roads of the town other than oil surface roads shall be 25 miles per hour, unless otherwise posted. 
(c)  Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be punished according to the provisions of section 1-7. The fines recovered for the violation of any of the provisions of this section or any ordinance and amendment hereof or in addition hereto shall be paid into the town treasury. 
Secs. 36-2-36-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Stopping, standing and parking, G.L. 1956, § 31-21-1 et seq.; violation of parking regulations,payment of fines, G.L. 1956, § 45-6.1-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 36-31. - Stopping at intersections; penalty for violation of section. 
(a)  Every operator of a motor vehicle traveling upon any road intersection or joining any other street or public highway where any stop sign or traffic light is placed or maintained shall bring such vehicle to a full stop at or near the prolongation of the nearest property lines of such intersection or joining public highways or at such other point as may be indicated by a clearly visible limit line, subject, however, to the direction of any police officer at such intersection or junction. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall be punished according to the provisions of section 1-7. 
(Ord. of 6-18-1981(1), §§ I, II) 
Sec. 36-32. - Obstruction of other vehicles; penalty for violation of section. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to place, stop or park the vehicle in any road so as to prevent or obstruct the passing of other vehicles, unless for a reasonable time when necessary, but not exceeding five minutes at a time. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall be punished according to the provisions of section 1-7. 
(Ord. of 6-18-1981(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 36-33. - Parking on certain highways prohibited; penalty for violation of section. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any vehicle to park the vehicle on any of the following highways or parts thereof in the town at any time: 
(1)  On the easterly and westerly side of T. Parker Road from the intersection of Old Plainfield Pike and T. Parker Road, south between poles NET&T 1 and 2; 
(2)  On the easterly and westerly side of Howard Hill Road between NET&T poles 13 and 16; and 
(3)  On any town highway or parts thereof deemed necessary by the chief of police due to traffic congestion caused by events that create high volumes of traffic. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall be punished according to the provisions of section 1-7. 
(Ord. of 6-18-1981(3), §§ I, II) 
Secs. 36-34-36-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARKING DURING SNOW CONDITIONS AND HIGHWAY REPAIR 

Sec. 36-56. - Parking during snow and ice conditions. 
(a)  Time limit. No vehicle shall be parked for a continuous period of longer than 30 minutes on any town highway whenever the public works director shall declare an emergency because of snow or ice conditions. 
(b)  Declaration of emergency; notice. An emergency because of snow or ice conditions shall be declared by the public works director by posting notice of such declarations in the town clerk's office, notifying the town police department, and giving such other notice as he, in his sole discretion, shall deem necessary or feasible. 
(c)  Duration of emergency conditions. Such emergency conditions shall last until the public works director shall declare the emergency terminated. 
Sec. 36-57. - Parking on highways under repair. 
(a)  Prohibited. No vehicles shall be parked on any section of any town highway while such section is under construction or repair and is clearly marked that no parking shall be allowed on such section. 
(b)  Posting of signs. Such section of highway shall be clearly posted that the highway is under construction and repair and that no parking is allowed by signs posted at intervals of no more than 500 feet. Such signs shall be posted for at least 24 hours before the beginning of construction or repair work, except when construction or repair work is of an emergency nature not allowing time for the advance posting of signs. 
Sec. 36-58. - Penalty for violation of division; towing. 
(a)  Any person, firm, association or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this division may be punished according to the provisions of section 1-7. 
(b)  Any vehicle parked in violation of this division may be towed from the highway on the orders of the department of police, at the owner's expense. The department of police shall give notice of the place to which such vehicle has been towed. 
Chapter 38 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any zoning map amendment saved from repeal, § 1-10(10); buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; subdivision, zoning and other regulations related to building code, § 10-37; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 16; planning, ch. 24; soil erosion and sediment control, ch. 26; streets and sidewalks, ch. 30; subdivision regulations, ch. 32. 
State Law reference- Rhode Island Zoning Enabling Act of 1991, G.L. 1956, § 45-24-27 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Purpose of chapter. 
    The zoning districts and regulations set forth in this chapter are made in accordance with the comprehensive community plan, adopted on April 23, 1992, and for the following purposes: 
(1)  Promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the town. 
(2)  Provide for a range of uses and intensities of use appropriate to the character of the town and reflecting current and expected future needs. 
(3)  Provide for orderly growth and development which recognizes: 
a.  The goals and patterns of land use contained in the comprehensive community plan of the town adopted pursuant to G.L. 1956, § 45-22.2-1 et seq. 
b.  The natural characteristics of the land, including its suitability for use based on soil characteristics, topography and susceptibility to surface water or groundwater pollution; 
c.  The value and dynamic nature of the town's waterbodies including freshwater ponds, streams and freshwater wetlands; 
d.  The entire town's watershed areas; 
e.  The value of unique natural resources and features; 
f.  The availability and capacity of existing and planned public and/or private services and facilities; 
g.  The need to shape and balance urban, suburban and rural development; and 
h.  The use of innovative development regulations and techniques. 
(4)  Provide for the control, protection and/or abatement of air, water, groundwater, noise pollution and soil erosion and sedimentation. 
(5)  Provide for the protection of the natural, historic, cultural and scenic character of the town, or areas therein. 
(6)  Provide for the preservation and promotion of agricultural production, forest, silviculture, aquaculture, timber resources and open space and recreation resources of the town. 
(7)  Provide for the protection of public investment in transportation, water, stormwater management systems, sewage treatment and disposal, solid waste treatment and disposal, schools, recreation, public facilities, open space and other public requirements. 
(8)  Promote a balance of housing choices for all income levels and groups and to ensure the health, safety and welfare of all citizens and their rights to affordable, accessible, safe and sanitary housing. 
(9)  Promote safety from fire, flood and other natural or manmade disasters. 
(10)  Promote a high level of quality in design in the development of private and public facilities. 
(11)  Promote implementation of the comprehensive community plan which states that the town will continue to be a rural community retaining its historic hamlets, small farmsteads, scenic roads, wooded ridges and river valley pastures while simultaneously absorbing new growth and development in the planning horizon (2010) through the use of growth management and through special overlay zoning districts to protect its farmland and historic, scenic and unique natural resources. 
(12)  Provide for coordination of land uses with contiguous municipalities, other municipalities, the state and other agencies, as appropriate, especially with regard to resources and facilities that extend beyond municipal boundaries or have a direct impact on that municipality. 
(13)  Provide for efficient review of development proposals, and to clarify and expedite the zoning approval process. 
(14)  Provide for procedures for the administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. I) 
State Law reference- Zoning ordinance to contain a statement of purpose, G.L. 1956, § 45-24-34. 
Sec. 38-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abutter means one whose property abuts, that is, adjoins at a border, boundary or point with no intervening land. 
    Accessory family dwelling unit means an accessory dwelling unit for the sole use of one or more members of the family of the occupant or occupants of the principal residence, but not needing to have a separate means of ingress or egress. 
    Accessory use means a use of land or of a building, or portion thereof, customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building. An accessory use may be restricted to the same lot as the principal use. An accessory use shall not be permitted without the principal use to which it is related. Examples: a garage accessory to a house on the residential lot, a repair shop in an auto sales agency and a parking lot serving a drugstore, and a barn accessory to a house. 
    Aggrieved party means: 
(1)  Any person or entity who can demonstrate that their property will be injured by a decision of any officer or agency responsible for administering this chapter; or 
(2)  Anyone requiring notice pursuant to this chapter. 
    Agricultural land means as defined in G.L. 1956, § 45-22.2-4. 
    Airport hazard area means as defined in G.L. 1956, § 1-3-2. 
    Applicant means an owner or authorized agent of the owner submitting an application or appealing an action of any official, board or agency. 
    Billboard means any sign or advertising device, freestanding or located on a building or wall, which is not related to a use on the premises. 
    Buffer means land which is maintained in either a natural or landscaped state, and is used to screen and/or mitigate the impacts of development on surrounding areas, properties or rights-of-way. 
    Building means any structure intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. 
    Building envelope means the three-dimensional space within which a structure is permitted to be built on a lot and which is defined by regulations governing building setbacks, maximum height and bulk; by other regulations; and/or any combination thereof. 
    Building height means the vertical distance from grade in conformance with the state building code, to the top of the highest point of the roof or structure. This distance excludes spires, chimneys, flagpoles and the like. 
    Cluster means a site planning technique that concentrates buildings in specific areas on the site to allow the remaining land to be used for recreation, common open space and/or preservation of environmentally, historically, culturally or other sensitive features and/or structures. The techniques used to concentrate buildings shall be specified in this chapter and may include, but are not limited to, reduction in lot areas, setback requirements and/or bulk requirements, with the resultant open land being devoted by deed restrictions for one or more uses. Under cluster development, there is no increase in the number of lots that would be permitted under conventional development except where chapter provisions include incentive bonuses for certain types or conditions of development. (Reserved for future development) 
    Collocation means the use of a common tower by two or more license holders or by one license holder for more than one type of communications technology. 
    Common ownership means either: 
(1)  Ownership by one or more individuals or entities in any form of ownership of two or more contiguous lots; or 
(2)  Ownership by an association (such ownership may also include a municipality) of one or more lots under specific development techniques. 
    Communications tower means a freestanding structure used for the location of one or more communications antenna arrays. It may also include an equipment shelter as an accessory use. 
    Community residence means a home or residential facility where children and/or adults reside in a family setting and may or may not receive supervised care. This shall not include halfway houses or substance abuse treatment facilities. This shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Whenever six or fewer retarded children or adults reside in any type of residence in the community, as licensed by the state pursuant to G.L. 1956, § 40.1-24-1 et seq. All use requirements pertaining to local zoning are waived for those community residences; 
(2)  A group home providing care or supervision, or both, to not more than eight mentally disabled or mentally handicapped or physically handicapped persons, and licensed by the state pursuant to G.L. 1956, § 40.1-24-1 et seq.; 
(3)  A residence for children providing care or supervision or both, to not more than eight children including those of the care giver and licensed by the state pursuant to G.L. 1956, § 42-72.1-1 et seq.; 
(4)  A community transitional residence providing care or assistance, or both, to no more than six unrelated persons or no more than three families, not to exceed a total of eight persons, requiring temporary financial assistance, and/or to persons who are victims of crimes, abuse or neglect, and who are expected to reside in that residence not less than 60 days, nor more than two years. Residents will have access to and use all common areas, including eating areas and living rooms, and will receive appropriate social services for the purpose of fostering independence, self-sufficiency and eventual transition to a permanent living situation. 
    Comprehensive plan means the comprehensive plan adopted and approved pursuant to G.L. 1956, § 45-22.2-1 et seq. and to which any zoning adopted pursuant to this chapter shall be in compliance. 
    Customary home occupation means any occupation which may normally be carried on in a residence by the occupant without the provision of normal business or industrial equipment and displays except for simple tools and machinery designed for home use. Such a use requires no structural alteration to the residence and does not create a nuisance to neighboring dwellings. Such home occupations may include, but are not limited to, knitting, sewing, cooking, handcrafts, artist, dressmaker, teacher, author, lawyer, architect, accountant, or consultant. 
    Day care, day care center means any other day care center which is not a family day care home. 
    Day care, family day care home means any home other than the individual's home in which day care in lieu of parental care or supervision is offered at the same time to six or fewer individuals who are not relatives of the care giver, but may not contain more than a total of eight individuals receiving day care. 
    Density, residential, means the number of dwelling units per unit of land. 
    Development means the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any structure; any mining, excavation, landfill or land disturbance; any change in use or alteration or extension of the use of land. 
    Development plan review means the process whereby authorized local officials review the site plans, maps and other documentation of a development to determine the compliance with the stated purposes and standards of this chapter. 
    District. See Zoning use district. 
    Drainage system means a system for the removal of water from land by drains, grading or other appropriate means. These techniques may include runoff controls to minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or development, the means for preserving surface water and groundwater, and the prevention and/or alleviation of flooding. 
    Dump means a place or facility for disposing discarded materials, such as trash, garbage or junk, as generated by residential, institutional, commercial, industrial and agricultural sources. 
    Dwelling unit means a structure or portion thereof providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation, and containing a separate means of ingress and egress. 
    Equipment shelter means an enclosed structure, cabinet, shed or box used in as an accessory to a communications antenna array to house electrical equipment, batteries and emergency electrical generators, directly related to such antenna array. No other uses, including storage, shall be permitted in any equipment shelter. 
    Extractive industry means the extraction of minerals, including solids, such as coal and ores; liquids, such as crude petroleum; and gases, such as natural gases. The term also includes quarrying; well operation; milling, such as crushing, screening, washing and flotation; and other preparation customarily done at the extraction site or as a part of the extractive activity. 
    FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
    Family means a person related by blood, marriage or other legal means. See also Household. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Floating zone means an unmapped zoning district adopted within this chapter which is established on the zoning map only when an application for development, meeting the zone requirements, is approved. 
    Floodplains or flood hazard area means as defined in G.L. 1956, § 45-22.2-4. 
    Front yard means the area between a road line and a line parallel thereto drawn through the nearest point of a structure, extending between side lot lines. 
    Garbage means any animal or vegetable waste. 
    General business-Mixed use development is a planned, coordinated development of a single tract or tracts of land with one or more buildings for a variety of uses. These may include retail, service, office and related activities, residential and municipal uses. Such development is planned, designed, constructed and managed on an integrated and coordinated basis with particular attention given to on-site vehicular circulation, parking, utility needs, building design and location, and open space. The project is developed or controlled by a single proprietary entity and has an enforceable master plan and/or covenants, conditions and restrictions. The development may consist of one or more parcels, condominium ownership, or a combination thereof and may contain public roads. 
    Groundwater. Groundwater and associated terms shall mean as defined in G.L. 1956, § 46-13.1-3. 
    Halfway house means a residential facility for adults or children who have been institutionalized for criminal conduct and who require a group setting to facilitate the transition to a functional member of society. 
    Hardship. See G.L. 1956, § 45-24-41. 
    Height , when referring to a tower or other structure, means the distance measured from the ground level to the highest point on the tower or other structure, even if the said highest point is an antenna. 
    Historic district or historic site means as defined in G.L. 1956, § 45-22.2-4. 
    Home occupation means any activity customarily carried out for gain by a resident, conducted as an accessory use in the resident's dwelling unit. Examples include, but are not limited to, small engine repair shop, weaving, book binding and chair caning. 
    Household means one or more persons living together in a single dwelling unit, with common access to, and common use of, all living and eating areas and all areas and facilities for the preparation and storage of food within the dwelling unit. The term "household unit" shall be synonymous with the term "dwelling unit" for determining the number of such units allowed within any structure on any lot in a zoning district. An individual household shall consist of any one of the following: A family, which may also include servants and employees living with the family; or a person or group of unrelated persons living together, not to exceed five. 
    Incentive zoning means the process whereby the local authority may grant additional development capacity in exchange for developer's provision of a public benefit or amenity as specified in local ordinances. 
    Infrastructure means facilities and services needed to sustain residential, commercial, industrial, institutional and other activities. 
    Land development project means a project in which one or more lots, tracts or parcels of land are to be developed or redeveloped as a coordinated site for a complex of uses, units or structures including, but not limited to, planned development and/or cluster development for residential, commercial, institutional, recreational, open space and/or mixed uses as may be provided for in this chapter. 
    Lodging or guest home means a structure devoted to the leasing of three or more rooms or suites, such suites usually consisting of a single room with common sanitary and dining facilities. 
    Lot means either: 
(1)  The basic development unit for determination of lot area, depth and other dimensional regulations; or 
(2)  A parcel of land the boundaries of which have been established by some legal instrument such as a recorded deed or recorded map, and which is recognized as a separate legal entity for purposes of transfer of title. 
    Lot area means the total area within the boundaries of a lot, excluding any road right-of-way, usually reported in acres or square feet. 
    Lot building coverage means that portion of the lot that is or may be covered by buildings and accessory buildings. 
    Lot depth means the distance measured from the front lot line to the rear lot line. For lots where the front and rear lot lines are not parallel, the lot depth is an average of the depth. 
    Lot frontage means that contiguous portion of a lot abutting a road. Noncontiguous frontage shall not be included when considering whether a lot meets the dimensional requirements of section 38-192. 
    Lot line means a line of record, bounding a lot, which divides one lot from another lot or from a public or private road or any other public or private space and shall include: 
(1)  Front means the lot line separating a lot from a road right-of-way. The front lot line on lots fronting on more than one road shall conform to section 38-273. 
(2)  Rear means the lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line, or in the case of triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped lots, an assumed line at least ten feet in length entirely within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line. 
(3)  Side means any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. On a corner lot, a side lot line is a road lot line. 
    Lot of record means a parcel of land recorded by deed or recorded plat in the office of the town clerk. 
    Lot, through, means a lot which fronts upon two parallel roads, or which fronts upon two roads which do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot. At least one lot frontage shall meet minimum zoning requirements for the district. 
    Lot width means the horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot measured at right angles to its depth along a straight line parallel to the front lot line at the minimum front setback line. 
    Low or moderate income (LMI) housing means any housing whether built or operated by any public agency or any nonprofit organization or by any limited equity housing cooperative or any private developer, that is subsidized by a federal, state, or municipal government subsidy under any program to assist the construction or rehabilitation of housing affordable to low or moderate income households, as defined in the applicable federal or state statute, or local ordinance and that will remain affordable through a land lease and/or deed restriction for 99 years or such other period that is either agreed to by the applicant and town or prescribed by the federal, state, or municipal government subsidy program but that is not less than 30 years from initial occupancy. 
    Mere inconvenience. See G.L. 1956, § 45-24-41. 
    Mixed use means a land use where more than one classification of land use (residential, commercial, recreational) is permitted within a zoning district and is combined on a single tract or tracts of land, or within a single structure. 
    Multi-family dwelling for LMI housing means a structure containing up to four units with a maximum of eight bedrooms total for the structure for housing subject to a comprehensive permit pursuant to section 38-281. 
    Nonconformance means a building, structure or parcel of land, or use thereof, lawfully existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of a zoning ordinance and not in conformity with the provisions of such ordinance or amendment. Nonconformance shall be only two types: 
(1)  Nonconforming by use: a lawfully established use of land, building or structure which is not a permitted use in that zoning district. A building or structure containing more dwelling units than are permitted by the use regulations of a zoning ordinance shall be nonconforming by use; or 
(2)  Nonconforming by dimension: a building, structure or parcel of land not in compliance with the dimensional regulations of this chapter. Dimensional regulations include all regulations of this chapter, other than those pertaining to the permitted uses. A building or structure containing more dwelling units than are permitted by the use regulations of this chapter shall be nonconforming by use; a building or structure containing a permitted number of dwelling units by the use regulations of this chapter, but not meeting the lot area per dwelling unit regulations, shall be nonconforming by dimension. 
    Overlay district means a district established in this chapter that is superimposed on one or more districts or parts of districts and that imposes specified requirements in addition to, but not less than, those otherwise applicable for the underlying zone. 
    Performance standards means a set of criteria or limits relating to elements which a particular use or process either must meet or may not exceed. 
    Permitted use means a use by right which is specifically authorized in a particular zoning district. 
    Piggery means any lot, structure or farm where garbage collected from off the premises is fed to pigs. 
    Planned development means a land development project developed according to plan as a single entity and containing one or more structures and/or uses with appurtenant common areas. 
    Preapplication conference means a review meeting of a proposed development held between applicants and reviewing agencies as permitted by law and municipal ordinance, before formal submission of an application for a permit or for development approval. 
    Preexisting towers and antennas means towers and antennas built and/or mounted before March 5, 1998. 
    Professional office means an office used primarily for conduct of the following occupations; licensed medical practitioner, attorney, accountant, architect, surveyor or engineer. 
    Recreational events and amusements (open) means outdoor recreational uses that are temporary and characteristic of the town and cause minimal noise, traffic and inconvenience to neighboring properties. Examples are; horse shows and art shows. Any event following within the scope of G.L. 1956, § 5-22-1 et. seq. shall also receive approval from the town council, subject to any terms and conditions imposed by the council pursuant thereto. 
    Rear yard means the area between a rear lot line and a line parallel thereto drawn through the nearest point of a structure, extending between side lot lines. 
    Road means a public highway of the town or the state, or a road within a subdivision approved by the planning board in accordance with chapter 32, the town subdivision regulations. 
    Road line means a lot line separating a lot from an adjacent road. 
    Setback line means a line parallel to a lot line at the minimum distance of the required setback for the zoning district in which the lot is located that establishes the area within which the principal structure must be erected or placed. 
    Side yard means the area between a side lot line and a line parallel thereto drawn through the nearest point of a structure, extending from the front yard to the rear yard, or if there is no rear yard, to the rear lot line. 
    Site plan means the development plan for one or more lots on which is shown the existing and/or proposed conditions of the lot. 
    Special use means a regulated use which is permitted pursuant to the special use permit issued by the authorized governmental entity, pursuant to G.L. 1956, § 45-24-42; formerly referred to as a special exception. 
    Structure means anything constructed which requires location on or attachment to the ground; and includes buildings, but does not include paving and planting. 
    Substandard lot of record means any lot lawfully existing at the time of adoption or amendment of this chapter and not in conformance with the dimensional and/or area provisions of this chapter. 
    Use means the purpose or activity for which land or buildings are designed, arranged or intended, or for which land or buildings are occupied or maintained. 
    Variance means permission to depart from the literal requirements of this chapter. An authorization for the construction or maintenance of a building or structure, or for the establishment or maintenance of a use of land, which is prohibited by this chapter. There shall be only two categories of variance, a use variance or a dimensional variance. 
(1)  Use variance means permission to depart from the use requirements of this chapter where the applicant for the requested variance has shown by evidence upon the record that the subject land or structure cannot yield any beneficial use if it is to conform to the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Dimensional variance means permission to depart from the dimensional requirements of this chapter, where the applicant for the requested relief has shown, by evidence upon the record, that there is no other reasonable alternative way to enjoy a legally permitted beneficial use of the subject property unless granted the requested relief from the dimensional regulations. The fact that a use may be more profitable or that a structure may be more valuable after the relief is granted shall not be grounds for relief. 
    Waters means as defined in G.L. 1956, § 46-12-1. 
    Wetland, coastal, means as defined in G.L. 1956, § 45-22.2-4. 
    Wetland, freshwater, means as defined in G.L. 1956, § 45-22.2-4. 
    Zoning certificate means a document signed by the zoning official, as required in this chapter, which acknowledges that a use, structure, building or lot either complies with, or is legally nonconforming to the provisions of, the municipal zoning ordinance, or is an authorized variance or modification therefrom. 
    Zoning map means the maps which are a part of this chapter and which delineate the boundaries of all mapped zoning districts within the physical boundary of the town. 
    Zoning ordinance means an ordinance enacted by the legislative body of the town pursuant to G.L. 1956, § 45-24-1 et seq. and in the manner providing for the adoption of ordinances in the town's Home Rule Charter, if any, which sets forth regulations and standards relating to the nature and extent of uses of land and structures, which is consistent with the comprehensive plan of the town as defined in G.L. 1956, § 45-22.2-1 et seq., which includes a zoning map, and which complies with the provisions of this chapter. 
    Zoning use districts means the basic unit in zoning, either mapped or unmapped, to which a uniform set of regulations applies, or a uniform set of regulations is for a specified use. The districts include, but are not limited to: agricultural, commercial, industrial, institutional, open space and residential. Each district may include subdistricts. Districts may be combined. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. II; Ord. of 3-5-1998; Ord. of 10-8-2009, Pt. 1(A); Ord. of 9-9-2010) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, G.L. 1956, § 45-24-31; definitions to be provided in zoning ordinance, G.L. 1956, § 45-24-35. 
Sec. 38-3. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or any safeguard of condition attached to the granting of a special use permit or variance may, after being given notice in writing of such violation by the zoning official, be fined not more than $100.00 for each offense; and each day of the existence of any such violation shall be deemed a separate offense, such fine to inure to the town. Immediately upon the request of the zoning official, the town solicitor shall institute appropriate action in the supreme or superior court to restrain the violation of, or to compel compliance with, the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. XI, § 3G) 
Secs. 38-4-38-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Administration and enforcement of zoning ordinance, G.L. 1956, § 45-24-54. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-36. - Enforcement of chapter. 
(a)  Zoning official. A zoning official shall be appointed by the town council and have the minimum qualifications of familiarity with this chapter and prior experience in the enforcement of zoning regulations. It shall be the duty of the zoning official to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to keep a record of every identifiable complaint of a violation and of any action taken in response. 
(b)  Zoning certificate. No building, structure or sign shall hereafter be erected, enlarged or relocated and no nonstructural use, (except nonstructural uses listed in section 38-191) shall be initiated until the zoning official has certified, in writing, that the proposed use, structure or sign conforms to the provisions of this chapter. The zoning official may require that copies of the plans, specifications and such other information as he may deem necessary be filed with the application for such certificate. The zoning certificate shall be issued within 15 days upon a written request from any person who is an owner of a parcel of land or a person with a bona fide legal or equitable interest in a parcel of land in the town. If no written response is provided from the zoning official within that time, the requesting party shall have the right to appeal to the zoning board of review for the determination. The zoning official shall issue the following copies of each certificate: the applicant, zoning board of review, town council and town clerk. No certificate may be issued by the zoning official for any use not specifically permitted in this chapter, except where the official receives a statement, in writing, from the zoning board of review indicating the granting of an appeal, special use permit or variance or a statement, in writing, from the town council indicating an amendment to this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. XI, § 1) 
Sec. 38-37. - Custodial powers of town clerk; planning board responsibilities. 
    The town clerk shall be the custodian of this chapter and the zoning maps created thereunder. The planning board shall be responsible for the maintenance and update of the text and zoning map comprising this chapter. Changes which impact the zoning map shall be depicted on the map within 90 days of the authorized changes. The planning board shall be responsible for review of this chapter at reasonable intervals; and, whenever changes are made to the comprehensive plan of the town, for the identification of any changes necessary and for the forwarding of these changes to the town council. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. XI, § 2) 
Secs. 38-38-38-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ZONING BOARD OF REVIEW[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Zoning board of review, G.L. 1956, § 45-24-56 et seq.. 

Sec. 38-61. - Establishment and procedures. 
    The zoning board of review shall consist of five members appointed by the town council from among the qualified electors of the town, each for a term of five years. One member shall be appointed each year at the December meeting of the town council. No member shall be an elected official of the town nor shall any member be an employee of the town. Any vacancy which may occur in the membership of the board shall be filled by the town council for the remainder of the unexpired term. The town council shall, each year at its December meeting, name two alternate members of such board to be designated as first and second alternate and who shall sit and actively participate in hearings. The first alternate shall vote if a member is unable to serve, and the second alternate shall vote if two members are unable to serve. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. XI, § 3A.) 
Sec. 38-62. - Organization. 
(a)  Election of officers. At its December meeting and at intervals of the year thereafter, the zoning board of review shall organize by electing from its membership a chairperson and a vice-chairperson. The board may engage the services of a secretary within the limit of the funds available to it or it may appoint one of its members as secretary. 
(b)  Meetings. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the board may determine. The chairperson, or in his absence the vice-chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses and the submission of data. An alternate member of the board shall sit in as an active member upon the request of the chairman when and if a member of the board is unable to serve at any hearing. All hearings of the board shall be open to the public. 
(c)  Conducting hearings. In conducting hearings and arriving at its decision, the board shall consist of five participating members. The concurring vote of three members shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the zoning official. The concurring vote of four members shall be required to decide in favor of an application on any matter concerning a special use permit or variance, upon which it is required to pass under this chapter. 
(d)  Recordkeeping. The board shall make a record of all its proceedings and actions, indicating its reasons for its decisions, the vote of each member participating therein, and the absence of a member or his failure to vote. This record shall be filed immediately in the files of the zoning board and shall be available for review by the public. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. XI, § 3B.) 
Sec. 38-63. - Powers and duties. 
    The zoning board of review shall have the powers set forth as follows: 
(1)  Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the zoning official in the enforcement of this chapter. In using this power, the board may reverse or affirm in whole or in part or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the zoning official from whom the appeal was taken. 
(2)  Authorize, upon application, special use permits pursuant to article VII of this chapter. In granting a special use permit, the board may impose such additional safeguards and conditions as are deemed necessary in order to conform to these requirements. The disregarding of any such condition or safeguard shall be considered as a violation. 
(3)  Authorize upon application in specific cases of hardship a variance according to the provisions set forth as follows: 
a.  The hardship from which the applicant seeks relief is due to the unique characteristics of the subject land or structure and not to the general characteristics of the surrounding area, and is not due to a physical or economic disability of the applicant. 
b.  The hardship is not the result of any prior action of the applicant and does not result primarily from the desire of the applicant to realize greater financial gain. 
c.  The granting of the requested variance will not alter the general character of the surrounding area or impair the intent or purpose of this chapter or the comprehensive plan upon which this chapter is based. 
d.  The relief to be granted is the least relief necessary. 
e.  The variance shall be according to the other provisions of G.L. 1956, § 45-24-41. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. XI, § 3C.) 
Sec. 38-64. - Voting. 
    The zoning board of review shall be required to vote as follows: 
(1)  Five active members shall be necessary to conduct a hearing. As soon as a conflict occurs for a member, that member shall excuse himself, and shall not sit as an active member and shall take no part in the conduct of the hearing. Only five active members shall be entitled to vote on any issue. 
(2)  The concurring vote of three of the five members of the board sitting at a hearing shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the zoning official from whom an appeal was taken. 
(3)  The concurring vote of four of the five members of the board sitting at a hearing shall be required to decide in favor of an applicant on any matter within the discretion of the board upon which it is required to pass under this chapter, including variances and special use permits. 
(4)  No member or alternate may vote on any matter before the board unless they have attended all hearings concerning the matter. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. XI, § 3D.) 
Sec. 38-65. - Application procedure. 
    Application procedures for the filing of appeals, request for variances, special use permits, development plan review, site plan review and such other applications as may be specified in this chapter, shall be prepared by the zoning official and published. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. XI, § 3E.) 
Sec. 38-66. - Application fee. 
    The application fee shall be $100.00. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. XI, § 3F.) 
Sec. 38-67. - Decisions and records. 
    Following a public hearing, the zoning board of review shall render a decision within 30 days. The board shall include in its decision all findings of fact and conditions, showing the vote of each member participating thereon, and the absence of a member or his failure to vote. Decisions shall be recorded and filed in the office of the zoning official within ten working days from the date when the decision was rendered, and shall be a public record. The board shall keep written minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member on each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations, findings of fact and other official actions, all of which shall be recorded and filed in the office of the zoning official in an expeditious manner upon completion of the proceeding. For any proceeding in which the right of appeal lies to the superior court, the board shall have the minutes taken either by a competent stenographer or recorded by a soundrecording device. Any decision by the board, including any special conditions attached thereto, shall be mailed to the applicant, to the planning board, and to the associate director of the division of planning of the state department of administration. Any decision evidencing the granting of a variance or special use permit shall also be recorded in the land evidence records of the town. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. XI, § 3H.) 
Secs. 38-68-38-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - APPEALS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Appeals to zoning board of review, G.L. 1956, § 45-24-64. 

Sec. 38-91. - Procedure. 
    An appeal to the zoning board of review from a decision of any other zoning enforcement agency officer or the planning board may be taken by an aggrieved party. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days of the date of the recording of the decision of the officer or agency, or within 30 days of the time when the aggrieved party knew or should have known of the action or decision of such officer or agency. The appeal shall be commenced by filing an application with the board, with a copy to the officer or agency from whom the appeal is taken, specifying the ground thereof. The officer or agency from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board all papers, including any transcript or audio tapes, constituting the record upon which the action for appeals was taken. Notice of the appeal shall also be transmitted to the planning board. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. XII, § 1) 
Sec. 38-92. - Stay of proceedings. 
    An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the zoning board of review, after the appeal shall have been duly filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would in the officer's opinion cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be granted by a court of competent jurisdiction on application thereof and upon notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken on due cause shown. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. XII, § 2) 
Sec. 38-93. - Public hearing. 
    The zoning board of review shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof in the same manner as set forth in section 38-431, as well as due notice to the parties of interest, and decide the appeal within 20 days of the hearing. The hearing of any appeals shall be at a separate meeting from the hearing of any variance or special use permit applications, although such hearings may be held on the same day or night. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. The officer or a designated individual of the agency, commission or board from whom the appeal is taken shall appear before the zoning board at the hearing to represent such agency, commission or board. Other members of the agency, commission or board may appear and be heard, but shall not represent the agency, commission or board. The cost of any notice required for the hearing shall be borne by the appellant. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. XII, § 3) 
Sec. 38-94. - Decision and records of the zoning board of review. 
    In exercising its powers in ruling, the zoning board of review may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm wholly or partly and may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have the powers of the officer or agency from whom the appeal was taken. All decisions and records of the board respecting appeals shall conform to the provisions of section 38-67. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. XII, § 4) 
Sec. 38-95. - Appeals to the superior court. 
    An aggrieved party may appeal a decision of the zoning board of review to the county superior court by filing a complaint setting forth the reasons of appeal within 20 days following the filing of the decision. The decision shall be posted in a location visible to the public in the town hall for a period of 20 days following the recording of the decision. The board shall file the original documents acted upon by it and constituting the record of the case appealed from, or certified copies thereof, together with such other facts as may be pertinent, with the clerk of the court within 30 days after being served with a copy of the complaint. When the complaint is filed by someone other than the original applicant or appellant, such original applicant or appellant and the members of the zoning board of review shall be made parties to such proceedings. The appeal shall not stay proceedings upon the decision appealed from, but the court may, of its discretion, grant a stay on appropriate terms and make such other orders as it deems necessary for an equitable disposition of the appeal. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. XII, § 5) 
Sec. 38-96. - Appeal of the enactment or amendment of this chapter. 
    An appeal of the enactment of, or an amendment to this chapter may be taken to the county superior court by filing a complaint within 30 days after the enactment or amendment has become effective. The complaint shall set forth with specificity the areas in which the enactment or amendment does not conform with the comprehensive plan and/or the manner in which it constitutes a taking of private property without just compensation. Such appeal may be taken by an aggrieved party or by any legal resident or landowner of the town. This appeal shall not stay the enforcement of this chapter, as enacted or amended, but the court may, in its discretion, grant a stay on appropriate terms, which may include the filing of a bond, and make such other orders as it deems necessary for an equitable disposition of the appeal. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. XIII) 
State Law reference- Procedure for adoption or amendment, G.L. 1956, § 45-24-51. 
Secs. 38-97-38-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ZONING DISTRICTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning ordinance to divide town into districts, G.L. 1956, § 45-24-36. 

Sec. 38-131. - Division of town into; enumeration. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the town is divided into zoning use districts designated and described as follows: 
(1)  AR agricultural/residential. This AR agricultural/residential district is characterized by a mixture of low density residential and farming uses with certain light industrial uses requiring special use permits. This AR district is designed to help preserve the rural character of the town, to regulate the development of the town so that the tax base will be adequate to support necessary public expenditures, to protect land now used for agriculture and forestry from haphazard encroachment and to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the district. 
(2)  NC neighborhood/commercial. This NC neighborhood/commercial district is characterized by establishments providing retail goods, such as groceries and drugs, and furnishing certain personal services. The NC district is designed to provide convenient local shopping services and to promote public safety to both pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
(3)  GBM-General business-Mixed use. This district is characterized by commercial establishments that serve town-wide shopping and service needs, such as retail businesses, offices, and restaurants. This district may also include compatible residential and municipal uses. It is designed to encourage planned development resulting in a sustainable and attractive commercial environment for the community. 
(4)  MI manufacturing/industrial. This MI manufacturing/industrial district is characterized by manufacturing and industrial uses, conveniently located to major highways and suitable for industrial development. This MI district is designed to provide sufficient land area to attract industry and afford it room for expansion, to prevent an unsafe mixture of industrial and residential uses and to protect residential and commercial districts. 
(5)  R-SC residential/senior citizen. This R-SC residential/senior citizen district is to promote the establishment of new housing developments particularly suited for senior citizens; to promote the use of large parcels of land dispersed throughout the town and particularly suitable for this purpose by reason of land use capability; to facilitate a more economic arrangement of buildings, common facilities, a vehicular circulation and utilities within the boundaries of a senior citizens development; to preserve to the greatest extent possible the existing natural landscape features and to utilize such features in a harmonious fashion; to permit the formation of such R-SC residential/senior citizens districts within the town only as the need for such housing can be clearly demonstrated; to permit the formation of single developments geographically spread according to established population centers in the town. 
(6)  M municipal. This M municipal district is the town center where the town clerk's office, the town house, the town hall, the police station, the highway department and the other municipal uses are located. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. III, § 6; Ord. of 9-9-2010) 
Sec. 38-132. - Official zoning map. 
    The boundaries of the zoning districts are hereby established as shown on a map, entitled "Town of Foster Zoning Map," filed at the office of the town clerk. 
Zoning Amendments, Addendum to Map, as of Sept. 9, 2010 
Route 6 Zoning Upgrade 
List by Plat and Lot 
Plat Lot Owner(s) Current Zone Current Use Proposed North Side of Route 6 10 0020 NW Health HC Vacant Commer. GBM 10 0021 BW Investments HC Mixed Use GBM 10 0022 Carnevale HC/AR Vacant Land AR 10 022A Genereux HC/AR Residence AR 10 0023 Soucie HC/AR Residence AR 10 0024 Colwell HC Mixed Use GBM 10 0025 Paolissi HC/AR Vacant AR 10 025A Baseline HC Commercial GBM 10 025B Q-Bar HC/AR Commercial GBM 10 0026 Olivo HC/AR Residence AR 10 026A RP Investments HC Commercial GBM 10 027A Nary HC/AR Residence AR 10 0028 Lucas HC/AR Vacant Land AR 10 028A Provost HC/AR Residence AR 10 0031 Rogers HC/AR Residence (3) AR 10 0032 LF Assocs. HC Commercial GBM 10 0033 Smith HC/AR Commercial GBM 10 0034 Eliades HC/AR Commercial GBM 10 0035 Tucker HC/AR Commercial AR 10 0036 Lindsay HC/AR Commercial GBM 10 0037 Rogers HC/AR Commercial GBM 10 037A Gabriele HC/AR Commercial GBM 10 0038 Oexner HC/AR Residence AR 10 038A Oexner HC/AR Residence AR South Side of Route 6 11 022A1 Moretti HC/AR Residence AR 11 0022 Martucci HC/AR Mixed Use GBM 11 021B Albanese HC/AR Residence AR 11 021A Perry HC Residence AR 11 0020 Gabriele HC Commercial GBM 11 019B Gabriele HC Commercial GBM 11 0019 Gabriele HC Residence AR North Side of Route 6 14 0001 Zelano HC/AR Vacant AR 14 002A NW Health HC/AR Commercial GBM 14 0002 Cournoyer HC/AR Residence AR 14 002B SBC Tower HC/AR Commercial GBM 14 0003 Bouvier HC/AR Residence AR 14 003A Paolucci HC/AR Vacant AR 14 0017 Tally NC/AR Residence AR 14 0018 Vaz NC Residence AR 14 0019 St. Paul's Rect. NC/AR Church GBM 14 019C St. Paul's Church HC/AR Church GBM 14 019A Prov. Dios HC/AR Church GBM 14 019B 5 F HC/AR Commercial GBM 14 0086 Nickerson AR Residence AR 14 0087 Jones AR Residence AR 14 0088 Hanlon AR Residence AR 14 0089 Kurczap AR Residence AR 14 0090 Kent AR Residence AR 14 090A Benson AR Residence AR 14 0091 Tulli AR Residence AR 14 0092 Plouffe AR Residence AR 14 0093 Spicer AR Residence AR 21 0028 Wright NC Commercial GBM 21 0027 Wright NC Comm. - Resid. GBM 21 0026 Danielson NC Commercial GBM 21 0025 Polouski NC Residence AR 21 0023 Davis AR Residence AR 21 0022 Costello AR Residence AR 21 0021 Holmes AR Residence AR 21 0020 Fracaretta AR Residence AR 21 019A Kenyon AR Residence AR 21 0017 Whalen AR Residence AR South Side of Route 6 21 0035 Petrone NC/AR Vacant AR 21 035B Vanner NC/AR Residence AR 21 035A Candelmo AR Residence AR 21 0033 NTK Inter. NC/AR Commercial GBM 21 0032 Carpenter AR Residence AR 21 0031 Prov. Water NC/AR Utility/Vacant GBM 21 0030 Whalen AR Vacant AR  
No changes were made to Plat 22. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. III, § 8; Ord. of 9-9-2010) 
Secs. 38-133-38-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - USES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 38-166-38-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DESCRIPTION OF USES 

Sec. 38-191. - Table of uses. 
    The uses in the various zoning districts are as follows: 
Districts AR NC GBM MI R-SC M Agricultural uses 1. Raising animals for home use X X O X O O 2. Raising animals for sale or for sale of animal products: A. A maximum of 35 animals on five acres or less: five additional animals for each additional acre over five acres X O O X O O B. Animals exceeding the above, See Article VI, Section 19 for Supplementary Regulations S O O S O O 3. Raising crops and forest products X X S X O O 4. Commercial nursery structures S X X X O O 5. Sale of produce raised on the premises X X X X O O 6. Poultry farm with capacity for more than 10,000 birds S S O S O O 7. One 200 sq. ft. wooden building not less than 120 sq. ft. wooden building, not for the purpose of housing animals. The use would require a reapplication for a special use permit every three years and the Building Official shall review the use of the building for compliance purposes. S S S S O S Residential uses 1. Single-family detached dwelling X S S O O O 2. Accessory family dwelling unit for the sole use of one or more members of the family of the occupant or occupants of the principal residence, but not needing to have a separate means of ingress or egress. (See section 38-282 for further requirements) X O S O O O 3. Residential cluster (reserved) 4. Residential compound X O O O O O 5. Multi-family dwelling structure S S S O O O 6. Community residences, and family daycare homes X S S O O O 7. Lodging, guesthouse or bed-and-breakfast S X X S O O 8. Motel O S X S O O 9. Hotel O X X S O O 10. Customary home occupation (performed by the occupant and using no more than 200 sq. ft. of the area of one floor provided such activity shall not be visible from a lot line and that exterior advertising shall conform to the provisions of article VI) X X X X O O 11. Rest home or convalescent home S S S O O O 12. Senior citizens group dwelling structure(s): Permitted only in the R-SC district for the exclusive use of senior citizens group housing. No other residential, commercial, or industrial use shall be permitted in this district. Refer to section 38-284. O O O O X O Open recreation uses 1. Public playground or park X X X X O S 2. Bathing beach X X X X O O 3. Golf course X O O X O O 4. Camping area (licensed by town) S O O S O O 5. Rod and gun clubs, rifle or pistol ranges S O O O O O 6. Open rec. events and amusements (license required by town council Ordinance No. 95-12-366) S S S S S X Public and semi-public uses 1. School or college S X X X O O 2. Religious institution other than church S O O O O O 3. Church X X X O O O 4. Library, museum, etc. X X X S O O 5. Medical clinic S S X O O O Hospital O S O O O O 6. Town of Foster government building O S S S O X 7. State or federal government building of any kind and town highway department or police department O O S S O S 8. Fire station or ambulance barn X X X X O X 9. General purpose hall for recreation, social or other intermittent functions S X X X O O 10. Cemetery S O O O O O 11. Day camps (no permanent residency permitted) S O O O O O Office uses 1. Professional office in the home (for use by a resident of the premises) X X X X O O 2. Bank or office building O X X X O O 3. Real estate office S X X X O O 4. Office for wholesale or manufacturing uses O S X X O O Restaurants and entertainment 1. Lunchroom or restaurant S X X X O O 2. Tavern or night club O S X X O O 3. Drive-in food or dairy bar O O S O O O 4. Theater or concert hall O S X O O O 5. Indoor commercial recreation O S X S O O 6. Lunch room or cafeteria (accessory to a permitted use and designed to serve the students, employees and patrons of the main use. Located entirely within the main building and with no exterior advertising) X X X X O O 7. Microbrewery, attached to or maintained as part of a restaurant S S S S O O Business 1. Barber, beautician, shoe repair, tailor, laundry pickup and similar service shops S 1 X X S O O 2. Antique shop, gift shop, florist shop, pet shop and similar specialty shops S 1 X X S O O 3. Mortuary or funeral home O S S S O O 4. Radio or television studio or transmission studio O X X X O O 5. Drive-in theater O O S S O O 6. Veterinary X X X X O O 7. Caterer O X X X O O 8. Gasoline filling station (no major repairing) O S S S O O 9. General automotive repair O S S X O O 10. Vehicle rental agency O O X X O O 11. Building materials and supplies, grain and feed and similar stores O X X X O O 12. Grocery, bakery, drug, hardware, variety and similar neighborhood stores O X X X O O 13. Fruit and vegetable stand and grocery variety store S 1, 2 X X X O O 14. General merchandise, supermarket, department store, furniture store and household goods store (including storage up to 30% of the gross floor area) O X X X O O 15. Auto or truck sales in a building (including repairs) O O S X O O 16. Auto or truck sales in an open lot O O S X O O 17. Retail sales in an open lot O S S S O O 18. Package store (alcoholic beverages) O X X X O O 19. Medical Office Building situated on a US Highway (not to exceed 5,000 sq. ft. in area) S X X O O O 20. Communications Towers and Antennas * S S S S O S 21. Firearms shops, ammunition shops, archery shops, edged weapons shops O X X S O O 22. Restaurant, pharmacy, or finance institution drive-through O O S 4 O O O Transportation and parking 1. Off-street parking facility (accessory to a use permitted in the district) X X X X O O 2. Commercial off-street parking facility O X X X O O 3. Rail or motor freight terminal O O S X O O 4. Rail or bus passenger station O S X X O O Wholesale business and storage 1. Wholesale business and storage of non-flammable and non-explosive material in a building O O X X O O 2. Open lot storage of building materials and machinery, etc. S 3 O O S 3 O O 3. Storage of flammable or explosive materials above ground (other than for normal home heating fuel use, not to exceed 1,000 gallons) Amended 9/21/95 O O O S O O 4. Open storage of solid fuel (other than wood), sand and gravel S 3 O O S 3 O O 5. Storage of flammable or explosive materials on-site, above or underground O S S S O O 6. Retail Outlet for wholesale or storage O O S X O O Service industries 1. Auto body or paint shop O O S S O O 2. Electric substation S X X X O O 3. Office or office building, service, building, storage of materials, uses incidental or related to operation of maintenance of all or any part of a public service system, or any structure or uses substantially similar to any of the structures or uses included in this subsection X X X X O O 4. Any other structure which is part of a public service system S S S S O O 5. Laundromat O S S S O O 6. Major solar installation S S S S S S Industrial use 1. The following uses in a single story building of not more than 1,000 sq. ft. in area, occupying the same lot as the residence of the owner and set back at least 100 ft. from the public highway, at least 100 ft. from side lot lines and at least 100 ft. from rear lot lines: Scientific or research laboratory, manufacture of musical or precision instruments, natural soaps and cosmetics, manufacture of toys and novelties, light metal fab-shop, blacksmith or welding shop, manufacture of electric or electronic devices and appliances, ceramics or pottery manufacture, manufacture of boats, fine arts and handcraft studios, woodworking and cabinetmaking, furniture repair, conservation arts studios, provided that such uses do not create smoke, gas odors, sound, vibration, soot, or hazardous waste to a degree obnoxious or offensive to person residing or conducting business in the neighborhood. S X S NA O O 2. The manufacture, compounding, processing or packaging of bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, drugs, food products (excluding meat, fish, yeast, vinegar and the rendering of fats and oils) and other similar operations O S S X O O 3. The manufacture, compounding or assembly of articles using shell, cellophane, plastic, fur, glass, leather, precious metals or stones, wood, textiles or tobacco and other previously prepared products O O S X O O 4. The manufacture and assembly from prepared materials of musical instruments, precision instruments, clocks, toys, novelties, appliances, electronic devices, metal products, machine tools and machinery (not requiring the use of drop hammers and punch presses of over 100 tons) and other similar products O O S X O O 5. Machinery and machine tool manufacture (requiring drop hammers or punch presses of over 100 tons) O O O S O O 6. Auto assembly or manufacture O O O X O O 7. Boat building O S S X O O 8. Commercial boat storage and repair O S S X O O 9. Blacksmith or welding shop O S S X O O 10. Scientific or research laboratory O O X X O O 11. Woodworking or cabinetmaking O S X X O O 12. Ceramics or pottery manufacture O S X X O O 13. Mining, quarrying or loam stripping S S O S O O 14. Retail outlet for permitted industrial operation S S X X O O 15. Soap manufacture O O O S O O 16. Sodium compounds manufacture O O O S O O 17. Stone cutting S S X X O O 18. Tile or brick manufacture O O O S O O 19. Sawmill O O O X O O 20. Temporary sawmill (not more than six months operation in any three-year period) X X X X O O 21. Reserved 22. Chemical manufacture O O O S O O 23. Gravel banks S O O S O S 24. Natural Material Processing, Stone Crushing and Sorting S O O S O S Accessory uses 1. Any use customarily incident to a use permitted in the district and located on same lot X X X X O O 2. Any use customarily incident to a use permitted in the district as a special use permit and located on the same lot S S S S O O  
Key: 
X - Permitted use 
O - Prohibited use 
S - Special use permit 
NA - Not applicable 
    Any use, not expressly permitted in this article, is prohibited. 
Notes: 
1.  Must occupy the same lot as the residence of the owner. 
2.  Building not to exceed 1,000 square feet. 
3.  Must be screened by an opaque fence or hedge no less than six feet in height. This requirement does not apply to such uses by the state or town government. 
4.  Drive-through uses, where permitted, shall meet the following development standards: 
a.  There shall be adequate off-street parking and loading spaces to serve the proposed use. There must be sufficient on-site stacking areas to accommodate at least ten queued vehicles, entering the site waiting to park or approach the order window/order box, and at least three queued vehicles exiting the site. 
b.  Any accessory drive-through window(s) shall be properly located within the parking and circulation plan to avoid any effect on traffic, and in no case shall a drive-through window be located on any building façade which faces a public street. 
c.  Vehicular entrances and exits shall be controlled by curbing. 
d.  All other dimensional and parking requirements for the site and the use shall be met. 
(Ord. of 6-3-1994, § 1; Ord. of 9-21-1995, § 1; Ord. of 3-20-1997; Ord. of 2-19-1998; Ord. of 11-19-1998; Ord. of 3-5-1998; Ord. of 6-21-2001; Ord. of 1-24-2002; Ord. of 9-9-2010; Ord. of 6-25-2015(1); Ord. of 7-23-2015; Ord. of 8-27-2015(1); Ord. of 1-14-2016(4)) 
Sec. 38-192. - Dimensional regulations. 
    The following dimensional regulations apply for each of the zoning districts described in article III of this chapter. See article VI of this chapter for additional regulations that apply. 
(1)  AR agricultural/residential district. Dimensional regulations for the AR district are as follows: 
Single-Family 
Residence 
Structure Other 
Permitted 
Use Minimum lot size 200,000 square feet 200,000 square feet Minimum lot frontage 300 feet 300 feet Minimum lot width 300 feet 300 feet Minimum front yard depth  35 feet  50 feet Minimum side yard depth  50 feet 100 feet Minimum rear yard depth 100 feet 100 feet Maximum building coverage 3 percent 3 percent Maximum building height  35 feet  35 feet  
(2)  NC neighborhood/commercial district. Dimensional regulations in the NC district are as follows: 
Single-Family 
Residence 
Structure Other 
Permitted 
Use Minimum lot size 200,000 square feet - Minimum lot frontage 300 feet 300 feet Minimum lot width 300 feet 225 feet Minimum front yard depth  35 feet  80 feet Minimum side yard depth  50 feet 100 feet Minimum rear yard depth 100 feet  80 feet Maximum building coverage 3 percent 25 percent or 
6,000 square feet, 
whichever is less Maximum building height  35 feet  35 feet Minimum distance of structure from a residence district boundary -  50 feet Minimum buffer strip* -  30 feet  
*No parking, signs (temporary or permanent, fixed or moveable) or structures (other than mailboxes) are permitted within 30 feet of the highway right-of-way. 
(3)  General business mixed use district. Dimensional regulations for the GBM district are as follows: 
Any 
Permitted 
Use Minimum lot size 200,000 square feet Minimum front yard depth 35 feet Minimum lot frontage 300 feet Minimum lot width 300 feet Minimum side yard depth 50 feet Minimum rear yard depth 80 feet Maximum building height 35 feet Minimum buffer strip (side and rear yards) 30 feet Minimum distance of structure from A/R zoning district 50 feet Maximum building coverage (of net buildable area) c 25% a, b Maximum impervious surface coverage (of net buildable area) c 60% a, b  
a Provided that all parking and design requirements are met. 
b One drive-through use shall be permitted within shopping centers having less than 100,000 square feet of gross floor area, provided that common curb cuts for the center are used. The drive-through use shall not have dedicated curb cuts in addition to those utilized in access to the center. The drive-through use shall be limited to a restaurant, pharmacy, or finance institution only. The design of the drive-through use shall provide for safe vehicular and pedestrian circulation and function in a manner that complements the center in which it is located. The use shall not create traffic hazards interior to the site or in the surrounding street network and neighborhood. It shall be properly screened and buffered to minimize impacts on surrounding properties and other uses within the center. 
c Net buildable area is defined as the total area of the applicable lot minus setbacks, buffer strips, and wetlands. 
(4)  MI manufacturing/industrial district. Dimensional regulations for the MI district are as follows: 
Any Permitted Use Minimum front yard depth 100 feet Minimum side yard depth  25 feet Minimum rear yard depth  25 feet Minimum distance of structure from a residence district boundary 100 feet Maximum building coverage 25 percent or 
50,000 square feet, 
whichever is less Maximum building height  35 feet  
(5)  R-SC residential/senior citizens district 1 . Dimensional regulations for the R-SC district are as follows: 
Only 
Permitted Use Minimum lot area per development 2 400,000 square feet whichever is greater Minimum lot area per living unit 40,000 square feet Minimum lot width 500 feet Minimum front yard depth 100 feet Minimum rear yard depth 100 feet Maximum building coverage 3 percent 
of net area Maximum building height 2 stories 
or 20 feet  
(1) Refer to section 38-284 for other requirements. 
(2) Specified lot area excludes ponds, streams and other wetland areas. 
(6)  M municipal district. Dimensional requirements for the M district are as follows: 
Any 
Permitted Use Minimum front yard depth 35 feet Minimum side yard depth 50 feet Minimum rear yard depth 50 feet Maximum building height 40 feet  
(7)  FC farmland/conservation overlay district. This subsection is reserved. 
(8)  Additional dimensional regulations; any permitted use. Any existing use listed in section 38-191 which is located in an NC, GBM or MI district shall conform to the dimensional regulations of the AR district. Any use listed in section 38-191 requiring a special use permit in the AR district shall conform at least to the dimensional regulations for other permitted use of the AR district, and to such further dimensional requirements as may be imposed for that use in this article or by the zoning board of review in granting the special use permit. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. IV, § 13; Ord. of 9-9-2010; Ord. of 1-14-16(3)) 
Sec. 38-193. - Prohibited uses. 
    The following uses shall not be permitted within the Town of Foster: 
Acetylene gas manufacture 
Acid manufacture 
Airport or heliport 
Ammonia or bleach manufacture 
Any use which is obnoxious by reason of the emission of gasses, odors, noise, dust, vibration or soot or by reason of the danger of fire or explosion 
Asphalt manufacture of refining 
Atomic energy processes and storage 
Automobile, truck, or other vehicle junkyard 
Brewery or distillery 
Carbon black manufacture 
Cement, lime, gypsum, pyroxylin, or plastic manufacture 
Chlorine manufacture 
Coal distillation and derivation of coal products 
Commercial facilities established for the purpose of storage, processing, or disposal of organic and non-organic waste 
Commercial laundry (excepting a laundromat as provided for in section 38-191) 
Commercial slaughterhouse 
Creosote manufacture 
Dormitory, except where accessory to a permitted use 
Dry cleaning plant 
Explosives manufacture 
Fertilizer manufacture 
Fossil fuel and nuclear power generating station 
Glue manufacture 
House trailer park or colony 
House trailers/mobile homes (except as provided for in section 38-191) 
Hydrofracking for the purpose of oil or gas extraction 
Iron or steel foundry 
Offal or dead animal processing, or treatment and distillation of bones, fats, or feathers 
Oilcloth or linoleum manufacture 
Paint manufacture 
Petroleum refinery 
Piggery 
Potash manufacture 
Racetracks of any description where a fee is charged or donations made (except as allowed under section 38-191) 
Rendering or refining of fats, oils, or bones 
Rubber manufacture or treatment 
Smelter 
Storage, processing, or disposal of hazardous waste or material 
Tanning or curing of hides 
Textile dyeing or finishing 
Vehicle washing shop (except where public sewerage disposal is available and/or except where utilizing a water reclaim system) 
Wastewater treatment facility or sewage sludge incinerator 
    Any use, not expressly permitted in this article, is prohibited. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. IV, § 14; Ord. of 8-27-2015(3)) 
Secs. 38-194-38-225. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NONCONFORMING USE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning ordinance to provide for nonconforming uses, G.L. 1956, § 45-24-39. 

Sec. 38-226. - Substandard lot of record. 
(a)  No lot area shall be so reduced that yards, total area and lot width shall be less than prescribed for the district in which the lot is located. No yard or open space provided around any building for the purpose of complying with the provision of this chapter shall again be used as a yard or open space for any other building. 
(b)  Where no adjacent land is in the same ownership so as to form a larger land parcel, a lot smaller than the minimum dimensions and area required by this chapter which was a lot of record on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives may be used for a permitted use, provided that such lot shall have a minimum area of 10,000 square feet and a minimum width of 100 feet. All dimensional requirements of the district shall be complied with except that side and rear requirements be reduced by the associated percentage that the lot is less than 150 feet wide or less than 200 feet deep. 
(c)  No building permit shall be issued on such a lot without certification in writing from the town's building official that said lot is a substandard lot of record. In the event that a variance or special use permit is necessary, the official shall certify that the lot is a substandard lot of record and needs the relief relating to "side and rear requirements," as prescribed in the previous paragraph, as part of application to the zoning board of review. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. V, § 1; Ord. of 6-25-2015(2)) 
State Law reference- Substandard lots of record, G.L. 1956, § 45-24-38. 
Sec. 38-227. - Merger of substandard lot of record. 
    Merger of substandard lots of record has been required under prior editions of this chapter. Such merger shall continue under this edition for all districts and all contiguous lots of record in the same ownership. Such lots shall continue to be merged so as to create dimensionally conforming lots or to reduce the extent of nonconformance. Merger in all districts is determined necessary under these standards due to the town's lack of sewers and public water supply and because it is a rural town and must conform with the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. V, § 2) 
Sec. 38-228. - Lawfully existing or established buildings, structures or uses of land. 
    A building, structure or use of land was lawfully established if it was in existence prior to July 7, 1967, or was established in conformance with the zoning ordinance in effect at the time the use was first established. A lot was lawfully established if it was of record or shown on a recorded plat prior to July 7, 1967, and was separately owned. All other lots that were not lawfully established are not protected by this section. For the purposes of this chapter, the creation and/or the use of a parcel of land for a particular use which was legal at the time the parcel of land was created and/or so used, shall not serve to create the lawful establishment or lawful existence of any use that was not legal at the time of creation and/or use of the land, regardless of subsequent changes in allowable legal uses. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. V, § 3) 
Sec. 38-229. - Two houses on one lot. 
    Where two or more dwelling houses, which were in existence prior to July 7, 1967, are located on one lot, the planning board may permit the division of the lot into separate lots for each house even though the separate lots do not conform in size and/or dimension to the minimum sizes and/or dimensions for residential use. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. V, § 4; Ord. of 3-5-1998) 
Sec. 38-230. - Nonconforming by use. 
    A lawfully established use of land, building or structure which is not a permitted use in the zoning district in which it is located is nonconforming by use. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. V, § 4; Ord. of 3-5-1998) 
Sec. 38-231. - Nonconforming by dimension. 
    A lawfully established building, structure or parcel of land not in compliance with the dimensional regulations of this chapter is nonconforming by dimension. Dimensional regulations include all regulations of this chapter, other than those pertaining to the permitted uses. A lawfully established building, structure, parcel of land, or use thereof, not in compliance with the parking regulations of this chapter is also nonconforming by dimension. A lawfully existing or lawfully established lot that is not in compliance with the dimensional regulations of this chapter including, but not limited to, those regulations for minimum lot size, lot width and lot frontage (also known as a substandard lot of record), is also nonconforming by dimension. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. V, § 5; Ord. of 3-5-1998) 
Sec. 38-232. - Existence by variance or special use permit. 
    A nonconforming building, structure, sign or parcel of land or the use thereof, which exists by virtue of variance or a special use permit (or a special exception) granted by the zoning board of review, shall not be considered nonconforming for the purposes of this article, and shall not acquire the rights of this article. Rather, such building, structure, sign, parcel of land or use thereof shall be considered a use by variance or a use by special use permit and any moving, addition, enlargement, expansion, intensification or change of such building, structure, sign, parcel of land or use thereof, to any use other than a permitted use or other than in complete conformance with this chapter, shall require a further variance or special use permit from the board. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. V, § 6; Ord. of 3-5-1998) 
Sec. 38-233. - Building or structure nonconforming by use. 
    Nonconforming uses are incompatible with and detrimental to permitted uses in the zoning districts in which they are located. Nonconforming uses cause disruption of the comprehensive land use pattern of the town, inhibit present and future development of nearby properties, and confer upon their owners a position of unfair advantage. It is intended that existing nonconforming uses shall not justify further departures from this chapter for themselves, or for any other properties. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. V, § 7; Ord. of 3-5-1998) 
Sec. 38-234. - Continuation of use. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall prevent or be construed to prevent the continuation of a nonconforming use of any building or structure for any purpose to which such building or structure was lawfully established. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. V, § 8; Ord. of 3-5-1998) 
Sec. 38-235. - Maintenance and repair. 
    Nothing shall prevent the performance of normal maintenance work or work necessary to comply with safety codes on a legally established nonconforming use. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. V, § 9; Ord. of 3-5-1998) 
Sec. 38-236. - Change of use. 
    A nonconforming use may be changed to a conforming use or may be changed to a different nonconforming use by special use permit. If so changed, the alteration shall more closely adhere to the intent and purpose of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. V, § 10; Ord. of 3-5-1998) 
Sec. 38-237. - Enlargement. 
    A preexisting use, which is not a prohibited use under section 38-193, may be enlarged for the same use, provided such enlargement is within the limits of the lot of record the use occupies on July 6, 1967, and subject to the dimensional requirements for front, side and rear yard depth and height of section 38-192 for the district of its location. In the case of enlargement of a single-family residence structure, the district dimensional requirements for front, side and rear yard depth may be modified by permitted use by special use permit under section 38-192. A preexisting use, which is a prohibited use under section 38-193, shall not be enlarged, and the extent and intensity of usage of any structure for a prohibited use shall not be increased beyond the extent and intensity of usage on July 6, 1967. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. V, § 11; Ord. of 3-5-1998) 
Sec. 38-238. - Abandonment. 
    If a nonconforming use is abandoned, it may not be reestablished. Abandonment of a nonconforming use shall consist of some overt act, or failure to act, which would lead one to believe that the owner of the nonconforming use neither claims nor retains any interest in continuing the nonconforming use unless the owner can demonstrate an intent not to abandon the use. An involuntary interruption of a nonconforming use, such as by fire and natural catastrophe, does not establish the intent to abandon the nonconforming use. However, if any nonconforming use is halted for a period of one year, the owner of the nonconforming use will be presumed to have abandoned the nonconforming use, unless that presumption is rebutted by the presentation of sufficient evidence of intent not to abandon the use. If a nonconforming building or structure is voluntarily demolished, it shall not be rebuilt except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. V, § 12; Ord. of 3-5-1998) 
Secs. 38-239-38-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS 

Sec. 38-271. - Purpose of article. 
    The purpose of the supplementary regulations enumerated in this article is to set specific conditions and dimensional criteria for various uses or areas, where general regulations are not applicable, and to set specific standards for the granting of special use permits. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. VI (intro. ¶)) 
Sec. 38-272. - Yard exceptions. 
    The space in a required front, side or rear yard shall be open and unobstructed with the following exceptions: 
(1)  An unenclosed porch may extend up to ten feet into a side or rear yard. 
(2)  Ordinary projections of windowsills, cornices and other ornamental features may extend up to five feet into a yard. 
(3)  Landscape features such as trees, shrubs and terraces may be placed in any yard area. Fences shall be set a minimum of five feet back from the road line. 
(4)  In NC, GBM and MI districts an outdoor telephone booth may be located in front yard area, provided it is adjacent to a permitted parking area. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. VI, § 1; Ord. of 9-9-2010) 
Sec. 38-273. - Corner lots. 
    For the purpose of complying with section 38-192, the minimum lot frontage on both roads shall comply with the minimum lot width for the district of location. All other dimensional regulations of article IV shall apply except that, in the case of a corner lot with two yards not fronting on a road but adjacent to the front yards, those two yards shall be side yards and comply with the side yard depths for the district of location. On any corner lot, no driveway or access way shall be constructed within seventy-five feet of the intersection of two road lines. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. VI, § 2; Ord. of 8-27-2015(2)) 
Sec. 38-274. - Driveway permits. 
    All construction of driveways that will access town roads requires a permit from the building and zoning inspector and public works director before construction can begin. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. VI, § 3) 
Sec. 38-275. - Vision clearance at corners. 
    At road intersections, in all districts, no structure shall be erected above a height of three feet above the road level, and no vegetation shall be planted and allowed to grow above a height of three feet above the road level within the triangle formed by the two intersecting road lines and a third line joining points on these road lines 15 feet from the intersection. Poles not exceeding six inches in diameter are exempt from this section. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. VI, § 4) 
Cross reference- Traffic, ch. 36. 
Sec. 38-276. - Lots divided by zoning district boundary. 
    Where a lot is divided by a zoning district boundary, the regulations for either district shall apply (at the option of the owner of the lot) except that no district shall, in effect, be extended more than 50 feet into an adjoining district. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. VI, § 5) 
Sec. 38-277. - Sewerage disposal. 
(a)  A shallow surface leaching field following a septic tank shall be located at least 100 feet from a dug well or from a drilled well. No portion of the leaching field shall be closer than 100 feet to the property line except where the property borders a public road in which case the distance to the road line may be reduced to 60 feet. 
(b)  A cesspool or seepage pit shall be located at least 150 feet away from a well and at least 150 feet from the property line except where the property borders a public road in which case the distance from the road line may be reduced to 110 feet. 
(c)  Any sewerage disposal system designed to leach or otherwise dispose waste into the soil shall adhere to G.L. 1956, tit., 2, ch. 1, §§ 18 through 28 governing the establishment of jurisdictional areas and associated setback distance to waterbodies. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. VI, § 6; Ord. of 3-5-1998; Ord. of 1-14-2016(1)) 
Sec. 38-278. - Surface and subsurface drains. 
    Designs for the construction or reconstruction of any surface or subsurface drainage control systems including, but not limited to, ditches, trenches, swales, curtain drains, French drains or drainage systems intended to lower the natural water table or divert surface runoff which discharges closer than 75 feet to a boundary must be submitted to the zoning official. After a determination by the director of public works that the proposed design will not adversely impact the existing drainage system of any town road or public right-of-way by increasing the volume of water to be carried by such system, the zoning official will issue a permit for construction. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. VI, § 7) 
Cross reference- Soil erosion and sediment control, ch. 26. 
Sec. 38-279. - Number of residential structures per lot. 
    No more than one main residential structure shall be permitted on a lot except as may be permitted under the provisions of section 38-192. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. VI, § 8) 
Sec. 38-280. - House trailers or mobile homes. 
    House trailers or mobile homes, so-called, whether on wheels, temporary foundations or permanent foundations shall not be permitted within the town, except as follows: trailers that were lawfully located in the town as of July 1, 1971, and replacements for such trailers; camping trailers, so called; and trailers when used as a temporary substitute residence following damage, arising from fire, windstorm or sudden casualty to a permanent residence which has made such permanent residence uninhabitable. Such temporary use of a house trailer shall continue only during repairs to the permanent residence and shall, in no event, continue for a period of more than one year from the date of the zoning and building permit allowing its location. Such temporary house trailer shall be located only on the same lot as the damaged permanent residence is located and shall comply with all dimensional requirements of the district where located. Such temporary house trailers shall be promptly removed as soon as the permanent residence shall be habitable and, in any event, within one year of the date of the permit for its location. This section shall apply only to damage to a permanent residence occurring on and after January 1, 1974. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. VI, § 9) 
Cross reference- Manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 16. 
Sec. 38-281. - Development standards for multifamily dwellings and comprehensive permit applications for affordable housing. 
    Multifamily dwellings are permitted by obtaining a special use permit or a comprehensive permit pursuant to G.L. 1956, ch. 45-53 in the AR, NC and GBM districts. All such multifamily uses must meet the requirements as set forth in this section. 
(1)  The minimum lot area for each multifamily use dwelling structure shall be 300,000 square feet and shall be increased in proportion to the total number of bedrooms per structure; refer to subsection (8)c of this section, except in cases where LMI housing is proposed and a density bonus pursuant to subsection (8)d is applied. 
(2)  Dwelling unit is a structure or portion thereof providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation and containing a separate means of ingress and egress. 
(3)  Each multifamily structure shall be provided with the necessary water supply and separate sewerage for sanitary and laundry facilities, all contained on the lot. All such systems shall be in conformance with the RI Department of Environmental Management Regulations currently in effect and all town regulations and standards. Where town, state and/or other standards are in conflict, the higher standards shall prevail. 
(4)  The development shall constitute an environment of sustained desirability in conformance with the policies and goals of the comprehensive community plan. 
(5)  Before a special use permit for a multifamily structure or multifamily development shall be granted, the site plan, together with supporting documents, shall be reviewed by the Foster Planning Board, after which review, the planning board shall publish a report of its findings and recommendations pertaining to the conformity of the proposed development with the comprehensive plan and the requirements of this section. Copies of this report shall be sent to the zoning board of review and to the office of the town clerk, who shall maintain copies for public inspection upon request. The zoning board of review shall grant no special use permit for multifamily developments without first receiving the aforementioned opinion of the town planning board. The building official shall grant no building permit or certificate of occupancy except for construction and occupancy in strict compliance with conditions set by the zoning board of review. Such building permits must be requested within six months of the date of approval. 
(6)  In cases where a comprehensive permit is requested by an applicant for LMI housing, the planning board shall serve as the "local board of review" pursuant to G.L. 1956, ch. 45-53 and shall follow procedures provided thereto and in the land development and subdivision review regulations. 
(7)  Procedures for applicant. 
a.  Special use permit not requiring subdivision of land. The applicant shall apply to the Foster Zoning Board of Review for a special use permit. The secretary of the zoning board of review shall forward the applicant's plans to the Foster Planning Board for review and opinion prior to the conclusion of the public hearing for the special use permit. 
b.  Special use permit requiring subdivision of land. A request for a special use permit requiring subdivision approval shall first be submitted to the Foster Planning Board under the Foster Subdivision Regulations. Upon receipt of "preliminary approval" by the planning board for the subdivision, the applicant shall then apply to the zoning board of review for a special use permit. 
c.  Comprehensive permit. Any applicant proposing to build LMI housing may submit to the planning board a single application for a comprehensive permit to build that housing in lieu of separate applications to the zoning board. This procedure is only available for proposals in which at least 25 percent of the housing is LMI housing. The application and review process for a comprehensive permit are contained in the land development and subdivision review regulations. 
(8)  Standards for development. 
a.  Permitted uses. Only multifamily structure(s) and their accessory uses will be permitted. "Accessory uses" may include indoor and outdoor parking facilities and most ordinary residential uses, but shall not include, office uses, restaurant and entertainment uses, commercial uses, wholesale business and storage, industrial uses, home occupations, professional office and neither storage nor overnight parking of commercial vehicles which have a capacity of over one and one-half tons. 
b.  Maximum lot coverage. The total ground area, occupied by the buildings, together with all accessory building(s), shall not exceed 20 percent of the total area of the lot. 
c.  Dimensional regulations. Each lot shall meet the following lot area and front, side and rear yard dimensions: 
1. Maximum number 
of bedrooms 
per structure Minimum 
lot area 
per structure 
(in square feet) Minimum 
lot frontage 
(in feet)  2 to 4 300,000 400  5 325,000 400  6 350,000 400  7 375,000 425  8 400,000 450  9 425,000 475 10 450,000 500  
2.  Minimum front yard depth ..... 100 feet 
3.  Minimum rear yard depth ..... 100 feet 
4.  Density bonus-Multi-unit structures may be allowed a density bonus of up to a maximum of eight bedrooms per acre for LMI housing as approved by RI DEM based on the soils. 
d.  Additional requirements. Additional requirements are as follows: 
1.  The specified lot area excludes ponds, streams and other freshwater wetland areas. 
2.  Lot frontage as defined in article I of this chapter. 
3.  The total number of bedrooms per structure is related to the design daily sewage flow (two person occupancy per bedroom) in accordance with state DEM regulations currently in effect. 
4.  A buffer strip is a strip 50 feet in width or depth alongside and rear lot lines that shall be maintained as a landscape buffer strip. 
5.  No principal building shall exceed 35 feet in height or two stories. No accessory building or other permitted structure shall exceed 20 feet in height. 
6.  Each building shall be provided with an enclosed fireproof waste pen of sufficient size to accommodate all trash and waste stored on the premises. The waste pen and utility area shall be properly screened and buffered from all buildings and property lines. No trash shall be disposed of on the premises. 
7.  Minimum off-street parking shall be provided and maintained as follows: 
i.  Two car spaces per dwelling unit (300 square feet per space including access, egress and general circulation). 
ii.  No parking shall be permitted within 75 feet of any boundary line or within the required minimum front yard. 
iii.  Off-street parking spaces and service drives shall be located within the boundaries of the lot being developed as a multifamily development, and provided in accordance with section 38-286. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. VI, § 10; Ord. of 10-3-2009; Ord. of 9-9-2010) 
Sec. 38-282. - Development standards for accessory family dwelling units. 
    Attached accessory apartments will be allowed for parents and in-law parents or grandparents of the occupant or occupants of the principal residence as a means of increasing affordable housing. These units may be no more than 600 square feet. As a condition for obtaining a zoning certificate and building permit for a structure with a one-bedroom, family apartment in accordance with section 38-192 under residential uses, the applicant for the permit shall sign a statement agreeing to this restriction, for use by family members only, which agreement shall be recorded in the land evidence records of the town at the expense of the applicant, and which agreement shall run with the land so as to be applicable to and binding upon subsequent owners and shall be enforceable against the applicant, his heirs, devisees, successors and assigns. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. VI, § 11) 
Sec. 38-283. - Accessory nonfamily dwelling units. 
    This section is reserved. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. VI, § 12) 
Sec. 38-284. - Development standards for senior citizens group housing. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote the establishment of new housing developments, particularly suited for senior citizens, within a designated R-SC district; to promote the use of land to facilitate a more economic arrangement of buildings, common facilities, vehicular circulation and utilities; to preserve to the greatest extent possible the existing natural landscape features and to utilize such features in a harmonious fashion; to allow for some flexibility in design and location of multiple structures on the same lot and to ensure a quality of construction and maintenance of the development commensurate with existing single-family dwellings within the community. 
(b)  Variances. In accordance with the purpose stated in subsection (a) of this section, the town recognizes that senior citizens, as a special class of residents, have particular needs and different life styles such that a housing development proposed exclusively for this purpose may be entitled to stronger consideration regarding several variations from the multifamily dwelling requirements. 
(c)  Senior citizen or elderly person defined. Senior citizen or elderly person shall mean herein a person 62 years of age or older, or a handicapped person. 
(d)  Review of site plan. The planning board shall review the site plan of the proposed development to determine its conformance with the requirements of this section. Within 45 days of receipt of the applicant's final site plan and supporting documents, the planning board shall submit a written report to the zoning official stating its findings and any special requirements for approval, with a copy to the town council. No zoning certificate shall be issued without written recommendation by the planning board. 
(e)  Additional R-SC regulations and standards. Additional R-SC district regulations, standards for development and special provisions are as follows: 
(1)  Each living unit shall be designed for occupancy by no more than two persons and shall be considered a single bedroom unit. Up to ten percent of the living units may be planned for occupancy by handicapped persons. 
(2)  No fewer than three, nor more than ten, living units shall be planned within a single structure. 
(3)  The maximum number of living units within any single development shall be 30. 
(4)  A private nonpublic road for the main circulation within the development shall be permitted provided it is designed and constructed in accordance with current subdivision regulation requirements governing reserved right-of-way width, width of improved roadway, storm drainage and other features. 
(5)  The entire development including the structures and land shall remain solely owned, meaning one person, firm, corporation or partnership. 
(6)  Permitted uses for senior citizens group housing may include such accessory use, attached or detached, structures directly in support of the community living concept such as a community hall, but limited to use by the residents of the development and occasional guests. 
(7)  Water supply and sewerage requirements for each structure shall be planned in accordance with section 38-277. 
(8)  The requirements for off-street parking, cited in section 38-286, may be reduced to require one car space per dwelling unit, provided additional infrequent and temporary parking can be accommodated by the roadway. 
(9)  Site plan/building design. A site plan for a proposed senior citizens group housing development shall be prepared in accordance with section 38-393. The applicant shall submit a preliminary and final site plan to the planning board as part of the review process required in section 38-393. 
(10)  A buffer strip will be maintained in accordance with section 38-281(7)d. 
(11)  Provisions for rubbish disposal will be provided for in accordance with section 38-281(7)d.4. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. VI, § 13) 
Sec. 38-285. - Standards for commercial and industrial development. 
    This section is reserved. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. VI, § 14) 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 12. 
Sec. 38-286. - Off-street parking requirements. 
(a)  Any structure or use erected or developed after July 6, 1967, must provide off-street parking facilities in accordance with the following regulations: 
(1)  Dwellings and motels, one car for each dwelling unit; 
(2)  Hotels and lodginghouses, one car space for every two suites or rooms; 
(3)  Office uses, one car space for every 250 square feet of floor area; 
(4)  Retail and service businesses, one car space for every 200 square feet of gross building area, with a minimum of four spaces per building; 
(5)  Parking space width, nine feet; 
(6)  Restaurants, theaters, churches and other places of assembly, one car space for every five persons of capacity; 
(7)  Industrial and wholesale uses, two car spaces for every three employees; and 
(8)  All other uses, parking as may be required by commercial site review, section 38-394. 
(b)  Plans and specifications for the required parking facility and its access drives shall be submitted at the time of application for the zoning certificate for the main use. In allocating space for off-street parking facilities, each car space shall have a minimum width of nine feet and minimum length of 18 feet and shall be served by suitable aisles to permit access to all car spaces. In no case shall the gross area of the facility be less than 270 square feet per car space. 
(c)  Off-street parking lots of more than two motor vehicles capacity shall conform to the following standards of construction: 
(1)  The area shall have a dust free, hard surface and shall be provided with bumper guards where needed. 
(2)  Where such area adjoins or lies within an AR agricultural/residential district, or adjoins a residential use in any other district, an opaque fence not less than four feet nor more than six feet in height, or a compact evergreen screen not less than four feet in height shall be erected and maintained between such area and the adjoining AR district or residential use. 
(3)  Lighting fixtures used to illuminate the parking area shall reflect away from adjoining property and away from adjacent traffic arteries. 
(d)  In any AR district, the parking or storage of commercial vehicles of over 1.5 tons capacity and of commercial or house trailers (not including camping trailers) shall not be permitted except where such parking or storage is directly related to and is accessory to a permitted use or a legal preexisting use. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. VI, § 15) 
Cross reference- Traffic, ch. 36. 
Sec. 38-287. - Off-street loading requirements. 
    All commercial and industrial structures erected after June 23, 1994, shall provide off-street loading facilities. Plans and specifications for such loading facilities shall be submitted to the zoning official at the time of application for the zoning certificate for the main use. Where a loading facility is to be located in or adjacent to an AR district, the regulations contained in section 38-287 concerning screening, surfacing and lighting shall apply. Such a loading facility shall be sufficient in size to eliminate the projection of vehicles into a road right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. VI, § 16) 
Cross reference- Traffic, ch. 36. 
Sec. 38-288. - Sign regulations. 
(a)  Definitions. 
    Abandoned means the business structure associated with the sign has been closed, demolished, or not maintained, for a period exceeding one year. 
    Animated sign means any sign that uses movement or the visual impression of movement, sound, or change of lighting to depict action or create a special effect and/or scene. Such signs include but are not limited to those that give the impression of flashing, running, blinking, oscillating, twinkling, scintillating, expanding, or contracting. 
    Announcement board means a board or wall area on which bulletins, notices, or displays are temporarily posted. Such signs shall not exceed five square feet in area. 
    Billboard means any off-premises sign exceeding 15 square feet in area. 
    Building marker means any sign indicating the name of a building and/or date and/or incidental information about its history or construction. Such markers shall not exceed four square feet in area. 
    Construction sign means any sign which purpose is to display the name of the contractor and/or subcontractors employed on a work site, and/or the consultants and/or financial institutions participating in the project. Such signs shall be either freestanding or attached to the structure and shall not exceed 16 square feet in area. Such signs are meant to enhance public health and safety during construction and so shall be removed upon completion of construction. Such signs shall not be erected until building permits for the relevant project are pulled. This definition does not include signs located on the premises of the general offices of a contractor. 
    Directional sign means any sign which purpose is to direct vehicles and/or pedestrians onto, around, and off of a premises. Such signs shall be limited to four square feet in area including any attached corporate logos or other symbols. Such signs shall be limited to three feet in height from the top of the sign to grade. A name or logo on these signs shall not comprise greater than 20 percent of the total sign area. 
    Directory sign means a sign which provides dedicated space for listings of two or more professional, service, business, and/or commercial activities and is designated and constructed with provision to allow changes of occupancy to be reflected on the sign. One such sign shall be permitted per building, either as a wall directory sign or as a freestanding directory sign. Freestanding directory signs are permitted in lieu of individual freestanding signs and shall not exceed 15 feet in height or 60 square feet in sign area. 
    Externally illuminated sign means any sign which light source is located outside of the sign and is of a continuous white light in nature. This includes but is not limited to spotlights and stationary floods. 
    Freestanding sign means any sign supported by a structural device or devices that is placed on, or anchored into, the ground and that is independent from any building. One freestanding sign shall be permitted per lot with a maximum visible sign area of 40 square feet. Where more than one business is located on a lot, up to three freestanding signs shall be permitted, provided that the total square footage of visible sign area does not exceed 40 square feet. A minimum sign clearance of eight feet is required between the grade and the base of the lowest part of the sign to ensure adequate site clearance for pedestrians and vehicles. Maximum sign height shall be 15 feet and all such signs shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from all lot lines. The area immediately underneath and around the base of the sign shall be landscaped per the landscaping requirements of this chapter. 
    Gas and service station sign means signs necessary to the operation of filling and service stations limited to the following: 
(1)  Lettering on buildings displayed over individual entrance doors shall not consist of more than one such sign centered over each entrance, and the sign area shall not exceed 12 inches in height. 
(2)  Lettering or other insignia which are part of a gasoline pump, consisting only of a brand name, lead warning sign, price, and other signs as required by law. 
(3)  A credit card sign not exceeding one square foot in area, affixed to the building or window. 
(4)  Other signs as permitted by this section. 
    Government signs mean signs erected by or on behalf of the United States of America, the State of Rhode Island, and the Town of Foster, traffic controls, legal notices, or other signs required by law including all signs erected under the authority of the Town of Foster. The town shall have the ability to erect such signs without sign approval. 
    Internally illuminated sign means any sign, exclusive of neon signs, whose light source is located behind and/or within the sign itself or behind and/or within any individual element(s) of a sign. 
    Incidental sign means a sign, generally informational, that has a purpose secondary to the use of the lot on which it is located, such as "no parking", "loading zone", "open", "telephone", and other similar directives. Such signs shall not exceed six square feet in area and shall not count toward the maximum visible sign area. 
    Incidental sign, residential means a sign, generally informational, that has a purpose secondary to the use of the lot on which it is located, such as "no trespassing", "beware of dogs", and the like. Such signs shall not exceed six square feet in area and shall not count toward the maximum visible sign area. 
    Institution/organization sign means a wall sign or freestanding sign whose sign display is not to exceed 12 square feet and is used on premises for church, hospital, library, museum, art gallery, historic preservation, or similar organization. 
    Legal nonconforming sign means: 
(1)  A sign which was erected legally prior to the enactment of this article; 
(2)  A sign which does not conform to the sign regulation requirements, for which zoning relief has been granted through the zoning board of review. 
    Lot frontage means roadway frontage on a local access road. 
    Monument sign means any sign whose base is in contact with or within one foot of the ground. Where permitted, only one monument sign shall be allowed per lot in lieu of a freestanding sign and shall have a maximum sign area of 50 square feet and shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from all property lines. Maximum sign height shall be eight feet. The area immediately underneath and around the base of the sign shall be landscaped per the landscaping requirements found in this chapter. 
    Moving sign means any sign moved by mechanical or natural means, such as wind. 
    Nameplate means material on which a name and/or professional designation is inscribed or painted. Professional nameplates shall indicate a name and/or professional designation and/or affiliation and shall not exceed one square foot per professional occupant. Residential nameplates shall display the name and address of resident and shall not exceed one square foot in area. All such nameplates shall be affixed either to a door, an adjacent wall of the premises, or a lamp post/mail box. 
    Neon sign means an electronic sign illuminated by inert gas confined to a glass tube. Such signs may be classified as "window" signs or as "projecting" signs and must meet all definitions and requirements of those sign types as addressed in this section. 
    Non-conforming sign means any sign that does not conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
    Off-premises sign means a sign not related or associated with the use of the property on which the sign is located. These signs are prohibited from all public rights of way, municipal buildings, and town-owned property, and shall not be affixed to any traffic signs, utility poles, nor to any trees located in public rights of way or on town property. 
(1)  Off-Premises Sign, Commercial Use (article IV, Zone Regulations: Description of uses): Any sign not related or associated with the commercial use of the property on which the sign is located. 
(2)  Off-premises sign, non-commercial use (article IV, Zone Regulations: Description of uses): Any sign not related or associated with the non-commercial use of the property on which the sign is located. These signs that also meet the definition of a temporary sign shall be permitted in all zoning districts and may be of any type and size of sign allowed therein and shall be subject to the same requirements, restrictions, and set back limitations applicable to other sign types in those zones. These signs that do not meet the definition of a temporary sign are not allowed. 
    Principal building means the building in which the principal use of the lot is conducted. Lots with multiple principal uses may have multiple principal buildings, but storage buildings, garages, and other clearly accessory uses shall not be considered principal buildings. 
    Projecting sign means any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a manner that it extends more than ten inches beyond the surface of such building or wall. Such signs shall be permitted in lieu of freestanding signs or monument signs. Only one projecting sign shall be permitted per business and shall be perpendicular to the wall to which it is attached, its nearest edge being no less than three inches and its furthest edge projecting no greater than 48 inches from the wall. The projecting sign shall have a maximum sign area of ten square feet and its lowest edge shall be a minimum of eight feet from the ground. 
    Real estate sign means any sign advertising the real estate upon which the sign is located as being for rent, lease, or sale. Residential real estate signs shall be permitted for individual residential properties and for residential subdivisions, and shall not exceed 20 square feet in area. Only one residential real estate sign per lot and/or subdivision shall be permitted. Commercial and industrial real estate signs shall be permitted for industrial and commercial properties and shall not exceed 60 square feet in area. All residential, commercial, and industrial real estate signs shall be removed within two weeks of the sale or lease of the associated property, unit, or entire subdivision. 
    Sign means any device, fixture, display, placard, or structure that uses any color, form, graphic, illumination, symbol, and/or writing to advertise, announce the purpose of, or identify the purpose of a person or entity, or to communicate information of any kind to the public. A wall sign shall consist of both a sign face and a bracket. A freestanding sign shall consist of the sign face(s), bracket(s), post(s) and frame. A monument sign shall consist of the sign face(s) and support base. 
    Subdivision identification sign means one freestanding permanent sign may be installed at all exclusive entrances to a development. Each sign shall have a maximum sign area of sixteen (16) square feet. These signs shall not be located within the public right-of-way or on town-owned or controlled land. 
    Temporary sign means any sign not permanently installed or any sign only intended for use for a limited period of time. Such signs shall be permitted in all zoning districts and may be of any type and size of sign allowed therein and shall be subject to the same requirements, restrictions, and set back limitations applicable to other sign types in those zones. Temporary signs are prohibited from all public rights of way, municipal buildings, and town-owned property, and shall not be affixed to any traffic signs, utility poles, nor to any trees located in public rights of way or on town property. Such signs shall not remain in place for more than 120 days. 
    Town refers to all governmental entities of the Town of Foster. 
    Wall sign means any sign attached parallel to, but within ten inches of a wall, painted on the wall surface, or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure which is supported by such wall or building, and which displays only one sign surface and is supported by such wall or building. One such sign shall be permitted per business per building face with a maximum of three per business. The maximum width of the sign display shall not exceed 70 percent of the linear frontage associated with the business unit. This provision shall only apply to those businesses located within the main structure(s) and shall not apply to any other freestanding structures (i.e. pad sites, kiosks, outbuildings, etc.). All wall signs must be directly associated with the business, entity, or enterprise located within the building or structure to which they are attached, painted, or erected as described above. Any wall signs that are not directly associated with said business, entity, or enterprise are strictly prohibited. 
    Window sign means any sign that is placed inside a window or upon the window panes or glass (exclusive of merchandise display). Permanent window signs may be applied to, painted on, or attached to the inside of each window associated with a business. The area of such window signs shall be counted toward the maximum visible sign area. All window signs shall not exceed 25 percent of the total window area. 
(b)  Computations. The following principles shall control the computation of sign area and sign height: 
(1)  Sign display: The sign display is a portion of the permitted sign area. The area of a sign display shall be computed by means of the smallest square or rectangle that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, or other display. 
(2)  Sign area, single-faced signs: The area of a sign face (which is also the sign area of a wall sign or other sign with only one face) shall be computed as the area of sign display together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed. 
(3)  Sign height: The height of a freestanding sign shall be computed as the distance from the base of the sign pole at normal grade to the top of the sign area. The height of a monument sign shall be computed as the distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the sign area. Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of (1) existing grade prior to the construction, or (2) the newly established grade after construction. 
(c)  General regulations. 
(1)  Changes to nonconforming signs: Enlargement or relocation of legal non-conforming signs requires additional approval from the zoning board of review. 
(2)  Rhode Island Building Code: Within all zones and districts, all signs shall comply with applicable provision(s) of the Rhode Island State Building Code and the National Electric Code. 
(3)  Sign maintenance: Within all zones and districts, all signs shall be maintained in good structural condition in conformance with this article (unless otherwise allowed through the zoning board of review) at all times. 
(4)  Landscaping requirements: For the purposes of this article, "landscaping" shall include any combination of living plants such as grass, ground cover, shrubs, vines, or hedges and nonliving landscape materials such as rocks, pebbles, sand mulch, or decorative paving material. In the case of freestanding or monument signs, the requirement shall be that the area immediately underneath the sign and the entirety of an area extending two feet radially from the sign base or supports shall be landscaped. Landscape materials may not obstruct the view of the sign message. 
(5)  Illumination: Externally lit signs are allowed in all zones, provided they are oriented such that the light is directed away from any adjacent properties and traffic arteries and is of a continuous white nature. 
(6)  Alterations: Any legally existing sign (including legal non-conforming sign) may be altered either to update the sign content or to reflect new information, provided that the alteration does not result in any change in the sign's extent, location, or illumination. 
(d)  Sign table. 
X = Permitted 
O = Prohibited 
AR = Agricultural/Residential 
NC = Neighborhood Commercial 
GBM = General Business Mixed Use 
MI = Manufacturing/Industrial 
R-SC = Residential-Senior Citizens 
AR NC GBM MI R-SC Animated O O O O O Announcement board X X X X X Billboard O O O O O Building marker X X X X X Construction sign X X X X X Directional sign X X X X X Directory sign O O X O O Externally illuminated sign X X X X X Freestanding sign X X X X X Gas and service station sign O X X X O Government sign X X X X X Internally illuminated sign O O O O O Incidental sign X X X X X Incidental sign, residential X X X X X Institution/organization sign X X X X X Monument sign O 1 X X X X Moving sign O O O O O Nameplate X X X X X Neon sign O O O O O Off-premises sign-Commercial use O O O O O Off-premises sign-Non-commercial use, temporary X X X X X Off-premises sign-Non-commercial use, permanent O O O O O Projecting sign O X X X O Real estate sign X X X X X Subdivision identification Sign X X X X X Temporary sign X X X X X Wall sign O X X X X Window sign O X X X X  
1 Subdivision identification sign excepted. 
(e)  Regulations by zone. 
(1)  Agricultural/residential (AR). 
a.  Setbacks: No sign shall be placed within five feet of a lot line or roadway, or the setback specified by the sign type definition (whichever is greater). 
b.  Height: No sign shall be greater than five feet in height. 
c.  Lighting: No external illumination of a permitted sign shall be greater than 75 watts/1,500 lumens. 
d.  Total sign area: No sign shall exceed 20 square feet in area, or the size restriction specified by sign type definition (whichever is less). 
(2)  Neighborhood commercial (NC) and manufacturing/industrial (MI). 
a.  Setbacks: No sign shall be placed within five feet of a lot line or roadway, or the setback specified by the sign type definition (whichever is greater). No sign shall be sited within 30 feet of an AR zone boundary. 
b.  Height: No sign shall be greater than 15 feet in height. 
c.  Lighting: No external illumination of a permitted sign shall be greater than 200 watts/4,000 lumens. 
d.  Total sign area: No sign shall exceed 60 square feet in area, or the size restriction specified by sign type definition (whichever is less). 
(3)  General business mixed use (GBM). 
a.  Setbacks: No sign shall be placed within five feet of a lot line or roadway, or the setback specified by the sign type definition (whichever is greater). No sign shall be sited within 30 feet of an AR zone boundary. 
b.  Height: No sign shall be greater than 20 feet in height. 
c.  Lighting: No external illumination of a permitted sign shall be greater than 250 watts/5,000 lumens. 
d.  Total sign area: No sign shall exceed 100 square feet in area, or the size restriction specified by sign type definition (whichever is less). 
(4)  Residential-senior citizens (R-SC). 
a.  Setbacks: No sign shall be placed within five feet of a lot line or roadway, or the setback specified by the sign type definition (whichever is greater). No sign shall be sited within 30 feet of an AR zone boundary. 
b.  Height: No sign shall be greater than ten feet in height. 
c.  Lighting: No external illumination of a permitted sign shall be greater than 100 watts/2,000 lumens. 
d.  Total sign area: No sign shall exceed 20 square feet in area, or the size restriction specified by sign type definition (whichever is less). 
(f)  Prohibitions. For the purposes of regulating unauthorized signage, protecting the health, safety, and welfare of residents, promoting the safety of the traveling public, protecting existing property values, preventing the overcrowding of land, encouraging positive economic development, and promoting a positive community appearance as part of a concerted effort to protect and enhance the aesthetics of the town for the enjoyment of all citizens, certain sign types are not allowed. It is recognized here that, unlike on-premise signs which are actually associated with the use of the property where the sign is located, "off-premises signage" is separate and distinct and thereby unrelated to the use of the property where the sign is located. With a view to this distinction, and in furtherance of the above stated goals, off-premises signs are regulated differently from on-premises signs. 
    In addition to the signs described as prohibited under the sign table, the following signs and sign materials are also expressly prohibited: 
(1)  Signs which are attached to natural features, stone walls, utility poles, utility boxes, traffic signs, fences, or highway structures. This does not include residential incidental signs. 
(2)  Signs attached to or placed on or against trailers or vehicles, whether registered or unregistered. This does not include signs adhered or painted onto vehicles. 
(3)  Signs in the public right-of-way, except for those installed by the government. 
(4)  Signs which imitate, and may be confused with, an official traffic control sign or signal, or an emergency or road equipment vehicle. 
(5)  All other signs which have not been expressly permitted within this chapter. 
(6)  All existing signs erected without the necessary approvals and/or permits. 
(7)  Off-premises signs, commercial use including billboards. 
(8)  Moving devices, such as pennants, ribbons, streamers, spinners, or the like. 
    Additional signs prohibited: The total number of permitted exterior signs at any business shall not exceed four. This number shall include any combination of wall signs, freestanding signs, monument signs, and projecting signs. 
(g)  Non-conforming signs. A sign shall lose its legal non-conforming status when: 
(1)  The sign is enlarged or reduced without approvals. 
(2)  The sign is relocated without approvals. 
(3)  The sign shall not have been repaired or properly maintained within 30 days after written notice to the effect has been given by the building official and/or director of planning, or their designees. 
(4)  The sign structure is removed and replaced with another nonconforming sign, regardless of its size. 
(5)  The business structure associated with the sign has been abandoned and demolished. 
    A sign shall not lose its legal nonconforming status when: 
(1)  A wall sign is removed for construction, painting and/or restoration of the building, provided that the sign is returned to its location within 30 days of completion of the building work. 
(2)  The sign is removed to facilitate repair, maintenance and/or repainting and replaced immediately upon completion of such work. 
(h)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Permanent signs require a sign permit, excepting residential incidental signs. Applications are available from the building official. 
(2)  A sign shall be considered in violation of the provisions of this article if: 
a.  It is prohibited. 
b.  It loses its non-conforming status. 
c.  It is considered abandoned. 
d.  It is considered unsafe or unsecure. 
1.  The zoning enforcement officer will follow violation procedure as outlined in section 38-3. 
2.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 1 above, a sign may be removed if reasonable efforts to contact the owner have been unsuccessful and the sign constitutes an immediate threat to safety of persons or property as determined by the zoning enforcement officer or a designee. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. VI, § 17; Ord. of 1-14-16(2)) 
Sec. 38-289. - Historic cemeteries. 
    No construction shall take place within 35 feet of a cemetery. No driveway shall be permitted within 15 feet of a cemetery. Ordinary road maintenance on town roads shall be exempt from these distance requirements, except that such road construction shall not undermine or destroy a cemetery. In addition, excavation on a property shall not undermine or destroy any cemetery, burial ground or any structures or gravesites located therein. This chapter shall not apply to the ordinary installation of gravesites, monuments, markers or mausoleums. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. VI, § 18) 
Sec. 38-290. - Regulations pertaining to animals. 
    No special use permit shall be granted unless a waste management and removal plan is first filed with and approved by the town planning board. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. VI, § 19) 
Cross reference- Animals generally, ch. 8. 
Sec. 38-291. - Regulations pertaining to communications towers and antennas. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide guidelines for the siting of towers and antennae that are consistent with the rural character and land uses of the town. The goals of this section are to: 
(1)  Establish the location of towers and minimize the total number of towers throughout the community, while providing seamless coverage. 
(2)  Maximize location of antennae on existing structures, and require the joint use (collocation) of new and existing towers in order to minimize or mitigate any adverse impact on the town. 
(3)  Facilitate the use of public property and structures for the siting of towers and antennas. 
(4)  Establish that towers located in the agricultural-residential, neighborhood-commercial, residential-senior citizen and municipal zones will be alternative tower structures that are complimentary to the existing character of the surrounding environment, if possible. 
(b)  Applicability. No communications antenna array or communications tower shall be erected, constructed, altered, or maintained on any lot within the town after the November 19, 1998, without complying with the terms of this section. No communications antenna array or communications tower shall be erected, constructed, altered or maintained on any parcel designated as permanent open space held in trust by the town or by the Town of Foster Land Trust. 
(c)  Development standards. The following development standards for communications towers and antennas shall apply, but not limit the authority of the zoning board of review under section 38-63. 
(1)  General. Towers and antennas shall be subject to review as a major land development plan and is to include a commercial and industrial development site review by the planning board as provided in section 38-394. 
a.  Town-owned sites or facilities that are located in the prospective development area which could potentially accommodate the proposed antennas and tower shall be considered first and given priority for locations of said antennas and/or tower. 
b.  In the event town-owned sites or facilities are not available, the applicant shall make a reasonable effort to utilize existing structures or alternative tower structures for location of antennas. Should an existing structure not be utilized, evidence as to why shall be submitted. 
c.  All towers, antennas, equipment shelters and any other communications equipment which have not been used for a period of one year shall be considered abandoned and shall be dismantled and removed at the owners expense. The owner of such tower, antennas, equipment shelter and any other communications equipment shall remove the same within 90 days of the sending of notice from the building official. If such tower, antenna, equipment shelter and any other communications equipment is not removed within said 90 days, the town may take any necessary action to remove said tower, antenna, equipment shelter and any other communications equipment at the owner's expense. 
(2)  Submission requirements. 
a.  The applicant shall comply with the submission requirements of chapter 32 and the requirements of section 38-394. 
b.  The applicant shall submit a master plan covering the entire town. The plan shall indicate all existing, proposed, or planned sites of such carrier, including alternative sites from which the needed coverage could also be provided. The plan will also indicate the zoning district, current use, and neighboring uses for all such sites. 
c.  Towers shall be built so as to facilitate collocation and co-use of antennas. The applicant shall indicate how the site will be designed to collocate future carriers, and how many of such carriers can be technically accommodated. Consideration shall be given to the collocator of multiple antennas on one tower and technologies which allow co-use of a single antenna to maximize the number of carriers on a given structure. 
d.  The application shall contain a statement that if the site will physically support co-location and the locator is willing to sign a commercially reasonable lease, it shall be allowed to collocate. 
e.  Tower bases and their accessory structures shall be enclosed by a maintenance-free fence no less than six feet in height or more than eight feet in height from finished grade. Access shall be through a locked gate. 
f.  Towers shall not be artificially lighted except as required for public safety reasons by the FAA, or by the town. All exterior lighting shall be full cutoff lighting. 
g.  No signs shall be allowed on any towers except as required for public safety reasons and must be located within eight feet of the ground. 
h.  The tower owner shall have the tower inspected for structural integrity in accordance with the state building code on an annual basis by a state-registered professional engineer. This inspection report is to be forwarded to the building official. 
i.  This section shall not apply to any tower or antenna installation which is owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio operator, which tower or antenna does not exceed 70 feet in height. The term "federally licensed" means having a valid and active federal amateur radio license in compliance with all applicable federal laws, regulations and ordinances and having provided evidence of such compliance with the town clerk. 
(Ord. of 11-19-1998; Ord. of 1-24-2002) 
Sec. 38-292. - Solar installations. 
(a)  Definitions. 
    Major solar installation means a solar installation designed primarily to sell electricity to a utility supplier, or a solar installation with an output exceeding 25kW or exceeding 20 percent of the net buildable area (i.e. the total area of the applicable lot, minus setbacks, vegetated buffers, and wetlands). 
    Minor solar installation means a solar installation designed to primarily service the property on which the solar installation is located with an output of 25kW or less. 
    Solar installation means a power system used to supply power by converting sunlight into electricity by means of photovoltaics, the harnessing of solar energy to generate thermal energy, or the use of concentrated sunlight to drive a traditional steam turbine. 
(b)  Minor solar installation. A minor solar installation is permitted in all zones, provided such solar installation: 
(1)  Shall meet all applicable zone requirements including but not limited to lighting, setbacks, signage, and height; 
(2)  Shall require a building permit after submission and approval of layout and design. Any memorandum of lease, easement, or utility agreements must also be submitted for review, and shall be recorded in land evidence in the Town of Foster upon approval; and 
(3)  Shall be in compliance with RI State Building Code and the RI State Electrical Code. 
(c)  Major solar installation. A major solar installation requires, in all zones, minor land development approval from the planning board and a special use permit from the zoning board of review, pursuant to G.L. 1956, § 45-23-61. If the major solar installation has an output of greater than 250kw or if it exceeds 40 percent of the net buildable area of the lot on which it is located, then such major solar installation shall require major land development approval from the planning board and a special use permit from the zoning board of review in all zones, pursuant to G.L. 1956, § 45-23-61. A major solar installation shall require a building permit prior to construction and adhere to the following: 
(1)  Design standards. Solar installation applications shall include the proposed site layout and any landscape changes, a diagram of electrical components, a description of the major system components to be used, an operation and maintenance plan, a decommission plan, utility approval, proof of liability insurance, and the contact information for the project contractors. Additional documents may be required by the planning board or by the zoning board of review. The planning board may waive requirements of the land development review process upon written request of the applicant at pre-application. 
(2)  Land evidence. Any memorandum of lease, easement, or utility/distribution agreements shall be submitted with the installation application and shall be recorded in land evidence in the Town of Foster after planning board and zoning board of review approvals. 
(3)  Setbacks and height. The installation must meet all height and minimum front, side, and rear yard requirements in the applicable zone, and must additionally maintain a 20-foot vegetated buffer from all adjacent properties and roadways. 
(4)  All installations shall be in compliance with the RI State Building Code and the RI State Electrical Code, and shall be subject to periodic inspections by the Foster Building Official. All relevant installation components must have an UL listing or equivalent. 
(5)  All electrical connection and distribution lines within the installation shall be underground or located entirely within a structure. Electrical equipment between the installation and the utility connection may be above-ground if required by the utility. 
(6)  Security. A fence shall surround the perimeter of the installation of no less than nine feet in height. 
(7)  Emergency access. Reasonable accessibility for emergency service vehicles shall be required. 
(8)  Signage. No signs are allowed on the security perimeter fencing except for a sign displaying the installation name, address and emergency contact information, and trespassing/warning/danger signs to ensure the safety of individuals who may come in contact with the installation. No sign shall exceed four square feet in area. 
(9)  Lighting. Externally lit signs are allowed, provided they are oriented such that the light is directed away from any adjacent properties and traffic arteries. 
(10)  Abandonment or Decommissioning. It is the responsibility of the parcel owner to remove all obsolete or unused systems within six months of cessation of operations. Reusable components are to be recycled whenever feasible. A surety bond to cover the cost of removal shall be required, and shall be posted prior to the issuance of any building permits. 
(d)  Incentives. Pursuant to G.L. 1956, § 44-3-21, a property meeting the following criteria shall be exempt from tangible taxation, and such exemption shall be applied for, verified by, and filed with the town's tax assessor: 
(1)  The additional cost or value of any solar installation which is being utilized as a primary or auxiliary power system for the sole purpose of supplying the energy needs of the property on which it is located. 
(Ord. of 7-23-2015, art. VI, § 23) 
Sec. 38-293. - Stone wall protection and preservation. 
(a)  Purpose and definition. The purpose of this section is to encourage and support the protection and preservation of historic stone walls located in the Town of Foster; to establish general provisions for the alteration of such stone walls within the land development and subdivision, variance and special use, and permit application review processes; and to suggest guidelines for the re-building of stone walls or building of new stone walls. 
    Historic stone walls, defined as a structure of stones gathered and constructed by earlier generations into a purposeful formation and often intended to designate property boundaries or to identify and separate agricultural activities on a farm, were typically constructed before 1950. 
    Historic stone walls are valued as important parts of Foster's landscape and heritage; as artifacts of the unique agricultural past of the region and the harsh demands of farming in New England; as visual reminders of farms, cattle and wagon lanes, settlement patterns, and land use; and as functioning elements of the landscape and woodland habitat. 
    Ensuring a balance between preservation of the rural heritage and character of the Town of Foster, as represented by historic stone walls, and respect for private property rights is of utmost importance. It is in the public interest to both minimize any restriction of the rights of property owners while protecting and preserving historic stone walls and encouraging the re-building of stone walls or building of new stone walls. 
(b)  General provisions-Historic stone walls. 
(1)  The proposed alteration, relocation, excavation, dismantling, or demolition of a historic stone wall (or part thereof) shall be identified on any site plan submission that is required by: 
a.  Application to the planning board as part of the minor or major land development and minor or major subdivision review process. 
b.  Application to the zoning board of review as part of the variance or special use permit process. 
c.  Application to the building official as part of the building permit process. 
d.  Application to public works as part of the driveway permit process. 
(2)  Site plan submission shall include specific information as to the nature of the construction, excavation, or demolition project; the location and general condition of the existing historic stone wall(s) on the property, relative to the project; and the anticipated impact of the project on the historic stone wall(s). 
(3)  The reviewing entity and applicant shall seek to find an alternate location of the use or project proposed to alter, relocate, excavate, dismantle, or demolish the historic stone wall. If no beneficial alternative is found to be possible, a plan to minimize the disturbance and/or mitigate the impact shall be substituted, such as: 
a.  Abbreviating the cut-throughs as much as possible. 
b.  Rebuilding, repairing, replacing, or relocating disturbed portions of the wall(s) in a manner that reasonably approximates the material and methods of the originals, using as many of the original stones as possible. 
c.  Restoration of the ends of any such walls. 
(4)  Any public works project initiated by the Town of Foster that is likely to affect abutting historic stone wall(s) not subject to a formal review process as required in subsection (b)(1) of this section shall give prior notice to the property owner. 
(c)  Suggested guidelines-Other stone walls. 
(1)  Re-build stone walls and/or build new stone walls similar to those constructed by earlier generations, using native field stone and methods that approximate historic stone walls. 
(2)  Rebuild, rather than dismantle, historic stone walls not subject to a formal review process as required in subsection (b)(1) of this section that are in disrepair with construction materials and methods that approximate the originals or leave them as-is. 
(3)  Develop plans to minimize the impact on any stone walls during the planning phase of any construction, excavation, or demolition project not subject to a formal review process as required in subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2016, art. VI, § 24) 
Secs. 38-294-38-320. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SPECIAL USE PERMITS AND VARIANCES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Variances, G.L. 1956, § 45-24-41; special use permits, G.L. 1956, § 45-24-42. 

Sec. 38-321. - Procedure generally. 
(a)  An application for a variance for relief from the literal requirements of a zoning ordinance because of hardship or an application for a special use permit may be made by any person, group or agency by filing with the zoning official an application describing the request and supported by such data and evidence as may be required by the zoning board of review or by the terms of this chapter. In filing for an appeal, variance or special use permit, the applicant, in addition to filing plans and specifications, shall accompany the request with a list of property owners within 200 feet of the property in question and with a filing fee of $100.00, payable to the town. The zoning official shall immediately transmit each application received to the zoning board of review and shall transmit a copy of each application to the planning board. 
(b)  The zoning board of review shall request on applications for special use permits and may request on applications for relief from the literal requirements of this chapter an advisory opinion and recommendations from the planning board. The planning board shall report its findings and recommendations, including a statement on the general consistency with the goals and purposes of the comprehensive plan to the zoning board of review within 30 days of the receipt of the application from that board. 
(c)  The zoning board shall hold a public hearing on any application for variance in an expeditious manner, after receipt, in proper form of an application, and shall give public notice thereof at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation. Notice of hearing shall be sent by certified mail to the applicant, and to at least the abutting owners within 200 feet of the property in question and other interested parties. This notification shall include the road address of the subject property. All notification costs are to be borne by the applicant. Any party may appear at the hearing in person, by agent or by attorney. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. VII, § 1; Ord. of 3-5-1998) 
Sec. 38-322. - Applicability of article. 
    The zoning board of review may grant a special use permit, following site plan review by the planning board, in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in article IX of this chapter, for any use or structure designated as a special use permit in article IV of this chapter or elsewhere in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. VII, § 3) 
Sec. 38-323. - Standards for granting. 
(a)  The zoning board of review may not grant a special use permit unless it finds the following: 
(1)  The use will comply with all applicable requirements and development and performance standards set forth in articles VI and IX of this chapter. 
(2)  The use will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter and the comprehensive plan of the town. 
(3)  The granting of the special use permit will substantially serve the public convenience and welfare. 
(4)  The use will not result in or create conditions inimical to the public health, safety, morals and general welfare. 
(5)  It will not substantially or permanently injure the appropriate use of surrounding property. 
(6)  In addition to the above, the zoning board of review shall consider: 
a.  Access to air, light, views and solar access; 
b.  Public access to waterbodies, rivers and streams; and 
c.  The conservation of energy and energy efficiency. 
(b)  The zoning board of review may not extend or enlarge a special use permit except by granting a new special use permit. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. VII, § 4) 
Sec. 38-324. - Issuance of variances and special use permits. 
(a)  Application. An application for relief from the literal requirements of this chapter because of hardship or an application for a special use permit may be made by any person, group or agency by filing with the zoning official an application describing the request and supported by such data and evidence as may be required by the zoning board of review or by the terms of this chapter. In filing for an appeal, variance or special use permit, the applicant, in addition to filing plans and specifications, shall accompany the request with a list of property owners within 200 feet of the property in question and with a filing fee of $100.00, payable to the town. The zoning official shall immediately transmit each application received to the zoning board of review and shall transmit a copy of each application to the planning board. 
(b)  Procedure. The zoning board of review shall request on applications for special use permits, and may request on applications for relief from the literal requirements of this chapter, an advisory opinion and recommendations from the planning board. The planning board shall report its findings and recommendations, including a statement on the general consistency with the goals and purposes of the comprehensive plan to the zoning board of review within 30 days of the receipt of the application from that board. 
(c)  Public hearing and notice. The zoning board shall hold a public hearing on any application for variance in an expeditious manner, after receipt, in proper form of an application, and shall give public notice thereof at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation. Notice of hearing shall be sent by first class mail to the applicant, and to at least the abutting owners within 200 feet of the property in question and other interested parties. This notification shall include the road address of the subject property. All notification costs are to be borne by the applicant. Any party may appear at the hearing in person, by agent or by attorney. 
(d)  Standards for relief. Standards for relief are as follows: 
(1)  Variance. In granting a variance, the board shall require that evidence to the satisfaction of the following standards be entered into the record of the proceedings: 
a.  The hardship from which the applicant seeks relief is due to the unique characteristics of the subject land or structure and not to the general characteristics of the surrounding area, and is not due to a physical or economic disability of the applicant. 
b.  The hardship is not the result of any prior action of the applicant and does not result primarily from the desire of the applicant to realize greater financial gain. 
c.  The granting of the requested variance will not alter the general character of the surrounding area or impair the intent or purpose of this chapter or the comprehensive plan upon which this chapter is based. 
d.  The relief to be granted is the least relief necessary. 
e.  The zoning board of review shall, in addition to the above standards, require that evidence be entered into the record of the proceedings showing that: 
1.  In granting a use variance, the subject land or structure cannot yield any beneficial use if it is required to conform to the provisions of this chapter. Nonconforming use of neighboring land or structures in the same district and permitted use of lands or structures in an adjacent district shall not be considered in granting a use variance; and 
2.  In granting a dimensional variance, the hardship that will be suffered by the owner of the subject property if the dimensional variance is not granted shall amount to more than a mere inconvenience, which shall mean that there is no other reasonable alternative to enjoy a legally permitted beneficial use of one's property. The fact that a use may be more profitable or that a structure may be more valuable after the relief is granted shall not be grounds for relief. 
(2)  Special use permit. In granting a special use permit, the zoning board of review shall require that evidence to the satisfaction of the following standards be entered into the record of the proceedings: 
a.  The special use is specifically authorized by this chapter. 
b.  The special use meets all of the criteria set forth in the sections of this chapter authorizing such special use. 
c.  The granting of the special use permit will not alter the general character of the surrounding area or impair the intent or purpose of this chapter or the comprehensive plan of the town. 
(e)  Special conditions. In granting a variance or special use permit, or in making any determination upon which it is required to pass after public hearing under this chapter, the board may apply such special conditions that may, in the opinion of the board, be required to promote the intent and purposes of the comprehensive plan of the town and this chapter. Failure to abide by any special conditions attached to a grant shall constitute a zoning violation. Such special conditions shall be based on competent credible evidence on the record, shall be incorporated into the decision, and may include, but are not limited to, provisions for: 
(1)  Minimizing adverse impact of the development upon other land, including the type, intensity, design and performance of activities; 
(2)  Controlling the sequence of development, including when it must be commenced and completed; 
(3)  Controlling the duration of use or development and the time within which any temporary structure must be removed; 
(4)  Ensuring satisfactory installation and maintenance of required public improvements; 
(5)  Designating the exact location and nature of development; and 
(6)  Establishing detailed records by submission of drawings, maps, plats or specifications. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. VII, § 5) 
Secs. 38-325-38-355. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - LAND DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS 

Sec. 38-356. - Residential compounds. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of residential compound development is to provide for the private conservation of underdeveloped or fragile natural resource areas and to provide open space preservation by permitting limited residential building on such tracts of land. 
(b)  Eligibility. 
(1)  Only property which has been continuously in the same ownership for a period of at least five years shall be eligible for residential compound development. For purposes of this section, continuous ownership shall include the period during which parties own property as joint tenants or as tenants-by-entirety and the period during which the surviving joint tenant or tenant-by-the entirety continues to own the property either in his own name or as joint tenant or tenant-by-the-entirety with another; the period during which a decedent has owned the property together with the time when his devisees or heirs-at-law shall own property after the death of the decedent. 
(2)  Frontage for lots created after July 1, 1967, shall be 300 feet or more. Frontage for lots that were preexisting lots of record on July 1, 1967, shall be 50 feet or more. 
(3)  No lot that has been divided after March 5, 1998, shall be eligible for a residential compound. 
(c)  General. Residential compound development shall be reviewed as a minor subdivision in accordance with provisions of chapter 32. 
(d)  Use limitations and dimension requirements. 
(1)  A compound shall include not more than three single-family dwelling units having frontage in common on a public road and sharing a driveway held in common. Two additional units that meet the definition of LMI may be added for a total of five units on the same type of lot. 
(2)  Restrictive covenants shall prohibit further division of land within the compound. 
(3)  The only permitted use shall be single-family residential and uses customarily accessory to residences. 
(4)  The minimum lot size for consideration shall be 30 acres. 
(Ord. of 3-5-1998; Ord. of 10-8-2009, Pt. 1(B)) 
Sec. 38-357. - Development standards for general business mixed use (GBM) development. 
    This designation is characterized by nodes for commercial establishments to provide town-wide shopping and service needs. These may include retail, service, office and related activities, residential and municipal uses. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide a procedure for the evaluation and approval of new integrated general business mixed use developments. The regulations are intended to promote developments which are compatible with surrounding areas and which incorporate buffers or transition areas to reduce potential negative impacts on agricultural or single-family residential areas. The regulations are intended to encourage a mixture of compatible uses to create a sustainable and attractive environment for a wide variety of trades and businesses. The regulations are intended to be flexible, to allow for innovative design techniques, to accommodate unique land uses, and to encourage creative approaches to development issues. 
Foster encourages a coordinated design approach for development within the GBM district with an emphasis on compatibility with the natural environment and surrounding land uses. This coordinated approach will allow for a sufficient mix of uses and accessory uses to create a self-contained or self-sustained development. It allows for planning of a project and calculation of densities over the entire project rather than on an individual lot-by-lot basis. 
A coordinated design approach should: 
  Break up the apparent mass and scale of large structures, and large paved parking areas, in order to ensure that such development is compatible with and does not detract from Foster's character, scale, and sense of place; 
  Help integrate multi-use development with its surroundings; 
  Promote and facilitate a safe and comfortable-pedestrian scale environment; 
  Encourage a mixture of uses and sizes of structures; and 
  Provide safe and accessible parking areas, allowing for safe pedestrian movement. 
It is anticipated that public officials will have considerable involvement in determining the nature of the development through the development plan review process, which will include consideration and application of aspects of both the Foster Land Development and Subdivision Regulations and the Foster Zoning Ordinance. 
Where the requirements of any part of this section may conflict with any other section of the Foster Land Development and Subdivision Regulations or the Foster Zoning Ordinance, this section shall prevail as to, or for, the general business mixed use development. 
(2)  Applicability and procedure. 
a.  General business mixed use developments are permitted in GBM zones as set forth in article III and article IV of this zoning ordinance with the approval of and subject to possible conditions and restrictions imposed by the planning board or zoning board of review pursuant to this section. 
b.  No general business mixed use development shall be undertaken nor any portion of such development be constructed until a plan for such development has been approved by the planning board in accordance with the procedures established by: 
1.  The land development and subdivision regulations of the Town of Foster for major land development and major subdivision, except as detailed in subsection (5) of these standards; and 
2.  Additional procedures and requirements set forth herein for general business mixed use developments. 
c.  Compatibility and interrelation of uses within the general business mixed use developments and coordination of traffic, utilities, parking, public wells, storm-water management, security, public onsite wastewater treatment systems, storage, architecture, open space, infrastructure, and other needs, as well as the entire development's impact on the surrounding area and roadways mandate that the development be considered in its entirety and approved, if appropriate, as a whole and developed as a whole. Phasing of construction may be permitted, as set forth in the land development and subdivision regulations, or as required by the planning board. Improvement guarantees shall be required as set forth in article VIII of the land development and subdivision regulations. 
d.  Applicants for a general business mixed use development under this section shall follow procedures for major land development and major subdivisions (see article VI of the Foster Land Development and Subdivision Regulations) including pre-application meetings, master plan review, preliminary plan review, and final plan review, and all requirements thereof shall be met, except as detailed in subsection (5) of these standards. 
(3)  Minimum land area. 
a.  A planned unit development shall consist of not less than 200,000 square feet of land area which may be developed into mixed use and commercial units as set forth in article II; and section 38-131(3); of Foster's Zoning Ordinance. 
b.  Once a planned unit development has been approved, all land area shown on the plan submitted as part of said planned unit development application, including those areas designated as reserved for future development, shall be dedicated to the development and may not be withdrawn from said development plan or devoted to any other use without the express written consent of the planning board. The board may allow subsequent withdrawal of land from a development, after an appropriate hearing, when such withdrawal will not violate the purpose and intent of this chapter or impair the previously approved plan. 
(4)  Uses. 
a.  Generally. 
1.  Uses are categorized as "permitted use,", "special use permit," and "prohibited use." The planning board may, at its sole option, impose conditions on any use proposal, and the zoning board of review may, at its sole option, impose conditions on a special use permit approval. 
2.  Designation as a special use does not constitute an authorization or an assurance that such use will be permitted without conditions within the planned development. Rather, each application for a special use shall be evaluated as to its internal consistency with the intent of the proposed GBM development, and its probable effect on the intent of said development, the adjacent property, the neighborhood, and on the town; and may be approved or denied as the findings of fact indicate appropriate. 
3.  Nothing herein contained shall preclude the planning board or zoning board of review from requiring multiple conditions for a proposal or to condition the granting of one or more special uses upon the implementation or completion of one portion of a project, during the master plan, preliminary plan, and/or final plan review stages of the application for a planned unit development or during the special use permit review of the application, as appropriate. 
4.  Items to be considered when evaluating a special use include, but are not limited to, the following: 
i.  The desired use will not be detrimental to the intent of the planned unit development or to the surrounding area; 
ii.  It will be compatible with existing and proposed uses within the planned unit development, as well as neighboring land uses; 
iii.  It will not create a nuisance or a hazard in the neighborhood; 
iv.  Adequate protection is afforded to the surrounding properties by the use of open space and plantings, or by decorative fencing; 
v.  Safe vehicular access and adequate parking are provided, and use of pervious surfaces is encouraged; 
vi.  Control of noise, smoke, odors, lighting, and any other objectionable feature is provided; 
vii.  Solar rights of the abutters are provided for; 
viii.  Architectural compatibility within the development and with the surrounding area is illustrated; 
ix.  The proposed conditional use will be in conformance with the purpose and intent of the comprehensive plan and the zoning ordinance of the Town of Foster; 
x.  The health, safety, and welfare of the community are protected; 
xi.  Shared parking/curb cuts or joint use is encouraged, and for some uses may be required, where it is likely that occupants of a vehicle would visit more than one use within a development before departing; 
xii.  Certain parking requirements may be waived, provided that adequate and safe parking is still provided; 
xiii.  Applicant shall demonstrate how the development will utilize shared parking, and shall show all calculations for such parking on the proposed site plan as required under the Foster Zoning Ordinance for such parking. 
5.  Before being granted a special use permit by the zoning board of review, the applicant must show how its application complies with article VII "Special Use Permits and Variances,", section 38-324(d) "Standards for relief-Special use permit" in Foster's Zoning Ordinance. 
b.  Mixed uses. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prevent or discourage the institution or maintenance of two or more uses on any one lot or within any one building in a general business mixed use development and a mix of compatible uses are to be encouraged throughout a general business mixed use development. 
(5)  Expansion of existing uses. 
a.  Expansion of a permitted use within the GBM district is allowed. Expansion of a non-conforming use is prohibited. 
b.  Expansion of a permitted use within the GBM district shall fall under one of the following tiers: 
1.  Original square foot building footprint of 2,500 square feet or less. 
i.  Expansion constituting 100 percent or less of the original square foot building footprint shall require a site plan review with the planning board per article IX of Foster's Zoning Ordinance. 
ii.  Expansion constituting more than 100 percent of the original square foot building footprint shall follow procedures for major land development and major subdivisions per article VI of Foster's Land Development and Subdivision Regulations and shall be subject to the applicable GBM development standards as detailed in subsections (2) through (4). 
2.  Original square foot building footprint of 7,500 square feet or less and greater than 2,500 square feet. 
i.  Expansion constituting 75 percent or less of the original square foot building footprint shall require a site plan review with the planning board per article IX of Foster's Zoning Ordinance. 
ii.  Expansion constituting more than 75 percent of the original square foot building footprint shall follow procedures for major land development and major subdivisions per article VI of Foster's Land Development and Subdivision Regulations and shall be subject to the applicable GBM development standards as detailed in subsections (2) through (4). 
3.  Original square foot building footprint of 10,000 square feet or less and greater than 7,500 square feet. 
i.  Expansion constituting 50 percent or less of the original square foot building footprint shall require a site plan review with the planning board per Article IX of Foster's Zoning Ordinance. 
ii.  Expansion constituting more than 50 percent of the original square foot building footprint shall follow procedures for major land development and major subdivisions per article VI of Foster's Land Development and Subdivision Regulations and shall be subject to the applicable GBM development standards as detailed in subsections (2) through (4). 
4.  Original square foot building footprint of greater than 10,000 square feet. 
i.  Expansion constituting 25 percent or less of the original square foot building footprint shall require a site plan review with the planning board per article IX of Foster's Zoning Ordinance. 
ii.  Expansion constituting more than 25 percent of the original square foot building footprint shall follow procedures for major land development and major subdivisions per article VI of Foster's Land Development and Subdivision Regulations and shall be subject to the applicable GBM development standards as detailed in subsections (2) through (4). 
(Ord. of 9-9-2010, art. VIII, § 3; Ord. of 4-28-2016) 
Secs. 38-358-38-385. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - SITE PLAN REVIEW 

Sec. 38-386. - Requirements and purpose of article. 
    Every applicant for a use variance or a special use permit under this chapter and for all commercial and industrial development under the town subdivision regulations must submit a site plan for review. The town planner shall coordinate and manage the site plan review process, evaluate the environmental impact of proposed projects, and otherwise assist the planning board and zoning board of review with respect to site plan review. Site plan review and approval of subdivisions is governed by the town's subdivision regulations. The purpose of the site plan review process is to ensure that the zoning board of review has before it sufficient information to determine whether a variance or special use permit will promote the health, safety and general welfare of the community and will conform to the intent and requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. IX, § 1) 
Sec. 38-387. - Presubmission conference. 
    Before submitting a site plan, an applicant for site plan review shall meet with the town planner to discuss the proposed project and to establish what documents and information the applicant must submit. The required contents of the site plan will depend on the scope and complexity of the proposed project. The town planner will indicate the required contents on a site plan application checklist. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. IX, § 2) 
Sec. 38-388. - Contents of site plan. 
    A site plan shall be drawn to scale by a registered architect or engineer, and may require multiple drawings, including maps, plans, elevations, sections and narrative documents. Site plans shall include as much of the following information as the planning board deems necessary to evaluate the proposed project. The project will not be scheduled for review, nor will it have vesting rights pursuant to article XI of this chapter unless the planning board is satisfied as to the content of the site plan submission according to the appropriate checklist as determined by the town planner. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. IX, § 3) 
Sec. 38-389. - Site plan/building design standards for multifamily dwellings. 
(a)  A site plan for a multifamily unit shall be prepared by a registered architect or engineer, and shall show the following, together with appropriate dimensions: 
(1)  Proposed name of the development, name of developer and owner; 
(2)  Lot layout by legal descriptions; 
(3)  Names and addresses of applicant and designer of the plan; 
(4)  Scale of plan: 
a.  Overall site plan: One inch = 100 feet; and 
b.  Immediate development area: One inch = 20 feet; 
(5)  Topographic map shall show existing ground contours over the area proposed for development as follows: minimum of five feet contour intervals and spot elevations at appropriate locations to substantiate design features; 
(6)  Boundary line of development indicated by a solid line and the total acreage encompassed thereby; names of abutting property owners indicated; 
(7)  Location, widths and names of all existing or prior platted roads, railroad and utility rights-of-way, parks and other public open spaces, permanent buildings and structures, houses or permanent easements, and town boundary lines within 1,000 feet of the development; 
(8)  Existing sewers, wells, water mains, drainage culverts and other underground facilities within the tract, indicating pipe sizes, grades, manholes and location; 
(9)  Location, arrangement and dimensions of automobile parking spaces, width of aisles, width of bays and angle of parking; 
(10)  Location and dimensions of vehicular drives, entrances and exits, acceleration and deceleration lanes; location and dimensions of pedestrian entrances, exits, walks and walkways; 
(11)  Storm drainage system and sanitary sewerage disposal systems, as approved; 
(12)  Location, height and materials of walls, fences, and screen plantings; 
(13)  Lighting (exterior); 
(14)  Ground cover, finished grades, slopes, banks and ditches; 
(15)  Location and general exterior dimensions of principal and accessory buildings and signs; 
(16)  The stages, if any, to be followed in the construction of the development; and 
(17)  The developer shall submit architectural floor plans and elevations of the principal buildings for review of their general designs and selection of exterior materials for the intended use and compatibility with the site and surrounding established uses. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. IX, § 4) 
Sec. 38-390. - Site plan for accessory nonfamily dwelling units. 
    This section is reserved. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. IX, § 5) 
Sec. 38-391. - Site plan for residential compounds. 
    This section is reserved. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. IX, § 6) 
Sec. 38-392. - Site plan for cluster development. 
    This section is reserved. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. IX, § 7) 
Sec. 38-393. - Site plan for senior citizens housing. 
    See section 38-389. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. IX, § 8) 
Sec. 38-394. - Site plan for commercial and industrial development. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to ensure the orderly development and integration of commercial, industrial and institutional projects into the community; provide for erosion control and stormwater management; prevent surface water and groundwater pollution; minimize traffic hazards; mitigate nuisances caused by noise, dust or lights; and protect and enhance the ecology and physical appearance of the community. 
(b)  Review of plan required. No zoning certificate or building permit shall be issued for any commercial building or other commercial construction in any zone of the town, or for any institutional use in an GBM or NC zone, until a site plan review of the proposed construction has been conducted by the planning board. In addition, any use in the GBM, NC or MI zone which requires a special use permit shall be subject to a site review by the planning board before a public hearing is held by the zoning board of review. It shall also be required for any enlargement in size of any building or change in use or actual use of any building including accessory structures. Site plan review is not required for repairs or alterations to existing buildings or structures, provided that such work does not increase the floor area of any building or structure and does not change the actual use thereof. As part of the site plan review process, the design of proposed buildings may be reviewed to determine compatibility with the site and with section 5.1 of the town's comprehensive plan. 
(c)  Meeting with town planner. Prior to submission of the formal plan, an applicant for a commercial site review shall make an appointment to meet with the town planner to confirm the need for such review, and for informal discussion of the project and site review application requirements and procedure. 
(d)  Site plan requirements. All site plans shall be prepared by a registered architect or engineer. Six copies of the site plan, drawn at a scale no smaller than one inch equals 40 feet, shall be submitted showing the following information unless waived by the planning board: 
(1)  Name of the proposed development and names and addresses of the developer and property owners, name of the registered architect or engineer designing the plan and his stamp of registration. 
(2)  Locus map at a scale of one inch equals 1,000 feet. 
(3)  Date, north arrow, graphic scale, contours at two-foot intervals and where slopes are three percent or less at one-foot contour intervals. 
(4)  Boundary line, dimensions, zoning classification and area of lot or tract; abutting property owners within 400 feet; and lot and plat numbers. 
(5)  Location and general exterior dimensions of existing structures and signs. 
(6)  Existing and proposed sewers, water mains, culverts and other underground appurtenances within and adjacent to the lot or tract, pipe sizes, grades, manholes and locations. 
(7)  Distance on all sides between buildings and property lines as measured on the site. 
(8)  Building use including number of employees and/or number of units; e.g., beds, offices and/or employees. 
(9)  Location, arrangement and dimensions of automobile parking spaces, width of aisles, width of bays and angle of parking. 
(10)  Location, arrangement and dimensions of off-street loading spaces. 
(11)  Location and dimensions of vehicular drives; entrances and exits; acceleration and deceleration lanes; and location and dimension of pedestrian entrances, exits, walks and walkways. 
(12)  Location, widths and names of all existing or prior platted roads, railroad and utility rights-of-way, parks and other public open spaces, permanent buildings and structures, houses or permanent easements, and section and municipal boundary lines, within 400 feet of the development. 
(13)  Method of solid waste disposal and screening of refuse areas. 
(14)  Location, type, intensity of illumination and height of all outdoor lighting fixtures. 
(15)  Location and exterior dimensions of proposed principal and accessory buildings and signs. 
(16)  Finished grades, slopes, banks and ditches. 
(17)  Landscaping retained and created showing botanical name, location and approximate size of plantings and screen plantings. 
(18)  Location, height and materials of walls and fences. 
(19)  An architectural rendering of plans or building elevations indicating exterior building design. 
(20)  Total floor area and ground coverage of each proposed building and structure and percentage of lot covered by each building or structure. 
(21)  The stages, if any, to be followed in the construction of the development, if it is to be developed in sections. 
(22)  Accompanying information shall include: 
a.  Soil erosion and stormwater runoff control plans in accordance with the erosion and sediment control regulations of chapter 26. 
b.  A report by the state department of environmental management as to the suitability of the soil and design of individual sewage disposal. 
c.  Location and extent of any wetlands and approval of state agencies for alteration of, or construction within, wetland areas, determination of special flood hazard requirements. 
d.  Summary of existing and proposed easements, restrictions and covenants placed on the property. 
(e)  Action on commercial and industrial site plans not requiring zoning board action. Action on commercial and industrial site plans not requiring zoning board of review action shall be as follows: 
(1)  Within 45 days of the receipt of a complete site plan for a commercial or industrial use, the planning board will schedule a public hearing. At least seven days prior to the hearing, the planning board shall give written notice of the time and place of such hearing, by certified mail, to the applicant and to persons owning land abutting the site. The board shall also publish, in a newspaper of general circulation in the town, a notice of such hearing. 
(2)  The planning board shall review the site plan for compliance with all articles of this chapter. The applicant shall be advised of any required changes and/or additions to comply with the requirements of this section. The planning board will approve, subject to modifications, or disapprove the site plan. Within 30 days after the date of the close of the public hearing, including the adjourned date thereof, the board shall notify the applicant in writing of its decision stating its reasons if the plan is disapproved. 
(f)  Performance standards. The following criteria are to be used by the planning board in judging applications for site plan reviews and shall serve as minimum requirements for approval of the site plan. The site plan shall be approved, unless, in the judgment of the planning board, the applicant is not able to meet one or more of the following standards. In all instances, the burden of proof shall be on the applicant and such burden of proof shall include the production of evidence necessary to complete the application. 
(1)  Landscape. The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state insofar as practicable by minimizing tree removal, disturbance of the soil and retaining existing vegetation during and after construction. After construction is completed, landscaping shall be installed according to the landscaping design shown on the site plan that will define, soften or screen the appearance of the off-road parking areas from the public right-of-way and abutting properties and/or structures in order to enhance the design or buildings or site, and to minimize the encroachment of the proposed use on neighboring land uses. 
(2)  Visual relationship of buildings. Proposed structures shall be related harmoniously to the terrain and to the existing buildings in the vicinity which have a visual relationship to the proposed buildings. Special attention shall be paid to the bulk, location and height of buildings and such natural features such as slope, soil type and drainageways. 
(3)  Vehicular access. The proposed site layout shall provide for safe access and egress from public and private roads by providing adequate location, numbers and control of access points, including site distances, turning lanes and traffic signalization when required by existing and projected flow on the municipal road systems. Provisions shall be made providing and maintaining safe and convenient emergency vehicle access to all buildings and structures on the site at all times. The development shall not impose unreasonable burdens on the circulation system of the town. Town roads inadequate to handle the volume of traffic generated by the development shall be improved by the applicant to provide safe passage. The developer may be required to provide a traffic impact report prepared by a certified traffic engineer if there are unusual safety concerns such as inadequate sight distance or a history of traffic accidents in the area proposed for development. 
(4)  Parking and circulation. The layout and design of all means of vehicular and pedestrian circulation, including walkways, interior drives and parking areas, shall provide for safe general interior circulation, separation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, service traffic, loading areas and arrangement and use of parking areas. 
(5)  Stormwater runoff and erosion control. Adequate provisions shall be made for stormwater runoff so that removal of surface water shall not adversely affect neighboring properties, downstream water quality, soil erosion or the storm drainage system. Whenever possible, onsite absorption of runoff waters shall be utilized to minimize discharges from the site. Provisions will be made to control erosion during and after construction. Reference is made to the state erosion and sediment control handbook. 
(6)  Existing utilities. The development shall not impose unreasonable burdens on sewers, sanitary and storm drains, water lines or other public utilities. 
(7)  Advertising features. The size, location, design, lighting and materials of all exterior signs and outdoor advertising structures shall be compatible with the design of the proposed buildings and structures and surrounding properties and conform with article VI of this chapter. 
(8)  Special features of the development. Exposed storage areas, exposed machinery installation, service areas, truck loading areas, utilities, buildings and similar structures shall have sufficient setbacks and screening to provide an audiovisual buffer sufficient to minimize their adverse impact on other land uses within the development area and surrounding properties. 
(9)  Exterior lighting. All exterior lighting shall be designed to minimize impact on neighboring properties. 
(10)  Municipal services. The development will not have an unreasonable impact on the municipal road system, fire department, police department, solid waste program, schools, open spaces, recreational programs and facilities, and other municipal services and facilities. 
(11)  Water pollution. In making this determination, it shall at least include the elevation of the land above sea level and its relation to the floodplains, the nature of soils and subsoils and their ability to adequately support waste disposal and other DEM approved discharge; the slope of the land and its effect on effluents; the aquifer and aquifer recharge areas; the availability of streams for surface runoff; and the applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances, codes and regulations. 
(12)  Air pollution. The use of the site shall not reduce the ambient air quality. In making this determination, the applicant shall consult federal and state authorities to determine air quality laws and regulations. 
(13)  Water supply. Sufficient water must be available for reasonably foreseeable needs of the development and not cause any unreasonable burden on the existing water supply if this supply is utilized. 
(14)  Sewage disposal. Adequate sewage waste disposal must be provided. 
(15)  Unique areas. There must not be any undue adverse affect on the scenic or natural beauty of the areas, aesthetics, historic sites, or rare and irreplaceable natural areas. 
(16)  Capacity. The applicant has adequate financial and technical capacity to meet the above standards. 
(17)  Waterbodies. Whenever the proposed development is situated, in whole or in part, within 300 feet of any pond, lake, river or other freshwater wetland, it will not adversely affect the quality of such body of water or unreasonably affect the shoreline of such body of water. There will be no disturbance of soil within 100 feet of the outer edge of a wetland. 
(g)  General provisions. General provisions concerning site plans for commercial and industrial development are as follows: 
(1)  The board may waive, by majority vote, site plan approval requirements or any specific provisions thereof for any change in use, and construction of an addition or accessory building to any other principal building, provided that the use is subordinate and customarily incidental to the principal use and provided that: 
a.  Such building area does not exceed 25 percent of the existing buildings or 1,500 square feet, whichever is less. 
b.  Such building does not exceed one story. 
c.  Such building conforms to all requirements of the district in which it is located or any other requirements in this chapter. 
d.  No site improvements are intended, required or will result from such building including, but not limited to, the development of additional parking spaces. 
e.  The change of actual use does not affect existing circulation, drainage, landscaping, buffering, lighting or other considerations of site plan review. 
(2)  The planning board may require the filing of a performance bond or the execution of a conditional agreement with the municipality by the applicant. 
(3)  All construction performed under the authorization of a building permit issued for development within the scope of this chapter shall be in conformance with the approved site plan. 
(4)  Change of approved site plan. If the applicant wants to make an amendment to an approved site plan, a written request shall be submitted to the planning board. If, in the opinion of the planning board, a requested change is sufficiently substantial, the planning board shall require the submission of any amended site plan. The procedure for the consideration of such written request or of such amended site plan shall be the same as that for consideration of a site plan under subsections (c), (d) and (e) of this section. 
(5)  Site plan procedure. Each applicant for site plan approval shall file with the town clerk six copies of the proposed site plan, 24 inches by 36 inches in size at a scale no smaller than one inch equals 40 feet; the required application form; and a $75.00 application fee. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. IX, § 9; Ord. of 9-9-2010) 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 12. 
Secs. 38-395-38-425. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - ADOPTION OR AMENDMENT 

Sec. 38-426. - Authority. 
(a)  For the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, morals and general welfare, in addition to reasons set forth in section 38-1, the town council hereby adopts and sets forth the procedure of this article to amend or repeal, and to provide for the administration, interpretation, and enforcement of this chapter, or any part thereof, on its own motion, on the petition of any person, group, or corporation, or on the recommendation of the planning board. 
(b)  This chapter, and all amendments thereto, shall be consistent with the town's duly adopted comprehensive plan and shall provide for the implementation of this plan. 
(c)  The town council shall refer every proposed amendment to the planning board for review and recommendation prior to the public hearing on the amendment. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. X, § 1) 
Sec. 38-427. - Procedure for adoption or amendment. 
(a)  Upon application to the town council and filing at the office of the town clerk, all proposals for adoption, amendment or repeal of this chapter or zoning maps, shall be referred to the planning board. 
(b)  All applications shall be accompanied by a filing fee of $150.00, in addition to a fee of $50.00, to cover expenses, both made payable to the town. These two fees must be received by the town clerk before action on the proposed amendment can be taken. Should expenses incidental to the amendment fall below the fees collected, the balance shall be returned to the applicant. Should expenses exceed fees collected, the applicant shall be billed accordingly. 
(c)  Upon receipt of such an application, the town clerk shall notify the planning board, which shall submit an advisory opinion to the town council within 45 days. 
(d)  The town council shall hold a public hearing within 65 days of the receipt of the proposal, giving proper notice as described in section 38-431. 
(e)  A decision shall be rendered on any such proposal within 45 days after the date of completion of the public hearing. The provisions of this subsection pertaining to deadlines shall not be construed to apply to any extension consented to by the applicant. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. X, § 2) 
Sec. 38-428. - Content of petition, motion or recommendation. 
    Any petition, motion or recommendation for an amendment to this chapter shall be made in writing, and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  A precise description of the proposed amendment or change; 
(2)  A precise description of the property which is the subject of the proposed amendment, including its location, the exact boundaries, and the extent and nature of the improvement; 
(3)  The full name and address of the owners of record and beneficial owners of the subject property; and 
(4)  The full names and addresses of the owners of all property that abuts the subject property. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. X, § 3) 
Sec. 38-429. - Review by planning board. 
(a)  Submission; evaluation. All materials and information submitted in support of a proposed amendment shall be submitted to the planning board. The planning board shall solicit comments and/or other technical assistance from all relevant town departments, officers or commissions in order to evaluate the potential impact of the amendment on the environment, resources and facilities of the town. 
(b)  Proposals to amend the text of this chapter. The planning board, in evaluating proposals to amend the text of this chapter, shall consider the following: 
(1)  Whether the amendment is consistent with the aims and principles embodied in this chapter; 
(2)  Whether the amendment is consistent with the town's comprehensive plan; 
(3)  How and where the amendment will affect the town's land uses, buildings and facilities; 
(4)  How and where the amendment will affect the town's natural land and water resources; and 
(5)  Whether and how the amendment will affect other regulations. 
(c)  Proposals to amend the official zoning map. The planning board, in evaluating proposals to amend the town's official zoning map, shall consider the following: 
(1)  Whether the uses permitted by the proposed amendment are appropriate in the affected area; 
(2)  Whether existing public facilities, utilities and services, including roads, are adequate to serve the demand that may result from the proposed amendment; and, if not, whether adequate public facilities, utilities and services are likely to be created; 
(3)  Whether the proposed amendment is consistent with existing or proposed plans in the vicinity of the affected area; and 
(4)  Whether the proposed amendment will promote the development of the town as contemplated in the town's comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. X, § 4) 
Sec. 38-430. - Planning board report. 
    Following its review, the planning board shall prepare a written report and recommendation for the town council. The report shall include a discussion of the factors of this article and the reasons supporting the recommendation. The report shall include: 
(1)  A statement on the general consistency of the proposal with the town's comprehensive plan, including the goals and policies statement, the implementation program, and all other applicable elements of the comprehensive plan; and 
(2)  A demonstration of recognition and consideration of each of the applicable purposes of zoning, as presented in article I of this chapter. 
If the planning board recommends that the town council adopt the amendment, the report shall also describe any changed conditions which warrant the amendment. The failure of the planning board to submit a report to the town council shall be deemed to constitute a recommendation for adoption of the proposed amendment. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. X, § 5) 
Sec. 38-431. - Notice and hearing requirements. 
(a)  No zoning ordinance shall be adopted, repealed or amended until after a public hearing has been held upon the question before the town council. The town council shall first give notice of such public hearing by publication of notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the town at least once each week for three consecutive weeks prior to the date of such hearing, which may include the week in which the hearing is to be held, at which hearing opportunity shall be given to all persons interested to be heard upon the matter to the proposed ordinance. Written notice, which may be a copy of the newspaper notice, shall be mailed to the associate director of the division of planning of the state department of administration and, where applicable, to the parties specified in subsections (b), (c), (d) and (e) of this section at least two weeks prior to the hearing. Such newspaper notice shall be published as a display advertisement, using a type size at least as large as the normal type size used by the newspaper in its news articles, and shall: 
(1)  Specify the place of the hearing and the date and time of its commencement; 
(2)  Indicate that adoption, amendment or repeal of a zoning ordinance is under consideration; 
(3)  Contain a statement of the proposed amendments to the ordinance that may be printed once in its entirety, or summarize or describe the matter under consideration; 
(4)  Advise those interested where and when a copy of the matter under consideration may be obtained or examined and copied; and 
(5)  State that the proposal shown thereon may be altered or amended prior to the close of the public hearing without further advertising, as a result of further study or because of the views expressed at the public hearing. Any such alteration or amendment must be presented for comment in the course of the hearing. 
(b)  Where a proposed general amendment to an existing zoning ordinance includes changes in an existing zoning map, public notice shall be given as required by subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Where a proposed general amendment to an existing zoning ordinance includes a specific change in a zoning district map but does not affect districts generally, public notice shall be given as required in subsection (a) of this section with the additional requirements that: 
(1)  Notice shall include a map showing the existing and proposed boundaries, zoning district boundaries, and existing roads and their names, and town boundaries, where appropriate; and 
(2)  Written notice of the date, time and place of the public hearing and the nature and purpose thereof shall be sent to all owners of real property whose property is located within 200 feet of the perimeter of the area proposed for change, whether within the town or within an adjacent town in which the property is located. 
(d)  Notice of a public hearing shall be sent by first class mail to the town council of any town to which one or more of the following pertain: 
(1)  Which is located within 200 feet of the boundary of the area proposed for change; or 
(2)  Where there is public or quasipublic water source, or private water source that is used or is suitable for use as a public water source, within 2,000 feet of any real property that is the subject of a proposed zoning change, regardless of municipal boundaries. 
(e)  Notice of a public hearing shall be sent to the governing body of any state or municipal water department or agency, special water district or private water company that has riparian rights to a surface water resource and/or surface watershed that is used, or is suitable for use, as a public water source and that is within 2,000 feet of any real property which is the subject of a proposed zoning change; provided, however, that the governing body of any state or municipal water company has filed with the building inspector in the town a map survey, which shall be kept as a public record, showing areas of surface water resources and/or watersheds and parcels of land within 2,000 feet thereof. 
(f)  No defect in the form of any notice under this section shall render any ordinance or amendment invalid, unless such defect is found to be intentional or misleading. 
(g)  Costs of any notice required under this section shall be borne by the applicant. 
(h)  In granting a zoning ordinance amendment, the town council may limit the change to one or more of the permitted uses in the zone to which the subject land is rezoned, and impose such limitation: 
(1)  Requiring the petitioner to obtain a permit or approval from any and all federal, state or local governmental agencies having jurisdiction over the land and use which are subject to the zoning change; 
(2)  Relating to the effectiveness or continued effectiveness of the zoning change; and/or 
(3)  Relating to the use of the land as it deems necessary. 
The building inspector and the town clerk shall cause the limitations and conditions so imposed to be clearly noted on the zoning map and recorded in the land evidence records; provided, however, that in the case of a conditional zone change, the limitations, restrictions and conditions shall not be noted on the zoning map until the zone change has become effective. If the permitted use for which the land has been rezoned is abandoned or if the land is not used for the requested purpose for a period of two years or more after the zone change becomes effective, the town council may, after a public hearing as set forth in this section, change the land to its original zoning use before such petition was filed. If any limitation, condition or restriction in an ordinance amendment is held to be invalid by a court in any action, that holding shall not cause the remainder of the ordinance to be invalid. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. X, § 6) 
Secs. 38-432-38-465. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - VESTED RIGHTS[8] 

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
ORDINANCES 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances of the town used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the codification and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code  5- 6-1965(1)(Ord.) I-IV 16-56-16-59 V-XI 16-81-16-87 XII 16-60 XIII 16-32, 16-33 XV 16-31  5- 6-1965(2)(Ord.) I 16-121 II, III 16-151, 16-152 IV-VI 16-122-16-124 VIII 16-126 X 16-125  6-17-1965(Ord.) 1 12-261 I 12-286 16-32 II-VI 12-287-12-291 IX 12-262  4- 6-1967(Ord.) 16-59 11- 1-1968(Ord.) I-IX 8-216-8-224 X 8-191 XII 8-225  7- 1-1971(Ord.) 1 16-57  6- 6-1974(Ord.) 1 34-32  3-10-1977(Ord.) I-III 8-126-8-128  5- 5-1977(Ord.) 1 8-126  4- 9-1981(Ord.) 1 8-126  6-18-1981(1)(Ord.) I, II 36-31  6-18-1981(2)(Ord.) 1, 2 36-32  6-18-1981(3)(Ord.) I, II 36-33  7-23-1981(Ord.) 8-31 1-V 8-32-8-36  2- 4-1982(Ord.) I, II 18-31, 18-32  9- 9-1982(Ord.) 1 6-126 2, 3 6-96 4-8 6-127-6-131 9 6-99 10 6-101 11 6-98 12 6-132 13 6-100 14 6-97 16 6-102 11- 6-1986(Ord.) 1 2-87 2 2-86 3 2-88  8- 6-1987(Ord.) 1, 2 28-1, 28-2 12-10-1987(Ord.) art. I, § 1 26-1 art. I, § 2 26-36 art. II, § 1 26-37 art. II, § 2 26-2 art. III, § 1 26-4 art. IV, § 1(a)- 26-81-26-85 art. IV, § 1(e) art. V, § 1(a)- 26-86-26-89 art. V, § 1(d) art. VI, § 1(a)- 26-38-26-41 art. VI, § 1(d) art. VI, § 2- 26-42-26-44 art. VI, § 4 art. VII, § 1 26-45 art. VIII, § 1, 26-46, 26-47 art. VIII, § 2 art. IX, § 1 26-3  4- 6-1989(1)(Ord.) 1-5 2-1  4- 6-1989(2)(Ord.) I 22-31 II(A)-II(C) 22-51-22-53 III(A)-III(D) 22-76-22-79  9-21-1989(Ord.) 1-5 2-61-2-65 11- 9-1989(Ord.) 30-1  1- 4-1990(1)(Ord.) 1-3 4-33-4-35 4 4-31 5-15 4-36-4-46 16 4-32 17, 18 4-47, 4-48  1- 4-1990(2)(Ord.) 1 12-66 2-14 12-91-12-103  3- 8-1990(Ord.) 1-3 12-136-12-138 4-7 12-161-12-164 12-20-1990(Ord.) 1-3 12-31-12-33  8-22-1991(Ord.) I 12-263, 12-264 VI 12-291  6- 3-1994(Ord.) 1 38-191  6-23-1994(Ord.) art. I, 38-1, 38-2 art. II art. III, § 6 38-131 art. III, § 8 38-132 art. IV, § 13, 38-192, 38-193 art. IV, § 14 art. V, § 1- 38-226-38-229 art. V, § 4 art. V, § 4- 38-230-38-238 art. V, § 12 art. VI, § 1- 38-272-38-290 art. VI, § 19 art. VI(intro. ¶) 38-271 art. VII, § 1 38-321 art. VII, § 3- 38-322-38-324 art. VII, § 5 art. IX, § 1- 38-386-38-394 art. IX, § 9 art. X, § 1- 38-426-38-431 art. X, § 6 art. XI, § 1, 38-36, 38-37 art. XI, § 2 art. XI, § 3A 38-61 art. XI, § 3B 38-62 art. XI, § 3C 38-63 art. XI, § 3D 38-64 art. XI, § 3E 38-65 art. XI, § 3F 38-66 art. XI, § 3H 38-67 art. XI, § 3G 38-3 art. XII, § 1- 38-91-38-95 art. XII, § 5 art. XIII 38-96 art. XIV, § 1- 38-467-38-470 art. XIV, § 4 art. XIV(intro. ¶) 38-466  9- 7-1995(Ord.) 1 28-32 2 28-31 3-15 28-33-28-45 17 28-46  9-21-1995(Ord.) 1 38-191 10- 5-1995(1)(Ord.) 1-3 4-71-4-73 5 4-74 10- 5-1995(2)(Ord.) I-XI 6-51-6-61 12-20-1995(Ord.) I(A)-I(D) 32-1-32-4 II 32-5 III(A)-III(G) 32-106-32-112 IV 32-146 V 32-161 VI 32-181 VI(A)-VI(E) 32-182-32-186 VII 32-221 VII(A)-VII(C) 32-222-32-224 VIII 32-256 VIII(A)-VIII(F) 32-257-32-262 VIII(F) 32-264 VIII(G) 32-263 IX(A), IX(B) 32-296, 32-297 X 32-331 X(A)-X(D) 32-332-32-335 XI(A)-XI(D) 32-41-32-44 XII-XV 32-45-32-48 XVI(A)-XVI(C) 32-71-32-73  3-20-1997(Ord.) 38-191  2-19-1998(Ord.) 38-191  3- 5-1998(Ord.) 38-2 38-191 38-229-38-238 38-277 38-321 38-356 11-19-1998(Ord.) 38-191 38-291 00-14-1  1- 6-2000 I 2-136-2-138  6-21-2001(Ord.) 38-191  1-24-2002(Ord.) 38-191 38-291  4-18-2002(Ord.) 2-101  5- 8-2003(1)(Ord.) 2-86-2-88  5- 8-2003(2)(Ord.) 1 12-31  3-24-2005(Ord.) 1-5       Added 30-2  6- 8-2006(Ord.) 34-1  3- 2-2009(Ord.) 26-131-26-137 10- 8-2009(Ord.) Pt. 1(A) 38-2 Pt. 1(B) 38-356 Pt. 1(C) 38-281 Pt. 2(A) 32-5 Pt. 2(B)       Added 32-361-26-367  9- 9-2010(Ord.) 38-2, 38-131, 38-132, 38-191, 38-192, 38-272, 38-281 art. VIII, § 3       Added 38-357 38-394  3-18-2012(Ord.) 1-15 28-31-28-45  8-23-2012(Ord.) I-VIII       Added 2-102  7-11-2013(Ord.) 1 8-102 2 8-126  6-25-2015(1)(Ord.) 38-191  6-25-2015(2)(Ord.) 38-226  7-23-2015(Ord.) 38-191 art. VI, § 23       Added 38-292  8-27-2015(1)(Ord.) 38-191  8-27-2015(2)(Ord.) 38-273  8-27-2015(3)(Ord.) 38-193  1-14-2016(1)(Ord.) 38-277  1-14-2016(2)(Ord.) 38-288  1-14-2016(3)(Ord.) 38-192  1-14-2016(4)(Ord.) 38-191  3-10-2016(Ord.) art. VI, § 24       Added 38-293  4-28-2016(Ord.) 38-357  5- 3-2016(Ord.) 1       Added 34-2  7-12-2016(Ord.) I-X       Added 34-51-34-60  5-25-2017(Ord.)       Added 8-71  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to General Laws of Rhode Island. 
G.L. 1956 
Section Section  
this Code 1-3-2 38-2 2-1-1-2-1-18 38-277 2-1-18 et seq. 26-81 32-4 3-1-1 et seq. Ch. 4 4-31 4-1-1 et seq. Ch. 8 4-4-2018 Ch. 8 4-13-1 Ch. 8 4-13-4 8-126 4-13-2011 8-221 4-13-2013 Ch. 8 4-13-2015.1 Ch. 8, Art. III, 
Div. 2 4-13-2029 et seq. Ch. 8, Art. III, 
Div. 4 4-15-1 et seq. Ch. 8 5-1-1 et seq. Ch. 12 5-2-2010 Ch. 6, Art. III 5-6-1 et seq. Ch. 10 5-11-1.1 et seq. Ch. 12, Art. IV 12-136 5-11-2018 Ch. 12, Art. IV 5-20-1 et seq. Ch. 10 5-21-1 12-224 5-22-1 38-2 5-22-1 et seq. Ch. 6 5-22-5 Ch. 6 5-22-2012 6-56 6-60 11-1-1 et seq. Ch. 20 11-30-1 Ch. 18 11-45-1 20-1 11-47-1 et seq. 12-99 12-102 20-3 11-47-39 Ch. 12, Art. III 11-47-39 et seq. 12-66 12-96 16-19-1 et seq. 2-136 17-1-5.1 Cht., § 2.05 17-11-6 Cht., § 3.04 ch. 19.1 28-32 ch. 23-18.8 28-31 23-18.8-2 28-43 ch. 23-18.9 28-31 23-18.9-1 et seq. Ch. 28 ch. 23-19 28-31 23-19.1-1 et seq. Ch. 28 23-19.2-1 Ch. 8 23-19.2-8 Ch. 10 23-27.3 et al. Cht., § 6.05 23-27.3-100.0 et seq. Ch. 10 23-27.3-100.1.7 10-36 23-27.3-107.1.1 10-2 23-27.3-108.0 Cht., § 6.05 23-27.3-108.1 Cht., § 6.05 23-27.3-113.1 Ch. 10, Art. III 23-27.3-114.2 10-109 23-27.3-116.0 et seq. 10-39 23-27.3-118.0 10-71 23-27.3-124.0 et seq. 12-31 23-27.3-127.2 10-38 23-28.5-1 et seq. Ch. 10 24-3-1 et seq. Ch. 30 24-4-1 et seq. Ch. 30 24-5-1 et seq. Ch. 30 24-6-1 et seq. Ch. 30 24-7-1 et seq. Ch. 30 24-15-9 et seq. 32-296 31-12-11-31-12-13 Ch. 36 31-13-3 Ch. 36 31-21-1 et seq. Ch. 36, Art. II 31-27-12 et seq. Ch. 36 31-44-1 et seq. Ch. 16 32-1-2 et seq. Ch. 22 32-3-1 Ch. 22 34-13-1 et seq. 32-43 34-39-1 et seq. 32-106 37-2-56 Cht., § 14.02 38-2-1 et seq. 2-1 38-2-4 2-1 38-2-8 2-1 40.1-24-1 et seq. 38-2 42-46-1 et seq. 22-78 42-72.1-1 et seq. 38-2 tit. 42, ch. 64.22 34-53 44-1-1 et seq. Ch. 34 44-3-3 34-54 34-31 44-3-3 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. II 34-54 44-3-9 34-51 34-54 44-3-21 34-54 38-292 44-4-6 34-53 44-5-1 et seq. Ch. 34 44-5-11 Cht., § 2.22 44-5-11.8 34-1 44-5-3 et seq. Ch. 34 45-1-1 et seq. Ch. 2 45-2-1 Char. Arts. I-XV 45-2-2 Ch. 34 45-4-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III 45-5-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II 45-5-18 Char. Arts. I-XV 45-6-3 20-2 45-6-6 Ch. 20 45-6.1-1 et seq. Ch. 36 Ch. 36, Art. II 45-15-16 Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 2 45-19-1 et seq. Ch. 14 45-22-1 et seq. Ch. 24 Ch. 24, Art. II 24-31 45-22.2-1 et seq. 10-101 32-73 38-1, 38-2 45-22.2-4 38-2 45-22.2-4(24) 32-5 45-23-1 et seq. 32-42 45-23-25 et seq. Ch. 32 32-1 32-4 45-23-32 32-4 45-23-61 38-292 45-23-64 32-161 45-23-71 32-73 45-24-1 et seq. 38-2 45-24-27 et seq. 32-73 Ch. 38 45-24-31 38-2 45-24-34, 
45-24-35 38-1, 38-2 45-24-36 Ch. 38, Art. III 45-24-38 38-226 45-24-39 Ch. 38, Art. V 45-24-41 Ch. 38, Art. VII 38-2 38-63 45-24-42 Ch. 38, Art. VII 38-2 45-24-44 10-105 10-112 32-183 Ch. 38, Art. XI 45-24-51 38-96 45-24-53 32-185 32-333 45-24-54 Ch. 38, Art. II 45-24-56 et seq. Ch. 38, Art. II, 
Div. 2 45-24-64 Ch. 38, Art. II, 
Div. 3 45-24.2-1 et seq. Ch. 10 45-24.3-1 et seq. Ch. 10 45-46-1 26-36 45-46-1 et seq. Ch. 26 45-46-4 Ch. 26 45-46-4, 
45-46-5 26-36 ch. 45-53 38-281 45-53-1 et seq. 10-107 45-53-3(5) 10-108 45-53-6(f)(2) 32-307 45-55-8.1 Cht., § 14.02 45-55-9 Cht., § 14.02 46-12-1 38-2 46-13.1-3 38-2  
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Vested rights, G.L. 1956, § 45-24-44. 

Sec. 38-466. - Generally. 
    An applicant shall be vested, and an application shall be deemed substantially complete for the purposes of this article if the following occurs. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. XIV, (intro. ¶)) 
Sec. 38-467. - Development not requiring planning board or zoning board approval. 
    Where no planning board approval or zoning board approval is required, an applicant is vested when the building inspector certifies that the application (for a building permit) is complete. The applicant is vested under this chapter and regulations in effect at the time of certification, not on the date of the application. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. XIV, § 1) 
Sec. 38-468. - Development requiring planning board approval. 
    Where only planning board approval is required, an applicant is vested on the date that the planning board certifies the application is complete. The applicant is vested under this chapter and regulations in effect at the time of certification, not the date of application. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. XIV, § 2) 
Sec. 38-469. - Development requiring zoning board approval. 
    Where only zoning board approval is required, an applicant is vested when the planning board certifies that the application is complete pursuant to article IX of this chapter. The applicant is vested under this chapter and regulations in effect at the time of certification, not the date of application. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. XIV, § 3) 
Sec. 38-470. - Development requiring both planning board and zoning board approval. 
    Where both planning board and zoning board approvals are required for development, an applicant is vested when the planning board certifies that the plans are complete under the respective guidelines and regulations of chapter 32 and this chapter, including article IX of this chapter. The applicant is vested under this chapter and regulations in effect at the time of the certification, not the date of application. 
(Ord. of 6-23-1994, art. XIV, § 4) 
