The Charter
Chapter C
HOME RULE CHARTER
C:1

ARTICLE I
BASIC PROVISIONS
§ C1-1. Municipal body.
The inhabitants of the Town within the corporate limits as now established
or as hereafter established in the manner provided by law shall continue to
be a municipal body politic and corporate in perpetuity under the name of
the "Town of Glocester."
§ C1-2. Form of government. [Amended 11/4/2014]
The form of Town government provided by this Charter shall be the Town
Council form of government. Pursuant to its provisions and subject only to
the limitations imposed by the State Constitution and by this Charter, all
powers of the Town, except those vested in and exercised by the Financial
Town Referendum, shall be vested in an elected Town Council which shall
enact local legislation and be responsible for the execution of the laws and
the administration of the Town Government.
§ C1-3. Powers of the Town.
The Town shall have all powers of local self-government and home rule and
all powers possible for a Town to have under the Constitution of this State,
together with all the implied powers necessary to carry into execution all
the powers granted. The Town shall have such additional powers as now or
hereafter may be granted to the Town by the Constitution and laws of the
State. All powers of the Town shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by
this Charter and by State Law or if not so prescribed, then in such manner
as shall be provided by Ordinance or Resolution of the Council.
The Town shall have and may exercise all local and municipal powers,
functions, rights, privileges and immunities of every name and nature
whatsoever unless otherwise prohibited by the Constitution and General
Laws of the State or by this Charter. The enumeration of particular powers
by this Charter shall not be deemed to be exclusive, and in addition to
the powers enumerated therein or implied thereby, or appropriate to the
exercise of such powers, it is intended that the Town shall have and may
exercise all powers which, under the Constitution of the State, it would be
competent for this Charter specifically to enumerate.
§ C1-4. State law.
The laws of the State not inconsistent with this Charter, except those
superseded by or declared inoperative by Ordinance or Resolution of the
Council, shall have the force and effect of Ordinances of the Town.
§ C1-5. Ordinance.
In the event of conflict between any Town Ordinance or Resolution and any
law of the State, other than a law enacted in conformity with the powers
§ C1-1 HOME RULE CHARTER § C1-5
C:3
reserved to the General Assembly by the Constitution and except in regard
to questions of health, education and police power, the provisions of the
Town Ordinance or Resolution shall prevail and control.
§ C1-6. Property.
Without limitation of the foregoing, the Town may acquire property within
or without its corporate limits for any municipal purpose, in fee simple
or any lesser interest or estate, by purchase, gift, device, lease or
condemnation, and may sell, mortgage, hold, manage and control such
property as its interest may require.
§ C1-7. Legislative powers. [Amended 11/4/2014]
The Town shall have the power to adopt and amend local laws and
Ordinances relating to its property, affairs and government. The legislative
powers of the Town shall be vested in the Council, except such powers as
are vested in the Financial Town Referendum.
§ C1-8. Contracts with other bodies.
The Town may enter into contracts or cooperative agreements with the
Federal Government, with the State, or with any political subdivision
thereof for the performance of any services and the use of any facilities.
§ C1-5 GLOCESTER CODE § C1-8
C:4
ARTICLE II
ELECTIONS
§ C2-1. District. [Amended 7-1997; 11/4/2014]
For Electoral purposes the Town shall consist of one district.
All Council members and other Town Officers (Town Clerk, Director of
Human Services and Town Sergeant) shall be elected at large. However, the
Moderator and Clerk of each Voting District shall be elected by the qualified
electors of that District. All elected officials shall be qualified electors and
residents of the Town.
* NOTE: Per R.I. General Law 2009, Article 17, Voting District Moderators
and Clerks are now appointed.
§ C2-2. Conduct of elections. [Amended 7-1997]
Elections for all Town offices which are filled by the vote of the electors of
the Town shall be held biennially on the first Tuesday after the first Monday
in November in each even numbered year; provided, however, that special
elections shall be scheduled as provided by law. All such Town elections
shall be conducted pursuant to applicable provisions of the election laws of
the State.
§ C2-3. Canvassers, composition. [Amended 7-1997]
There shall be a canvassing authority appointed by the Council, which
shall provide party representation as authorized by the Constitution and
laws of the State. The canvassing authority shall be known as the Board
of Canvassers, and shall be vested with all the powers and duties now or
hereafter vested by law in the canvassing authority or Board of Canvassers
of the Town. All members of said authority or Board now in office shall
continue as members thereof until their successors have been appointed
and qualified. All members shall be qualified electors and residents of the
Town during their term of office.
§ C2-1 HOME RULE CHARTER § C2-3
C:5

ARTICLE III
FINANCIAL TOWN REFERENDUM
§ C3-1. Time and purpose. [Amended 11/4/2014]
The electors of the Town qualified to vote upon a proposition to impose
a tax or for the expenditure of money shall vote each year at Financial
Town Referendum on a date to be determined and advertised by the Town
Council, for the purpose of ordering any tax which lawfully may be ordered,
making appropriations, and transacting any other business appertaining to
the financial affairs of the Town which legally may come to Financial Town
Referendum.
§ C3-2. Powers of electors. [Amended 11/4/2014]
The electors in Financial Town Referendum shall have and exercise the
powers vested in the Town to raise by a tax upon real and personal estate
such sums of money as may be required to pay Town debts and to defray the
necessary charges and expenses of the Town and they also may assess, levy
or impose any other taxes for the support of the Town which may legally be
assessed, levied or imposed.
§ C3-3. Notice. [Amended 11/4/2014]
The Town Clerk shall cause the electors of the Town to be notified of every
Financial Town Referendum.
The Council shall provide for the manner of calling such meeting and all
other matters relating thereto which are not otherwise prescribed by the
Charter or by vote of the Financial Town Referendum.
§ C3-4. Subjects requiring special notice. [Amended 11/4/2014]
No vote shall be taken at a Financial Town Referendum to levy a tax or to
dispose of real property of the Town unless special mention has been made
and notice given in the warrant issued for calling such meeting.
§ C3-5. Special Financial Town Referendum. [Amended 11/4/2014]
Whenever the Council by Resolution, or 10% of the electors of the Town
qualified to vote on a proposition to impose a tax or for the expenditure of
money, shall make a request in writing for the calling of a Special Financial
Town Referendum and directs the same to the Town Clerk, the Clerk shall
cause the electors to be duly notified of the time and place of such meeting
and of the business proposed to be transacted therein.
Restriction of Special Financial Town Referendum: No Special Financial
Town Referendum shall be called without the consent of the Council if
any subject proposed to be considered has been acted upon by a Town
Referendum within the preceding six months.
§ C3-1 HOME RULE CHARTER § C3-6
C:7
§ C3-6. Financial Town Referendum procedures. [Amended 11/4/
2014]
The Board of Canvassers shall conduct the Referendum in accordance with
the provisions of Rhode Island Election Law.
Record of proceedings: A copy of the record of proceedings of any Financial
Town Referendum, duly certified by the Town Clerk, shall be evidence of any
act of the electors of the Town at a Financial Town Referendum.
§ C3-7. Financial Town Referendum may authorize bond issues.
[Amended 11/4/2014]
The electors of the Town qualified to vote upon a proposition to impose a
tax or for the expenditure of money may, at a Financial Town Referendum,
authorize the borrowing of money and the issuance of bonds pursuant to the
statutes now or hereafter in effect.
§ C3-6 GLOCESTER CODE § C3-7
C:8
ARTICLE IV
TOWN COUNCIL
§ C4-1. Number, selection, terms.
The Council shall consist of five members elected from the Town at large,
each to serve for a term of two years, such term to begin on the first day of
January next following their election. They shall serve until their successors
are elected and qualified.
§ C4-2. Qualifications. [Amended 7-1997]
Members of the Council shall not hold any other Town office or any paid
public employment in any position of the Town, except as otherwise
provided by the Charter, with the exception of the School Department. Nor
shall any Council person be employed by the Town in any position, other
than as an elected office holder or in the School Department, for a period
of one year after the completion of his/her term. If a member of the Council
shall cease to possess any of these qualifications or shall be convicted of
a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude, the office shall immediately
become vacant.
§ C4-3. Vacancies, forfeiture of office, filling of vacancies. [Amended
7-1997; 11/4/2008]
Vacancies. A vacancy shall exist in the Council if a member dies, submits
in the Office of Town Clerk a resignation in writing, ceases to meet the
qualifications for membership, is convicted of a felony or a crime of moral
turpitude, forfeits the office as Town Council member, or is absent from four
consecutive months of Town Council meetings, unless such absences are
excused by a majority vote of the whole Town Council, with reasons stated
at the time and appearing in the journal of the meetings from which the
Town Council member was excused.
Forfeiture. A Town Council member shall forfeit that office if that member
violates any express prohibition of this Charter, state or federal law.
Filling of vacancies. Any vacancy in the membership of the Council shall
be filled by the qualified candidate for Council with the next highest vote
total from the last General or Special Election. If the next highest qualified
candidate is unavailable, the next available candidate shall be chosen until
the list is exhausted. In the event of a tie the Council shall select. If no
qualified candidate is available from the list, the Council shall appoint a
qualified elector to fill the vacancy. The new member shall be sworn into
office at a regular Town Council meeting no later than 30 days following
certification by the Board of Canvassers as to the eligibility of the member
designated to fill the vacancy.
§ C4-1 HOME RULE CHARTER § C4-4
C:9
§ C4-4. Presiding officers.
At its organization meeting the Council shall elect one of its members
as Council president and another as vice-president. The president shall
preside at meetings of the Council. Such office shall not deprive the Council
president of a vote on any question.
§ C4-5. Compensation. [Amended 11/4/2014]
The president of the Council and the members shall receive such annual
compensation as included in the budget approved by the electors at the
Financial Town Referendum provided that no change in compensation shall
take effect until after the next biennial election and installation of Council
members.
§ C4-6. Quorum.
Three members of the Council shall constitute a quorum, unless otherwise
provided by law, for the transaction of business, but a smaller number may
adjourn from time to time. At least 48 hours' notice of the holding of an
adjourned meeting shall be given all members who were not present at the
meeting from which the adjournment was taken.
§ C4-7. Judge of qualifications.
The Council shall be the judge of the qualifications of its members and of
the grounds for forfeiture of their office and for that purpose shall have
power to subpoena witnesses, administer oaths and require the production
of evidence. A member charged with conduct constituting grounds for
forfeiture of the office shall be entitled to a public hearing on demand, and
notice of such hearing shall be published by the Council at least one week in
advance of the hearing. Decision's made by the Council under this section
shall be subject to review by the courts.
§ C4-8. Meetings. [Amended 11/4/2014]
The first meeting of the newly elected Council for induction into office and
organization shall be held on the first day of January following its election
or the first business day thereafter. The Council shall meet regularly at
such time and at such place as may be prescribed by its rules but not less
frequently than once each month. A special meeting of the Council shall
be called by the Town Clerk at the request of the Council president or a
majority of the members of the Council. Notice of a special meeting shall be
delivered to each member at the member's place of residence by the Town
Clerk or by the Clerk's designee at least 48 hours previous to the time of
such meeting. The Council may meet upon shorter notice by an affirmative
vote of a majority of the members of the Council which shall be entered
in the record of proceedings. The purpose of a special meeting shall be
stated in the notice of the meeting and no business shall be transacted at
any special meeting other than that which has been stated in the notice.
All meetings of the Council shall be open to the public, and citizens shall
§ C4-4 GLOCESTER CODE § C4-8
C:10
have a reasonable opportunity to be heard, except that this provision shall
not be deemed to prevent the holding of executive sessions in accordance
with the Open Meetings Act. Nothing contained herein shall prevent the
Council from holding an emergency meeting, upon an affirmative vote of
the majority of its members when said meeting is deemed necessary where
the public welfare so requires. Nothing contained herein shall be used to
circumvent the spirit and requirements of this Charter.
§ C4-9. Powers and duties. [Amended 11/4/2014]
The Council shall be the policy-determining body and administrative body
of the Town. All powers of the Town, excepting such as may belong to
the Financial Town Referendum or to other agencies as provided in the
Charter and by law, shall be vested in the Council. Without limitation of the
foregoing grant or of other powers given to it by this Charter, the Council
shall have the power:
1. To determine its own rules and order of business and keep a journal of
its proceedings which shall be open to public inspection in the office of
the Town Clerk.
2. To judge the eligibility of its own members subject to review by the
courts on questions of fact and law.
3. To enact, amend or repeal Rules, Ordinances and Resolutions for the
government of the Town which have to do with the preservation of the
public peace, health, safety, welfare and comfort of the inhabitants and
the protection of persons and property, and other municipal functions.
The Council may provide reasonable penalties in accordance with the
law for the violation of any Ordinances.
4. To create, change and abolish Departments, Offices and Agencies other
than those established by this Charter and distribute the work among
them, and assign additional functions or duties to Departments, Offices
and Agencies established by or under this Charter, but may not
discontinue or assign to any other Department, Office or Agency, any
function or duty assigned by this Charter to a particular Department,
Office or Agency.
5. To inquire into the conduct of any Office or Officer, Department or
Agency of the Town under its control.
6. To fill all vacancies in all Elective or Council Appointive Offices, Boards
and Commissions for the remainder of the respective terms thereof,
except as specifically provided otherwise in this Charter.
7. To establish the compensation that may be paid appointive officers and
employees, including Board and Commission members of the Town, and
stipulate the amount in each instance, except where specifically
provided otherwise in this Charter.
§ C4-8 HOME RULE CHARTER § C4-9
C:11
8. To provide by Ordinance for a personnel classification system and
personnel classification board in conformity with provisions of this
Charter and applicable general and special laws.
9. To act as a Board of Personnel Review in receiving, considering and
disposing of appeals from dismissals, suspensions, demotions, transfers
and layoffs of appointive offices and employees of the Town.
10. To provide rules and regulations with respect to vacations of Town
officials and employees, except those of the School Department and
employment contracts.
11. To call for a Special Financial Town Referendum.
12. To propose a budget to be acted upon at the Annual Financial Town
Referendum.
13. To take any action necessary to give effect to the vote of the Financial
Town Referendum approving a municipal budget for the ensuing fiscal
year. Such to include, but not be limited to the administration of the
expenditure of the budget through its employees or by contract with
private parties.
14. To take any action necessary to give effect to any vote of a Financial
Town Referendum authorizing the issuance of bonds for any purpose
and to complete all the details of the bond transaction, and to give
effect to any vote of a Financial Town Referendum in accordance with
the general and special laws of the state.
15. Set quarterly installment dates, for the payment of taxes, with approval
by Town Council Resolution.
16. Assess the penalty for unpaid taxes in accordance with R.I. General
Law.
17. To transfer the unexpended balance from the funds of any
appropriation to another, should the need arise and a surplus be
available and specifically identified.
18. To review any special assessment upon request of a property owner and
order correction or confirmation of same.
19. To enact and amend, as prescribed by statute, the Zoning Ordinance.1
20. To grant, suspend or revoke licenses in accordance with law.
21. To provide for the audit at any time of the accounts of the Town or any
of its departments and to provide for an annual audit as hereinafter
prescribed.
22. To enact and amend Ordinances relating to the Town's property, affairs
and government not inconsistent with the State Constitution and laws.
1. Editor's Note: See Ch. 350, Zoning.
§ C4-9 GLOCESTER CODE § C4-9
C:12
§ C4-10. Procedures.
23. To issue subpoenas to compel witnesses to testify and produce records
as prescribed by law.
24. To appoint sub-committees of the Council which may investigate and
report on any matters referred to them and make a recommendation
thereon, but no sub-committee shall have any executive or legislative
powers and all matters shall be determined by the Council.
25. To require a bond in such amount and with such surety as the Council
may specify from all persons entrusted with the collection, custody or
disbursements of any of the Town monies and may require such bond
from such other officials and employees as it may deem advisable and
all as required by law. The premium on such bonds shall be paid by the
Town unless provided otherwise.
26. To adopt a Zoning Ordinance consistent with the Comprehensive Plan
adopted pursuant to the Rhode Island Comprehensive Planning and
Land Use Act of the General Laws of the State of Rhode Island.2
1. Ordinances — The Council may act by Rule, Ordinance or Resolution,
but in addition to the cases in which an Ordinance is required by any
specific provision of this Charter or any applicable law, any action
creating or abolishing any department, office or agency of the Town
government or any action taken under the provisions shall be by
Ordinance only.
2. Passage of Ordinance.
Introduction — Every proposed Ordinance shall be filed with the Town
Clerk by a member of the Council not later than four business days
previous to the day of the meeting at which it is to be introduced.
The Town Clerk shall forthwith provide each member of the Council
with a copy thereof and shall post one copy of such Ordinance in some
place accessible to the public in the Town Hall. Every Ordinance, other
than an emergency Ordinance, shall be read the first time by title and
explained by its proponent at the meeting at which it is introduced and
then referred to a subsequent regular or special meeting for action. A
Public Hearing shall be mandatory on all ordinances, enactments and
amendments, and no action shall be taken on the Ordinance until the
conclusion of the hearing.
The affirmative vote of three Council members present shall be
necessary for the passage of any Ordinance or amendment of any
Ordinance. The vote upon any Ordinance shall be by roll call and
entered on the record of proceedings. A vote by roll call shall be taken
on any other matter at the request of any two members.
2. Editor's Note: See Ch. 350, Zoning.
§ C4-9 HOME RULE CHARTER § C4-10
C:13
§ C4-11. Probate Court.
3. Publication of Ordinance — After passage there shall be published
within 10 days in a newspaper with general circulation in the Town, a
notice describing the Ordinance in brief and general terms and within
the same period the entire Ordinance shall be made available for public
inspection in the office of the Town Clerk.
4. Effective Date of Ordinance — Every Ordinance, unless it shall specify
another date, shall become effective at the expiration of 20 days after
such publication following passage.
5. Emergency Ordinances — In an emergency affecting the public peace,
health, safety, comfort and welfare of the inhabitants of the Town and
for protection of persons and property, the Council, by an affirmative
vote of three members, may adopt on the day of its introduction,
without previous filing with the Town Clerk, an Ordinance containing a
declaration of emergency which shall take effect upon its passage. The
nature of the emergency shall be specifically stated in the Ordinance
and such declaration shall be conclusive as to the existence of such
emergency. Such emergency Ordinances(s) shall be temporary and for
the period of the emergency only and may authorize Departments,
Offices and Agencies of the Town Government to act outside and
beyond the usual requirement of Ordinances, Resolutions, Rules and
Regulations.
6. Ordinance Enacting Clause — The enacting clause of all Ordinances
shall be: "The Council of the Town of Glocester, County of Providence,
State of Rhode Island hereby ordains:"
7. Authentication and Publication of Ordinances and Resolutions — Upon
its final passage each Ordinance or Resolution shall be authenticated by
the signature of the Town Clerk and shall be recorded in a book kept for
that purpose. Within 10 days after final passage, each Ordinance shall
be published at least once in such a manner as the Council may
prescribe by Ordinance.
8. Inspection of Proposed Ordinances and Resolutions by the Public —
After the introduction of any Ordinance or Resolution in the Council,
the Town Clerk shall keep available a copy of such proposed Ordinance
or Resolution, together with all amendments thereto, which copy shall
be a public record.
9. Codification — The Council, within one year of the effective date of this
Charter, and at least every 10 years thereafter, shall cause to be
prepared and published a codification of the Ordinances of the Town.
1. Appointment. There shall be a Probate Court for the Town, powers and
duties of which shall be exercised and performed by a Judge of Probate,
who shall be appointed by the Council by Resolution to serve for a term
of office concurrent with that of the Council or until a successor is
§ C4-10 GLOCESTER CODE § C4-11
C:14
appointed and qualified. The Judge of Probate shall be a member in
good standing of the Rhode Island Bar with five years' experience as a
practicing attorney.
2. Vacancies. In the event the Judge of Probate is a party to or interested
in any proceeding before the Probate Court, or is absent or unable to
perform the Judge's duties, or there is a vacancy in such office, the
duties shall temporarily be performed by the Town Solicitor, and the
fact of such interest, absence or vacancy shall be recorded in the
records of said Court.
3. Compensation. The Probate Judge shall receive such compensation as
shall be set by the Council.
§ C4-11 HOME RULE CHARTER § C4-11
C:15

ARTICLE V
TOWN SOLICITOR
§ C5-1. Appointment.
There shall be a Town Solicitor who shall be appointed by the Council to
serve at its pleasure.
§ C5-2. Qualifications.
The Town Solicitor shall be a member in good standing of the Rhode Island
Bar with five years' experience as a practicing attorney. The Town Solicitor
shall not hold any other office in the Town Government, except that of
Acting Judge of Probate when so necessary.
§ C5-3. Compensation.
The Town Solicitor shall receive such compensation as shall be set by the
Council.
§ C5-4. Duties.
§ C5-5. Opinion a public record.
Written legal opinions furnished to the Council and all Departments, Offices
and Agencies of the Town shall be filed with the Town Clerk and become a
public record unless making them public would defeat their lawful purpose.
§ C5-6. Special powers.
This section shall not be deemed to abridge such special powers as are now
and hereafter conferred upon Town Solicitors by State law.
1. The Town Solicitor shall appear for and protect the rights of the Town in
all actions, suits or proceedings, civil or criminal, in law or equity,
brought by or against it or for or against any of its Departments,
Officers, or Agencies, and shall perform such other duties appropriate
to the office as the Council may require.
2. The Town Solicitor shall act as Probate Judge as herein provided.
§ C5-1 HOME RULE CHARTER § C5-6
C:17

ARTICLE VI
SCHOOL DEPARTMENT
§ C6-1. Number, selection, terms.
There shall be a School Committee which shall consist of six members,
elected from the Town at large, to serve four-year terms, or until their
successors are elected and qualified. The terms of the School Committee
shall be arranged in such manner that three members will be elected every
two years.
§ C6-2. Qualifications. [Amended 7-1997]
Members of the School Committee, as defined in this Charter, shall, at the
time of their election and during their term of office, be residents for at least
six months next preceding the election and qualified electors of the Town of
Glocester. No member of the School Committee shall be eligible to accept
any other paid appointed School Department office during their term on the
School Committee or for a period of one year thereafter.
§ C6-3. Vacancies, forfeiture of office, filling of vacancies. [Amended
7-1997; 11-2000; 11-2-2004; 11-4-2008]
1. Vacancies. A vacancy shall exist in the School Committee if a member
dies, submits in the Office of the Town Clerk a resignation in writing,
ceases to meet the qualifications for membership, is convicted of a
felony or a crime of moral turpitude, or is absent from four consecutive
months of School Committee meetings, unless such absences are
excused by a majority vote of the whole School Committee, with
reasons stated at the time and appearing in the journal of the meetings
from which the School Committee member was excused.
2. Forfeiture. A School Committee member shall forfeit that office if that
member violates any express prohibition of this Charter, state or federal
law.
3. Filling of vacancies. The School Committee candidate from the last
General or Special Election receiving the next highest total of votes
shall fill any vacancy in the membership of the School Committee. In
the event of a tie the Town Council shall appoint. If the next highest
candidate is unavailable then the next available qualified candidate
shall be chosen until the list is exhausted. If no qualified candidate is
available from the list, the vacancy shall be filled by a majority vote of
the Town Council. The new candidate shall be sworn into office at a
Regular School Committee meeting no later than 30 days following
certification by the Board of Canvassers as to the eligibility of the
member designated to fill the vacancy.
§ C6-1 HOME RULE CHARTER § C6-4
C:19
§ C6-4. Compensation. [Amended 11/4/2014]
The School Committee shall annually provide to the Town Council its
recommendations for compensation for its members, and the Council shall
forward these recommendations in the budget to be voted on at a Financial
Town Referendum for the approval of the townspeople.
§ C6-5. Powers and duties.
1. The School Committee shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson
from its membership and shall adopt its own rules and order of
business.
2. The School Committee shall determine and control all policies affecting
the administration, maintenance and operation of the public schools,
and shall have all the powers and be subject to all the duties as
prescribed by the laws of the State.
3. The School Committee shall appoint a Superintendent of Schools as its
chief administrative agent and appoint a clerk to the School Committee.
4. The School Committee shall have the power to inquire into the conduct
of any office, department or activity of the public schools and make
investigations as to school affairs.
5. The appointment and removal of all school employees and fixing of
salaries shall be made by the School Committee and upon
recommendation of the Superintendent of Schools, except as may be
provided otherwise by the laws of the State. Except for the purpose of
inquiry, the School Committee, as far as is consistent with the laws of
the State, shall deal with the administration of the public schools solely
through the Superintendent of Schools and neither the School
Committee nor any member thereof shall give orders to any
subordinate of the Superintendent or other administrative officers to
whom the work is delegated.
6. The School Committee shall submit budget estimates to the Town
Council in the same manner provided by law as other Departments, but
the budget estimates and appropriations shall be considered by the
Council and in the Town's budget process in total only. The allocation of
the amounts appropriated shall be determined by the School
Committee.
7. The School Committee shall prepare a complete report of its finances
and activities at the close of the fiscal year. Such report shall be
included as a separate action in the annual report to the Council.
8. The meetings of the School Committee, except when in Executive
Session, shall be open and accessible to the public. Final action shall be
taken only in open meeting.
§ C6-4 GLOCESTER CODE § C6-5
C:20
§ C6-6. Building Committee. [Amended 11-4-2008]
Whenever a new school building or an addition to an existing building
shall be planned, a Building Committee shall be formed consisting of seven
qualified electors appointed by the Town Council to serve at the pleasure of
the Council. The Building Committee shall be responsible for the planning
and supervision of all such construction relating to new school buildings or
additions to existing buildings. The Building Committee shall be organized
at the call of the Town Clerk after the appropriation of funds and the
acquisition of land have been completed. Any member(s) may be removed
without cause from the Building Committee by a majority vote of the Town
Council. Any vacancy in the membership of the Building Committee shall be
filled by the Town Council.
§ C6-7. Regionalization.
In the event and so long as the entire public school system of the Town of
Glocester shall be regionalized with that of another City or Town, pursuant
to the General Laws of the State Of Rhode Island, now or hereafter in
effect, the provisions of §§ C6-1 through C6-7, both inclusive, and all other
provisions of this Charter relating to public schools shall be inoperative;
provided, that in the event the regionalization agreement does not provide
for the manner of the selection of the members of the School Committee
from the Town of Glocester, members of the Glocester Regional Committee
will be elected as in Article VI, Section I, of the Home Rule Charter.
§ C6-8. Maintenance of school buildings and grounds.
The Public Works Department, when requested by the School Committee
and with the approval of the Council, may be made responsible for the care
and maintenance of school buildings and grounds, provided that the cost of
such care and maintenance shall be charged against the appropriation for
the schools.
§ C6-9. Financial accounting. [Added 11-2-2004]
The financial accounting responsibilities of the School Department shall be
performed by the Town Department of Finance.
§ C6-10. Overspending of School Department appropriations
prohibited. [Added 11-2-2004; amended 11/4/2014]
If, at any time during the fiscal year, it is determined that the remaining
unexpended balance of the total appropriations for the Glocester School
9. The School Committee shall have the power to issue subpoenas to
compel witnesses to testify and produce records as prescribed by law.
10. The School Committee shall exercise such other powers and perform
such other duties as prescribed by law and as are not inconsistent with
this Charter.
§ C6-5 HOME RULE CHARTER § C6-10
C:21
Department will be insufficient to cover the items budgeted, the
Superintendent of Schools shall advise the School Committee to reconsider
the programs and revise allotments so as to forestall any expenditures
which would result in excess of appropriations. The School Committee shall
advise the Town Council and the Director of Finance that the situation
has occurred and provide the Town Council with a revised work plan that
eliminates any potential deficit. Remaining amounts in any unappropriated
fund balance may not be used to cover over expenditures without the
approval by vote of the taxpayers of the Town of Glocester at a Financial
Town Referendum.
§ C6-10 GLOCESTER CODE § C6-10
C:22
ARTICLE VII
DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE
§ C7-1. Organization.
There shall be a Department of Finance, the head of which shall be the
Director of Finance. The appointing authority for the position of Town
Treasurer shall be the Town Council. The term "Town Treasurer" and
"Director of Finance" where referenced in this Charter shall be considered
synonymous except as provided in §§ C7-6 and C7-7 in this Article. Further
organization of this Department shall be as stated in this Charter and by
Ordinances enacted by the Council to the end that the essential processes
in the finances of the Town, namely, control and accounts, purchasing,
assessment of property, collection of taxes and other revenues and
payments may be properly administered.
§ C7-2. Director of Finance.
The Director of Finance shall be a full-time position. The Director of
Finance, subject to the provisions of this Charter and of Ordinances enacted
by the Council, shall have and exercise all the powers and duties now and
hereafter vested by law in Town Treasurer. The Director of Finance shall
have charge of the administration of the financial affairs of the Town and
shall have and exercise all the powers and duties vested in this Article of
the Charter.
1. Qualifications: The Director of Finance shall be the Chief Financial
Officer of the Town and shall have such training and experience in
accounting, budgeting or management, either in public or private
business, to meet the required qualifications of the position.
2. Compensation: The Director of Finance shall receive such annual
compensation as may be set by a vote of the Council. [Amended
11-2000]
3. Powers and Duties:
a. Cooperate with the Council and the Budget Committee in compiling
the expenditure and revenue estimates for the budget.
b. Receive all fees, rents, funds, money receivable by the Town from
the State or Federal Government, the Courts and any Department,
Office or Agency of the Town, except as otherwise provided in this
Charter or by law.
c. Have custody of all public funds belonging to or under the control
of the Town or any Department, Office or Agency of the Town and
deposit all funds coming into the Director of Finance in such
depositories as may be designated by the Council, or, if no such
designation shall be made, in such depositories as may be chosen
provided, however, that deposits in such depository are insured by
an Agency of the United States. All interest received on deposits
§ C7-1 HOME RULE CHARTER § C7-2
C:23
shall be the property of the Town and shall be accounted for and
credited to the proper accounts.
d. Have custody of all investments and invested funds of the Town or
in the possession of the Town in a fiduciary capacity, and have the
safekeeping of all bonds and notes of the Town and the receipt and
delivery of Town bonds and notes for transfer, registration or
exchange.
e. Exercise control over all expenditures by pre-auditing all bills,
invoices, payrolls, or other evidences of claims or charges against
the Town, and seeing that budget appropriations are not exceeded
by disbursements in any Department, Office or Agency of the Town.
f. Pay out funds by check, such payments being made only after
compliance with the provisions of this section and authorization by
the Council.
g. Prescribe and maintain an accounting system for the Town and
adopt and require standard accounting procedures for all
Departments, Offices and Agencies of the Town, which accounts
shall include the amounts of all appropriations, and the amounts
paid from each, and show in reasonable detail the person to whom
and the purpose for which the payments were made, the unpaid
obligations against each and the unencumbered balance.
h. Prescribe uniform forms of receipts, vouchers, bills and claims to
be used by all Departments, Offices and Agencies of the Town.
i. Prepare a monthly statement of all receipts and disbursements in
such detail as the Council may require.
j. Prepare at the close of each fiscal year a complete financial
statement and report in accordance with State Law for submission
to the Council and the taxpayers of the Town.
k. Perform the work of buying for the Town pursuant to Rules and
Regulations established by Ordinance according to which the
Director or an officer appointed or designated by the Director shall
purchase or contract for all supplies, materials and equipment
required by any Department, Office or Agency of the Town;
establish and enforce specifications with respect to supplies,
materials and equipment; be responsible for the inspection of
deliveries of supplies, materials and equipment belonging to the
Town; store, if necessary, and distribute all supplies, materials and
equipment required by any Department, Office and Agency;
transfer to or between Departments, Offices and Agencies surplus,
obsolete and unused supplies, materials and equipment, and
subject to the approval of the Council, dispose of any such, by sale
if possible.
§ C7-2 GLOCESTER CODE § C7-2
C:24
§ C7-3. Work programs: allotments. [Amended 11/4/2014]
From the beginning of the fiscal year and after the annual Financial Town
Referendum the head of each Office, Department, and Agency shall submit
to the Council a work program for the year not inconsistent with
appropriations made by the Financial Town Referendum which shall show
the requested allotments of appropriations by quarterly periods for the
entire fiscal year. The Council shall review the requested allotments and
may revise, alter, or change such allotments, other than the allotments of
the School Department, in a manner not inconsistent with appropriations
made by the Financial Town Referendum before approving the same. The
aggregate of such allotments shall not exceed the total appropriations
available to said Office, Department or Agency for the fiscal year. Allotments
and revised allotments of appropriations submitted by the School
Committee shall be automatically approved by the Council or treated as
approved, if the aggregate thereof does not exceed the total appropriation
available to the School Department for the fiscal year.
§ C7-4. Budget control.
If at any time during the fiscal year the Director of Finance shall ascertain
that the remaining unexpended balance of appropriations for the fiscal year
will be insufficient to cover the proposed work programs, the Director shall
make that fact known to the Council for it to reconsider the work programs
and allotments of the several Offices, Departments and Agencies and revise
the allotments, other than the allotments of the School Department, so as
to forestall the making of expenditures in excess of appropriations. If at any
time during the fiscal year, the Director of Finance shall ascertain that the
remaining unexpended balance of appropriations of the School Department
for the fiscal year will be insufficient to cover proposed work programs for
the School Department, the Director shall advise the School Department to
reconsider its work programs and allotments and to revise its allotments so
as to forestall the making by it of expenditures in excess of appropriations.
l. Whenever any Department, Office or Agency of the Town shall
purchase or contract for any supplies, materials, equipment or
contractual services, independently and contrary to the provisions
of this Charter or the Rules and Regulations made thereunder, such
order or contract shall be voidable by the Town.
m. The Town shall be allowed to enter into lease/purchase agreements
as contractual obligations, to appropriate annually a sum sufficient
to pay both principal and interest, subject to Council approval, and
maintain a perpetual inventory of Town property.
n. Maintain a current inventory of Town assets.
1. On a quarterly basis, the Budget Board shall meet with the Director of
Finance to review the actual expenditures, receipts and projections for
the balance of the fiscal year. A report of its findings and
§ C7-2 HOME RULE CHARTER § C7-4
C:25
§ C7-5. Competitive bidding.
Before the Town makes any purchase of or contracts for supplies, materials
or equipment, ample opportunity shall be given for competitive bidding
under such Rules and Regulations as the Council shall prescribe by
Ordinance.
§ C7-6. Deputy Town Treasurer.
There shall be a Deputy Town Treasurer appointed by the Council from
within the staff of the Department of Finance upon recommendation of the
Director of Finance. The Deputy Treasurer shall have all the powers and
perform all the duties which are granted to the office of Town Treasurer
by Resolution, Ordinance or Law in the Treasurer's absence, with the
exception of administrative responsibilities. In no event shall the Deputy
Treasurer have the power to sign the bonds, notes or other evidence of
indebtedness of the Town except at the direction of the Council.
§ C7-7. Vacancy.
If a vacancy shall occur in the Office of Director of Finance, the Deputy
Town Treasurer shall assume the duties of a Town Treasurer as prescribed
by Resolution, Ordinance and Law. The Council shall appoint an interim
Director of Finance from within the Finance Department. The interim
Director of Finance shall assume the powers and duties of that office until
such time as the Council shall appoint a successor.
§ C7-8. Tax Assessor.
There shall be within the Department of Finance a full-time Tax Assessor
who shall be appointed by the Council. The Tax Assessor shall be
responsible for the fixing of an assessed evaluation for purposes of taxation
on all taxable real estate and personal property and for the preparation of
an assessment roll and a tax roll for the Town in the manner provided by
Law and Ordinance.
recommendations shall be submitted to the Council not later than 30
days following the close of the fiscal quarter.
1. Qualifications: The Tax Assessor shall have knowledge of and
experience in the appraisal of real and personal property, and shall hold
a certificate as a residential appraiser, or the equivalent, or acquire
such certificate within one year of appointment. The Tax Assessor shall
hold no other paid public Town office or employment in the service of
the Town of Glocester.
2. Compensation: The Tax Assessor shall receive such compensation as
may be fixed from time to time by the Council.
3. Powers and Duties: The powers and duties of the Tax Assessor shall
include but not be limited to:
§ C7-4 GLOCESTER CODE § C7-8
C:26
§ C7-9. Board of Assessment Review.
a. Apply to or apportion upon the assessed valuation of real estate and
personal property the amount of tax ordered to be levied or
imposed thereon;
b. Make and prepare all regular and special assessment rolls and a
tax roll for the Town in the manner provided by law;
c. Establish a uniform and equitable system for assessing all classes
and kinds of property;
d. Prepare tax maps and land value maps;
e. Give such notices of assessments and taxes and to perform such
other duties as may be required by Law and Ordinance;
f. Subject to the approval of the Director of Finance, employ from
time to time within the limits of available appropriations such
clerical assistants as may be necessary;
g. Cooperate with the Board of Canvassers and Registration in the
preparation of the lists of electors as may be necessary.
1. Memberships: There shall be a Board of Assessment Review consisting
of three members, qualified electors of the Town appointed by the
Council for a term of six years.
2. Vacancies shall be filled by the Council for the unexpired term.
3. Duties: The Board of Assessment Review shall hear and consider the
appeal of any property owner concerning the amount of the assessed
valuation as determined by the Assessor. The Board shall keep an
accurate record of its proceedings which shall be available for public
inspection.
4. Correction in Assessment: If it shall appear that the valuation of any
property has been erroneously or incorrectly assessed, the Board shall
have the authority to order a correction. Such determination shall be
certified by the Board to the Assessor, whose duty it shall be to make
such corrections in the valuation as the Board may determine. If the tax
roll has been certified by the Assessor, who shall then transmit the
findings of the Board to the Council, which may cancel in whole or in
part the tax based on such valuation in order to effect a correction.
5. Procedure: The Council shall provide by Ordinance for the organization
and procedure of the Board of Assessment Review and for the manner
of receiving, considering, and disposing of appeals.
6. Right of Appeal: The taking of an appeal to the Board of Assessment
Review or any action thereon shall not be construed to limit or restrict
the right of any taxpayer to apply to a court of competent jurisdiction
§ C7-8 HOME RULE CHARTER § C7-9
C:27
§ C7-10. Tax Collector. [Amended 11/4/2014]
There may be within the Department of Finance the Office of Tax Collector,
who shall be appointed by the Council. The Council may also appoint a
Deputy Tax Collector, who in the absence of the Tax Collector shall have all
the powers and perform all the duties which are granted to the Office of Tax
Collector.
§ C7-11. Director of Human Resources. [Added 11-2-2004]
There shall be within the Department of Finance the position of Director
of Human Resources shall be appointed by the Council. The position of
Director of Human Resources may be assigned to another established
position within the Town. The Director of Human Resources shall be
responsible for the coordination and administration of all programs and
activities of the Town personnel system; shall act as Affirmative Action
Officer and shall act as Compliance Officer regarding implementation of
special rules regarding employees with disabilities; is an ex officio member
of the Personnel Board.
for relief from any assessed valuation or tax originally determined by
the Assessor.
1. Powers and Duties. The powers and duties of the Tax Collector shall
include but not be limited to:
a. Collect and receive all taxes and special assessments for the
collection of which the Town is responsible, and shall have all the
rights, powers and duties prescribed by the laws of the State and
by Ordinance.
b. Conduct tax sales in accordance with R.I. General Law.
§ C7-9 GLOCESTER CODE § C7-11
C:28
ARTICLE VIII
FINANCIAL PROCEDURES
§ C8-1. Fiscal year.
The fiscal year of the Town shall begin on the first day of July and end on
the last day of the following June. The fiscal year shall also constitute the
budget and account year.
§ C8-2. Budget Board. [Amended 11-2-2004]
There shall be a Budget Board of seven members, appointed by the Council
who shall at the time of their appointment and during the term of service be
qualified electors of the Town. The members appointed by the Council shall
serve for three years for staggered terms. Vacancies shall be filled by the
Council to serve out the remaining term of the member whose departure
created the vacancy. Members shall be eligible for reappointment. The
Board may choose a chairperson and vice-chairperson from its membership
and prescribe its own procedures.
§ C8-3. Budget schedule and procedures. [Amended 11/4/2014]
1. Duties. The Budget Board shall:
a. Receive and examine all requests for capital and operating
expenditures submitted by the Departments, Commissions, Offices
and Agencies of Town government, including the School
Department.
b. Hold such hearings as may be necessary to provide the opportunity
for all Department Heads, Town Officials and Agencies submitting
estimates to appear before the Board to explain and justify their
requests. The Board shall provide opportunity for any citizen who
desires to do so to address the Board on any pertinent matter
consistent with the procedural rules established by the Board.
c. Submit to the Council no later than the third Thursday in March its
recommendations regarding all requests for appropriations which
have been submitted for its review together with revenue estimates
and the projected tax levy required to support the budget
recommendation. For budgeting purposes, anticipated revenues
shall include: State, Federal and Department revenues in detail,
surplus revenues and the amount to be raised by taxes.
1. All estimates for capital and operating expenditures by Departments,
Commissions, Offices and Agencies of Town government for the ensuing
fiscal year shall be submitted to the Budget Board no later than January
2 in each year.
2. The Council shall review the recommendations of the Budget Board and
make such changes in the various expenditure requests as it sees fit;
provided, however, that the Council shall not have the authority to
§ C8-1 HOME RULE CHARTER § C8-3
C:29
§ C8-4. Annual audit.
Within three months after the beginning of each fiscal year, in accordance
with State Law, the Council by Resolution shall arrange for an independent
audit of the books, accounts, and other evidences of financial transactions
of the Town and of the School Department as of the close of the preceding
fiscal year, to be conducted either by State Auditors or by a certified public
accountant holding a certificate from the State and having no personal
interest in the financial transactions of the Town. Such examinations shall
conform with generally accepted auditing standards and shall include all
procedures necessary for the auditors to express an informed opinion of the
financial practices and accounts. A copy of the audit report shall be filed
with the Town Clerk and shall be public record.
§ C8-5. Borrowing in anticipation of taxes. [Amended 11/4/2014]
Borrowing in anticipation of taxes shall require the approval of the Town
Council, by Resolution, in accordance with existing State law.
change any item in the School Department expenditure request except
the overall total amount. The budget proposal as presented by the
Budget Board will include separate listings and totals of the capital
and operating appropriations requested respectively; comparisons with
budget and projected expenditures for the current fiscal year, budgeted
and projected revenues for the same; a projected tax rate for the Town
taking into consideration changes in the tax base, a detailed listing of
funds anticipated from the State and Federal government and other
sources; a report of findings and recommendations as the Budget Board
may provide.
3. The Council shall hold a Public Hearing on its preliminary
recommended budget prior to its adoption, which hearing must be at
least 21 days prior to the Financial Town Referendum Sufficient copies
of the budget shall be made available by the Town Clerk for the use of
all Offices, Departments and Agencies and for the use of interested
persons.
4. The Council shall adopt a recommended budget for presentation to the
Financial Town Referendum not later than 15 days preceding its date.
No revenue from any source other than the tax levy shall be included in
the budget as recommended by the Council unless the facts clearly
warrant the expectation that such amount will be realized as cash
during the fiscal year.
5. A copy of the budget as finally adopted by Financial Town Referendum
shall be certified by the Town Clerk and filed in the Office of the
Director of Finance. Sufficient copies thereof shall be made available by
the Town Clerk for the use of all Offices, Departments and Agencies and
for the use of interested persons.
§ C8-3 GLOCESTER CODE § C8-6
C:30
§ C8-6. Failure to approve a budget. [Amended 11/4/2014]
In the event that no budget shall have been approved at a Financial Town
Referendum by the start of the fiscal year, the Departments, Commissions,
Offices and Agencies of the Town shall have the authority to continue
making expenditures at the rates authorized in the budget of the previous
fiscal year until such time as a new budget shall have been adopted. The
spending shall be at 1/12 of the previous year's total budget per month.
§ C8-7. Capital program. [Amended 11/4/2014]
§ C8-8. Capital reserve fund. [Amended 11/4/2014]
There shall be an annual addition to the amount appropriated by the
Financial Town Referendum equivalent to 2% of the amount appropriated
as an operating budget approved at the meeting, as a capital reserve fund.
Such appropriation, and the addition of the same to the amount to be
raised by taxation, shall be made by operation of this section of the Charter,
1. Each Department, including the School Department, shall prepare and
submit to the Budget Board a three-year capital plan as part of the
expenditure request by January 2 prior to the ensuing budget year.
2. Each capital program shall include:
a. A clear general summary of its contents.
b. A list of all capital improvements which are proposed to be
undertaken during the three years next ensuing together with
supporting information as to the necessity for the expenditure.
c. Cost estimates and suggested methods of financing.
d. The calendar quarter of the fiscal year the expenditure is expected.
e. The estimated annual cost for operating and maintaining the
facilities to be constructed or acquired.
The capital program may be revised and extended each year with
regard to capital improvements still pending or in process of
construction or acquisition.
3. Public Hearing on Capital Program. The Council shall give notice by one
or more methods of general circulation in the Town giving a general
summary of the Capital Program and stating the time and place where
copies of the Capital Programs are available for inspection by the
public, and the time and place, not less than two weeks after such
notice, for a Public Hearing on the Capital Program. The Council shall
adopt the Capital Program with or without amendment after Public
Hearing and not later than 15 days preceding the Financial Town
Referendum. Copies of the Capital Program as adopted shall be public
record and shall be made available to the public in suitable places in
Town.
§ C8-6 HOME RULE CHARTER § C8-8
C:31
without the necessity of any vote or any other action by the Town. Such
amount and any accumulations shall be held and invested by the Town
Treasurer as a separate fund, and from time to time any amount from such
fund may be expended upon authorization by an annual or Special Financial
Town Referendum for the purchase of improvements set forth in the Capital
Program.
§ C8-9. Land Trust. [Amended 11-2000]
There shall be appropriated to the Glocester Land Trust 75% of the revenue
generated from the payment of Real Estate Conveyance Taxes in the current
fiscal year based upon receipts for the prior fiscal year.
§ C8-10. Emergency appropriation.
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property or the public
peace, the Council may make emergency appropriations. Such
appropriations may be made by emergency Ordinance in accordance with
the provisions of Article IV, § C4-10, Item 5 of this Charter. To the extent
that there are not available unappropriated revenues to meet such
appropriations, the Council may, by such emergency Ordinance, authorize
the issuance of emergency notes, which may be renewed from time to time,
but the emergency notes and renewals thereof shall be paid not later than
the last day of the fiscal year thereof next succeeding that in which the
emergency appropriation was made.
§ C8-11. Lapse of appropriation.
Every appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital expenditure, shall
lapse at the close of a fiscal year to the extent that it has not been expended
or encumbered. An appropriation for a capital expenditure shall continue
in force until the purpose for which it was made has been accomplished
or abandoned; the purpose of any such appropriation shall be deemed
abandoned in two fiscal years following the date the appropriation passed
without any disbursement from or encumbrance of the appropriation.
§ C8-12. Fees shall be paid to the Town.
All fees received by any office or employee of the Town shall belong to
the Town and shall be paid to the Town Treasurer at such intervals as the
Council may require, except otherwise provided in this Charter.
§ C8-13. Minimum cash reserve. [Added 11-2-2004]
The minimum unreserved general fund balance the Town shall maintain
shall be not less than 12% of the total annual Town proposed expenditures
for the next fiscal year.
§ C8-8 GLOCESTER CODE § C8-14
C:32
§ C8-14. Transfer of Funds. [Added 11/4/2014]
The Town Treasurer is authorized, with Town Council approval, to transfer
funds from Restricted, Committed, and Assigned Fund Balances to the
General Fund in an amount necessary to cover expenditures incurred and
related to the purposes pursuant to the constraints imposed on the use of
those fund balances.
§ C8-15. Outstanding encumbrances. [Added 11/4/2014]
A portion of the General Fund balance shall be reserved for encumbrances
outstanding on June 30 each year. Said list of encumbrances, if any, shall be
submitted by the Town Treasurer to the Town Council for approval and the
Town Council may re-authorize those funds for the ensuing fiscal year.
§ C8-14 HOME RULE CHARTER § C8-15
C:33

ARTICLE IX
TOWN CLERK
§ C9-1. Selection, term. [Amended 7-1997]
There shall be a Town Clerk who shall be elected at each General Election
for a term of two years and shall serve until a successor is elected and
qualified.
The Town Clerk shall not hold any other Town office or any paid public
employment in any position of the Town, except as otherwise provided by
the Charter. Nor shall the Town Clerk be employed by the Town in any
position, other than as an elected office holder or in the School Department,
for a period of one year after the completion of his/her term.
§ C9-2. Deputy Town Clerk.
There shall also be a Deputy Town Clerk appointed by the Town Clerk with
the approval of the Council. When the Town Clerk is not available, the
Deputy shall perform all the duties which are granted to the Office of the
Town Clerk and perform such other duties as may be required.
§ C9-3. Powers and duties. [Amended 11/4/2014]
The Town Clerk shall be the Clerk of the Financial Town Referendum, Clerk
of the Council, Clerk of the Probate Court, Clerk of the Board of Canvassers,
and the Recorder of Deeds. It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to:
§ C9-4. Compensation. [Amended 11/4/2014]
The Town Clerk and Deputy Town Clerk shall receive such annual salaries
as included in the budget approved by the electors at the Financial Town
Referendum. All fees collected by either the Town Clerk or Deputy Town
(1) Make a permanent record of all proceedings and certify by signature all
actions of the aforesaid bodies;
(2) Be custodian of the Town Seal and of the official documents and records
of the Town;
(3) Direct, supervise, and be responsible for the recording of deeds,
mortgages, vital statistics, licenses and permits and such other records
as shall by Ordinance and Law be required to be kept by the Town
Clerk;
(4) Issue marriage licenses, burial permits, and such other licenses and
permits as are required by Ordinance and Law to be issued by the Town
Clerk;
(5) Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or by
Law pertaining to Town Clerks, and such other duties appropriate to
the Office as the Council may require.
§ C9-1 HOME RULE CHARTER § C9-4
C:35
Clerk shall be transmitted to the Town Treasurer and deposited in the
general funds of the Town unless otherwise directed by the laws of the
State.
§ C9-4 GLOCESTER CODE § C9-4
C:36
ARTICLE X
PUBLIC WORKS
§ C10-1. Appointment.
There shall be a Department of Public Works which shall be headed by
the Director of Public Works who shall be appointed by the Council to
serve at its pleasure. The Director shall be responsible for the supervision
and administration of the work of the Department and shall have all the
powers, rights, and duties prescribed by the Laws of the State for Highway
Supervisors and such other duties as the Council may require.
§ C10-2. Compensation.
The Director of the Department of Public Works shall receive such
compensation as shall be fixed by the Council, which compensation shall be
paid from the appropriation for the Department of Public Works.
§ C10-3. Powers and duties.
There shall be a Department of Public Works that shall be responsible for
the functions and services of the Town relating to highways, bridges, public
parking lots, solid waste disposal and public buildings and facilities, except
school buildings unless otherwise herein provided. The Department shall
also be responsible for such other duties of a like nature as may be assigned
to it from time to time by the Council.
§ C10-1 HOME RULE CHARTER § C10-3
C:37

ARTICLE XI
PUBLIC SAFETY
§ C11-1. Police Department.
1. Organization: There shall be a Police Department, the head of which
shall be a Chief of Police. In addition to Chief of Police there shall be
such other Subordinate Officers and Patrol Officers as shall from time
to time be determined by the Council. Said Chief, Subordinate Officers
and Patrol Officers, subject to such probationary requirements as may
hereinafter be set forth, shall constitute the permanent Police
Department of the Town.
2. Qualifications: The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Council and
shall have at least five years' experience above the rank of Patrol Officer
in any organized Police Department and have expertise in the
organization, administration, management and direction of police
personnel and shall possess such other qualifications as the Council
may prescribe by Ordinance.
All police officers below the rank of Chief shall be appointed or
promoted as the case may be by the Council upon recommendation by
the Chief of Police, provided that they shall have satisfactorily passed
such qualifying tests as the State may require concerning standards
and training for police officers and such other qualifying tests as the
Chief of Police and/or the Council may require by Ordinance. All
members of the force shall, at the time of their permanent appointment,
have served for a period of not less than one year in a probationary
status after completion of the required training during which period
they may be removed at any time by the Council upon recommendation
of the Chief of Police, with or without cause.
3. Powers and Duties: The Police Department shall be responsible for the
preservation of the public peace, prevention of crime, apprehension of
criminals, protection of the rights of persons and property and the
enforcement of the statutes of the State and the Ordinances of the
Town. The Police Department shall also be responsible for assisting
other Town Departments and Officials in the performance of their
duties where required.
4. In addition to the members of the permanent police force of said Town,
the Town Council, upon the recommendation of the Chief of Police, may
from time to time appoint reserve police officers for occasional service
and for limited terms, none of which shall exceed one year. Said reserve
police officers shall receive such compensation as shall from time to
time be fixed by the Town Council within the limits of the appropriations
currently available for such purposes.
Prior to their appointment as reserve police officers, they shall have
passed such qualifying tests as the Town Council shall require by
ordinance: furthermore, they shall attend and successfully complete the
§ C11-1 HOME RULE CHARTER § C11-1
C:39
§ C11-2. Animal Control Officer and Appraiser of Dog Damage.
[Amended 11/4/2014]
There shall be one or more Animal Control Officers appointed by the
Council, to serve at the pleasure of the Council, who shall be responsible for
the supervision and enforcement of Laws and Ordinances pertaining to dogs
and other animals, and who shall have such other powers and duties as are
prescribed by Law or Ordinance. The Animal Control Officer(s) shall receive
such compensation as the Council may fix, within the limits of the amount
appropriated in the budget voted on at the Financial Town Referendum. The
Council shall appoint one or more appraisers of dog damage, one of whom
may be an Animal Control Officer, who shall serve at the pleasure of the
Council and who shall have such powers and duties as are prescribed by
Law or Ordinance.
§ C11-3. Fire Department and/or Emergency Medical Services.
[Amended 11/4/2014]
Authorization: In the event any of the legislatively created fire districts
are no longer able to provide adequate fire protection and/or emergency
medical services, the Council may by Ordinance, and subject to approval at
a Financial Town Referendum, create a Fire Department and/or emergency
medical services.
§ C11-4. Emergency management. [Amended 11-4-2008; 11/4/2014]
There shall be a Director of Emergency Management appointed by the
Council who shall:
State certified school given for reserve police officers; and furthermore
they shall undergo the State psychiatric examination required for all
police officers. Only those reserve police officers that have been
certified as qualified shall carry firearms. Reserve police officers may
be re-certified or re-appointed by the Town Council, again for the
maximum of one year. They may be removed by the Town Council at any
time with or without cause.
There shall be no Constable appointments by the Town Council.
1. Prepare a Comprehensive Plan for the utilization of Town facilities,
equipment and personnel during any emergency.
2. Assist the Council in any declared emergency.
3. Be the liaison with the State Office of Emergency Management and the
State Health Department.
4. Perform any other duties or functions as the Council may direct by
ordinance or during any emergency as the Council President may
direct.
5. Be a qualified elector of the Town.
§ C11-1 GLOCESTER CODE § C11-4
C:40
ARTICLE XII
PLANNING AND ZONING
§ C12-1. Planning Board.
There shall be a Planning Board which shall act in an advisory capacity to
the Council in all matters concerning the physical growth and development
of the Town and affecting the health, safety and general welfare of the
people. The Planning Board shall administer the Subdivision Ordinance of
the Town as required by that Ordinance and perform such other duties as
may be prescribed by law.
Membership, Terms of Office and Vacancies. The Planning Board shall
consist of seven members appointed by the Council from among the
qualified electors of the Town, each for a term of five years. The said terms
shall be so arranged that the term of no more than two nor fewer than one
member shall expire each year. No member shall be an elected official or
employee of the Town. Any vacancy which may occur in the membership of
the Board shall be filled by the Council for the remainder of the unexpired
term. The Board shall elect a chairperson and such other officers as it may
determine from among its membership.
§ C12-2. Zoning Board of Review.
There shall be a Zoning Board of Review which shall have such powers and
duties as are prescribed by the Laws of the State and Ordinance of the Town
for such Boards. The Zoning Board of Review shall also serve as the Platting
Board of Review and shall have such powers and duties as are prescribed
by the Laws of the State and Ordinances of the Town for such Boards.
Membership, Terms of Office and Vacancies. The Zoning Board of Review
shall consist of five members appointed by the Council from among the
qualified electors of the Town, each for a term of five years. One member
shall be appointed each year. No member shall be an elected official of the
Town nor shall any member be an employee of the Town. Any vacancy which
may occur in the membership of the Board shall be filled by the Council
for the remainder of the unexpired term. The Council shall each year at its
January meeting name two auxiliary members of said Board who shall sit
as active members whenever required. The Board shall elect a chairperson
and such other officers as it may determine from among its membership.
§ C12-1 HOME RULE CHARTER § C12-2
C:41

ARTICLE XIII
OTHER OFFICES AND COMMISSIONS
§ C13-1. Director of Human Services. [Amended 11-2-2004; 11/4/
2014]
There shall be a Director of Human Services who shall be elected at each
General Election for a term of two years and serve until a successor is
elected and qualified. Should a vacancy occur in the Office, the Council shall
fill the same until the next General Election following the vacancy.
The Director of Human Services shall administer all welfare statutes of the
State or Federal government, the administration of which is delegated to
the Town, and shall have all powers and duties relating to the poor, needy,
and dependent persons as shall by law be appropriate to the office. The
Director of Human Services shall receive such compensation as shall be
fixed by the budget approved at the Financial Town Referendum.
§ C13-2. Sealer of Weights and Measures.
There shall be a Sealer of Weights and Measures appointed by the Council
to serve at the pleasure of the Council. The Sealer of Weights and Measures
shall have such powers and duties as are prescribed by law.
§ C13-3. Building and Zoning Inspector. [Amended 11-2000]
There shall be a Building and Zoning Inspector appointed by the Council
to serve at the pleasure of the Council who shall be responsible for the
supervision and enforcement of Ordinances relating to buildings, zoning,
trailers, campgrounds, minimum housing and other matters which come
under the Inspector's jurisdiction pursuant to statute or ordinance. The
Building and Zoning Inspector shall receive such compensation as may be
set by a vote of the Council.
§ C13-4. Town Sergeant.
There shall be a Town Sergeant who shall be elected at each general
election for a term of two years and shall serve until a successor is elected
and qualified. Should a vacancy occur in the Office of Sergeant, the Council
shall fill the same until the next General Election following the vacancy.
The Sergeant shall have such powers and duties as are prescribed by law
and shall receive such fees as are prescribed by law and such additional
compensation as may be fixed by the Council.
§ C13-5. Conservation Commission.
There shall be a Conservation Commission established in accordance with
State Law.
§ C13-1 HOME RULE CHARTER § C13-6
C:43
§ C13-6. Housing Authority.
The Council shall appoint members of the Housing Authority herein
established as provided by State Law.
§ C13-7. Tree Warden.
There shall be a Tree Warden appointed by the Council serving at its
pleasure who shall have the qualifications prescribed by State Law. The
Warden shall perform the functions and duties of the office as prescribed
by State Law. The Tree Warden shall have such powers and duties as
prescribed by Law and shall receive such fees as are prescribed by Law.
§ C13-8. Recreation Commission.
There shall be a Recreation Commission appointed by the Council to serve
at its pleasure. The powers and duties shall include:
§ C13-9. Land Trust.
Council will appoint five of the seven trustees of the Land Trust as provided
by State Law.
§ C13-10. Additional offices and commissions.
Council shall create or abolish by Ordinance such other Offices and
Commissions as may be required by Law or may be deemed necessary.
§ C13-11. Qualifications. [Amended 11-2-2004]
All persons appointed to the offices provided for in this Article (Article XIII,
§§ C13-1 through C13-9), with the exception of § C13-2, Sealer of Weights
and Measures; § C13-3, Building and Zoning Inspector; and § C13-7, Tree
Warden, shall be qualified electors at the time of their appointment and
during their term of service.
1. Creation of a Comprehensive Recreation Program for the Town of
Glocester which it will submit in accordance with State laws governing
Town-wide Comprehensive Planning.
2. Responsibility, along with the Director of Public Works, under direction
of the Council, for the maintenance and operation of public beaches,
parks, playgrounds and the operation of all recreational buildings and
activities therein.
3. Any additional duties as shall be required by the Council, this Charter
or by Law.
§ C13-6 GLOCESTER CODE § C13-11
C:44
ARTICLE XIV
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ C14-1. Definitions.
§ C14-2. Term of office.
The term of office of all Offices, members of Boards, Commissions or
Committees appointed with the approval of the Council, or appointed or
elected by the Council, shall be concurrent with the term of the Council,
unless otherwise provided in the Charter or by State Law. Every elected or
appointed officer of the Town who is elected or appointed for a specific term
1. "Council" — The term "Council" when used in this Charter shall refer to
the Town Council of the Town of Glocester.
2. "Elector" — The term "Elector" as used in this Charter, shall refer to
any person having the qualifications required by law to vote in elections
in the Town of Glocester.
3. "General Election" — The term "General Election" shall mean an
election held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November in
even numbered years, at which time, in addition to the offices provided
in this Charter, there are elected candidates to fill the offices of
Senators and Representatives in the General Assembly, members of
Congress, or such other offices as may be provided by law. [Amended
7-1997]
4. "No Other Public Town Office" — Whenever in this Charter it shall be
provided that the named elected or appointed office shall hold no other
public Town office or employment in the service of the Town of
Glocester. There shall be excepted therefrom the Office of notary
public, Justice of the Peace, member of the National Guard, member of
a reserve component of the Armed Services of the United States;
volunteer firefighter, volunteer police officer, Civil Defense worker,
member of a Committee or Group formed by any religious, charitable or
educational organization to work alone, or with other members, to
carry out projects in conjunction with other municipalities of the State,
the State of Rhode Island, or with an agency of the United States.
5. "Publish" — The words "Publish" or "Published" as used in this Charter
shall mean to cause to be printed, as a paid advertisement, in one or
more newspapers having a general circulation in the Town of Glocester,
the notice of matter to be brought to the attention of the inhabitants of
the Town.
6. "Special Election" — The term "Special Election" shall mean any
election held by virtue of an act of the General Assembly, or by action of
the Town Council of Glocester, in accordance with law.
7. "Ex-officio" — The term "Ex-officio" shall mean by virtue of official
position.
§ C14-1 HOME RULE CHARTER § C14-2
C:45
shall continue to hold such office until a successor is elected or appointed
and qualified. Any appointed Officer of a Board or Commission may be
removed from the office by the Town Council for due cause following a
public hearing.
§ C14-3. Open meetings. [Amended 11/4/2014]
All meetings of the Council, the School Committee, and every other Board,
Committee and Commission created by this Charter or which may be
hereafter created by the Council, except when in Executive or closed
session sanctioned by Law, shall at all times be open and accessible to the
public.
§ C14-4. Public records.
All records and accounts of the Council and of every Board, Commission,
Office and Agency of the Town shall be open to public inspection at all
reasonable times during business hours, except:
§ C14-5. Minority membership.
The members of any Board, Commission, or Agency appointed by the
Council shall not be composed entirely of members of the same political
party.
1. The records of the Police Department and Town Solicitor, the disclosure
of which would tend to defeat the lawful purpose which they are
intended to accomplish;
2. Records of the Department of Public Welfare pertaining to the history of
individual cases;
3. Records in the Office of the Town Clerk pertaining to adoptions and the
parentage of adopted children;
4. Records of the School Committee pertaining to grades and matters of
discipline of individual pupils;
5. All other records required by law to be treated as confidential. Any
person inspecting public records as above provided shall be permitted
to make written copies or abstracts of any of such records. It shall be
the duty of any officer or employee of the Town having custody or
control of any records or accounts open to public inspection as above
provided, to furnish, as expeditiously as possible, to any person
requesting the same, a certified copy of any such record or account, or
any portion thereof, upon the payment of a reasonable charge for the
preparation of the copy.
§ C14-2 GLOCESTER CODE § C14-6
C:46
§ C14-6. Compensation of officers and employees. [Amended 11/4/
2014]
The budget adopted at the Financial Town Referendum shall set the
compensation of elected officials of the Town. The Council may provide
that certain appointees shall serve without compensation but shall be
reimbursed for necessary expenses actually made by them. Any officer or
employee who performs the duties of an officer other than his/her own, shall
not be entitled to any additional compensation unless the Council shall so
provide by Resolution or Ordinance.
§ C14-7. Disclosure of financial interest.
Any officer or employee of the Town who has a financial interest, direct or
indirect, or by reason of the ownership of stock in any corporation, in any
contract with the Town or in the sale of land, material, supplies, or services
to the Town, or to a contractor supplying the Town, shall make known that
interest, and shall refrain from voting upon or otherwise participating in the
capacity as a Town officer or employee in the making of such sale or in the
making of such contract. Any officer or employee of the Town who willfully
conceals such a financial interest, or willfully violates the provisions of this
section shall forfeit his or her office or position. Violation of this section with
the knowledge of the person or corporation contracting with or making a
sale to the Town shall render the contract or sale voidable by the Council.
§ C14-8. Prohibitions.
§ C14-9. Non-interference by Council.
The Council or its members shall deal with Town officers and employees
solely through the procedures and rules adopted as a result of the Personnel
Policy ordered to be established in this Charter. No Council member shall
1. No person shall be appointed to or removed from or in any way favored
or discriminated against, with respect to any Town position or
appointive Town office, because of race, color, age, handicap, gender,
political or religious affiliations or opinions.
2. No officer or employee of the Town shall collect any fees or perquisites
for personal use, but such fees or perquisites, collectible under law,
shall be paid into the treasury of the Town.
3. No officer or employee of the Town shall solicit or accept any
compensation or gratuity in the form of money or otherwise for any act
or omission in the course of public work.
4. No officer or employee of the Town shall use, or permit to be used, Town
property for private purposes; and no officer or employee of the Town
shall use public facilities for the purpose of conducting private
business.
§ C14-6 HOME RULE CHARTER § C14-9
C:47
give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately, as
a matter of individual action.
§ C14-10. Separability.
If any provision of this Charter is held invalid, the other provisions of the
Charter shall not be affected thereby. If the application of the Charter,
or any of its provisions, to any person or circumstance is held invalid,
the application of the Charter and its provisions to other persons or
circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
§ C14-11. Amending of the Charter. [Amended 11-2-2004]
This Charter may be amended or a new Charter adopted by the electors
of the Town in the manner provided by the Constitution of the State. The
Council shall every fifth year after the adoption of the charter, or more often
if it is deemed necessary, appoint a Study Committee of nine members, who
shall at the time of their appointment and during the term of service be
qualified electors of the Town, to review this Charter. Said Committee shall
within six months of its appointment submit to the Council a report with its
recommendations for amendment(s), addition(s), or deletion(s).
§ C14-12. Town employees.
Whereas it is important and necessary to preserve the integrity of the
government of the Town of Glocester by ensuring that Town employees be
at all times beyond suspicion of any violation of the public trust:
§ C14-13. Personnel system and policies.
The Council shall within one year of the adoption of this Charter develop
and create by Ordinance a Personnel System and Policies for the Town of
Glocester.
§ C14-14. Vacancies.
Unless otherwise provided for in this Charter, an office shall become vacant
upon the incumbent's death, resignation and acceptance thereof, removal
from office in any manner authorized by law or forfeiture of office. An
incumbent office holder shall forfeit the office of the office holder:
1. Any employee of the Town of Glocester who is indicted for any crime
involving public funds, public property or moral turpitude may be
immediately suspended without pay and benefits until such time as the
employee is found not guilty or the charges are dismissed.
2. Any employee of the Town of Glocester who is charged by way of
criminal information or by a warrant and summons for any crime
involving public funds, public property or moral turpitude may be
immediately suspended until such time as the employee shall be found
not guilty or the charges are dismissed.
§ C14-9 GLOCESTER CODE § C14-14
C:48
§ C14-15. Initiative and referendum. [Amended 7-1997; 11-4-2008]
In order to preserve direct participation in government to the voters of
Glocester, there are hereby established procedures whereby they may
initiate legislative proposals for consideration by the Town Council and the
voters. Procedures are also established whereby voters can petition the
Town Council to reconsider ordinances it has passed.
1. Lacks at any time during the term of office any qualifications for the
office prescribed by this Charter or by law.
2. Violates any express provision of this Charter.
3. Is convicted of a felony or a crime of moral turpitude and exhausts all
appeals from said conviction.
1. General Authority.
a. Initiative. The qualified electors of the Town shall have the power to
propose ordinances to the Town Council and, if the Town Council
fails to adopt an ordinance so proposed without any change in
substance, to adopt or reject it at a Town election, provided that
such power shall not extend to the budget or capital program or
any ordinance relating to appropriation of money, levy of taxes or
salaries of Town officers or employees.
b. Referendum. The qualified electors of the Town shall have power to
require reconsideration by the Town Council of any adopted
ordinance and, if the Town Council fails to repeal an ordinance so
reconsidered, to approve or reject it at a Town election, provided
that such power shall not extend to the budget or capital program
or any emergency ordinance or ordinance relating to appropriation
of money or levy of taxes.
2. Commencement of proceedings - Petitions Committee; affidavit. Any
five qualified electors may commence initiative or referendum
proceedings by filing with the Town Clerk an affidavit stating they will
constitute the Petitioners' Committee and be responsible for circulating
the petition and filing it in proper form, stating their names and
addresses, and specifying the address to which all notices to the
Committee are to be sent, and setting out in full the proposed initiative
ordinance or citing the ordinance sought to be reconsidered. Promptly
after the affidavit of the Petitioners' Committee is filed, the Town Clerk
shall issue the appropriate petition blanks to the Petitioners'
Committee.
3. Petitions.
a. Number of signatures. Initiative and petitions must be signed by
qualified electors of the Town equal in number to at least 10% of
the total number of qualified electors registered to vote at the last
regular Town election.
§ C14-14 HOME RULE CHARTER § C14-15
C:49
b. Forms and content. All papers of a petition shall be uniform in size
and style and shall be assembled as one instrument for filing. Each
signature shall be executed in ink or indelible pencil and shall be
followed by the address of the person signing. Petitions shall
contain or have attached thereto throughout their circulation the
full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered.
c. Affidavit of circulator. Each paper shall have attached to it when
filed an affidavit executed by the circulator thereof stating that the
circulator personally circulated the paper, the number of
signatures thereon, that all the signatures were affixed in the
presence, that the circulator believes them to be the genuine
signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be and that
each signer had an opportunity before signing to read the full text
of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered.
4. Procedure after Filing.
a. Certificate of Town Clerk; amendment. Within 20 days after the
petition is filed, the Town Clerk shall complete a certificate as to its
sufficiency, specifying if it is insufficient, the particulars wherein it
is defective and shall promptly send a copy of the certificate to the
Petitioners' Committee by registered mail. A petition certified
insufficient for lack of the required number of valid signatures may
be amended once if the Petitioners' Committee files a notice of
intention to amend it with the Town Clerk within five days after
receiving the copy of the certificate and files a supplementary
petition upon additional papers within 10 days after receiving the
copy of such certificate. Such supplementary petition shall comply
with the requirements of Subsections b and c of 3 and within five
days after it is filed, the Town Clerk shall complete and certify as to
the sufficiency of the petition as amended and promptly send a
copy of such certificate to the Petitioners' Committee by registered
mail as in the case of an original petition. If a petition or amended
petition is certified insufficient and the Petitioners' Committee does
not elect to amend or request Town Council review under
Subsection b of this subsection within the time required, the Town
Clerk shall promptly present the certificate to the Town Council
and the certificate shall then be a final determination as to the
sufficiency of the petition.
b. Town Council review. If a petition has been certified insufficient
and the Petitioner's Committee does not file notice of intention to
amend it or if an amended petition has been certified insufficient
the Committee may, within five days after receiving the copy of
such certificate, file a request that it be reviewed by the Town
Council. The Town Council shall review the certificate at its next
meeting following the filing of such request and approve or
disapprove it, and the Town Council's determination shall be a final
determination as to the sufficiency of the petition.
§ C14-15 GLOCESTER CODE § C14-15
C:50
c. Court review: new petition. A final determination as to the
sufficiency of the petition shall be subject to court review. A final
determination of insufficiency, even if sustained upon court review,
shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose.
5. Action on petitions.
a. When an initiative or referendum petition has been finally
determined sufficient, the Town Council shall promptly consider
the proposed initiative ordinance in the manner provided for
ordinance adoption or reconsider the referred ordinance by voting
its repeal. If the Town Council fails to adopt a proposed initiative
ordinance without any change in substance within 60 days or fails
to repeal the referred ordinance within 30 days after the date the
petition was finally determined sufficient, it shall submit the
proposal or referred ordinance to the voters of the Town.
b. Submission to voters. The vote of the Town on a proposed or
referred ordinance shall be held not less than 30 days and not later
than one year from the date of a final Town Council vote thereon. If
no regular Town election is to be held within the period prescribed
in this subsection, the Town Council shall provide for a special
election; otherwise, the vote shall be held at the same time as such
regular election, except that the Town Council may at its discretion
provide for a special election at an earlier date within the
prescribed period. Copies of the proposed or referred ordinance
shall be made available at the polls and Town Hall.
c. Withdrawal of petitions. An initiative or referendum petition may
be withdrawn at any time prior to the 15th day preceding the day
scheduled for a vote of the Town by filing with the Town Clerk a
request for withdrawal signed by at least four members of the
Petitioners' Committee. Upon the filing of such request the petition
shall have no further effect and all proceedings thereon shall be
terminated.
6. Results of election.
a. Initiative. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a
proposed initiative ordinance vote in its favor, it shall be considered
adopted upon certification of the election results and shall be
treated in all respects in the same manner as ordinances of the
same kind adopted by the Town Council. If conflicting ordinances
are approved at the same election, the one receiving the greatest
number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such
conflict.
b. Referendum. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a
referred ordinance vote against it, it shall be considered repealed
upon certification of the election results.
§ C14-15 HOME RULE CHARTER § C14-16
C:51
§ C14-16. Recall. [Added 11-4-2008]
An elected official holding a Town office, having been in office for at least
six months, may be removed from office by a recall petition prepared and
approved by the voters of the Town in the manner hereinafter provided for
recall procedure.
1. Upon application of five qualified voters, the Town Clerk shall issue the
recall petition blanks, which shall be dated, which shall demand the
removal of the designated elected official, and shall state the cause
upon which the removal is sought. The petition is to be filed with the
Town Clerk within 60 days after issuance to be in order for the
certification process.
2. The signatures to a recall petition need not all be appended to one
paper but each signer shall add his/her signature as it appears on the
Board of Canvassers and Registration's records, his/her place of
residence giving the street and number or other sufficient designation if
there be no street and number. One of the signers shall take an oath
before an officer competent to administer oaths that the statement
therein made is true, as he/she believes, and each signature to the
paper appended is the genuine signature of the person whose name it
purports to be. The recall petition shall be signed by a least 10% of the
registered voters of the Town.
3. The petition is to be submitted by the Town Clerk to the Board of
Canvassers and Registration for certification forthwith. If the petition
shall be found and certified by the Board of Canvassers and
Registration to be sufficient within 10 days, the Board shall submit the
same with its certificate to the Town Council without delay, and the
Town Council shall order an election to be held on a Tuesday fixed by
them not more than 60 days after the date of the Board of Canvassers
and Registration's certificate that a sufficient petition is filed; provided,
however, that if any other Town election is to occur within 90 days after
the date of the certificate, the Town Council shall postpone the holding
of the recall election to the date of such other election.
4. If a majority of the votes cast on the question of removal is affirmative,
the person whose removal is sought shall thereupon be deemed
removed from office upon certification of the election results.
§ C14-16 GLOCESTER CODE § C14-16
C:52
ARTICLE XV
SUCCESSION IN GOVERNMENT
§ C15-1. Continuation of laws and ordinances.
All Town Ordinances, Resolutions, Orders, and Regulations which are in
force when this Charter becomes effective are repealed to the extent that
they are inconsistent with or interfere with the effective operation of this
Charter, or of Ordinances, Resolutions, Orders and Regulations adopted
pursuant thereto. To the extent that the Constitution and laws of the State
permit, all general laws or special acts relating to or affecting the Town or
its agencies, officers, or employees which are in effect when this Charter
becomes effective, are superseded to the extent they are inconsistent with
or interfere with the effective operation of this Charter, or of Ordinances,
Resolutions, Orders, and Regulations adopted pursuant thereto. The
Council shall proceed to enact or adopt as promptly as possible any
Ordinances, Rules, Resolutions and Orders which are necessary to
implement the provisions of this Charter.
§ C15-2. Continuation of the tax obligation.
All taxes which have been levied or assessed but not collected at the
time this Charter becomes effective shall be collected, with any penalties
thereon, by the Town government hereby established in accordance with
law.
§ C15-3. Continuation of government.
All Committees, Commissions, Boards, Departments and Offices of the Town
shall continue to perform the duties until reappointed or reelected or until
successors to the respective positions are appointed or elected in the
manner provided by this Charter.
§ C15-4. Continuation of administrative personnel.
All persons holding an office or position in the administrative table of
organization of the Town or any person serving as a member of any Board,
Commission, or Committee at the time this Charter takes effect shall retain
such office or position and continue in the performance of duties for the
term originally designated at the time of the appointment or election, or
until provision shall have been made, in accordance with this Charter, for
the performance of such duties by a person or body thereunto authorized
or the discontinuance of such office, unless as otherwise established in this
Charter.
§ C15-5. Transfer of records and property.
All records, property and equipment whatsoever of any Office, Department
or Agency or any part thereof, the powers and duties of which are assigned
in whole or in part thereof to another Office, Department or Agency by
§ C15-1 HOME RULE CHARTER § C15-5
C:53
this Charter, shall be transferred and delivered forthwith to the Office,
Department or Agency to which such powers and duties are so assigned.
§ C15-6. Continuation of contracts and obligations.
All leases, contracts, franchises and obligations entered into by the Town or
for its benefit prior to this Charter taking effect, shall continue in full force
and effect.
§ C15-7. Pending actions and proceedings.
No action or proceeding, civil or criminal, in law or in equity pending at the
time when this Charter shall take effect, brought by or against the Town
or any Office, Department or Agency or Officer thereof, shall be affected
or abated by the adoption of this Charter or by anything contained in said
Charter.
§ C15-8. Transfer of accounts and appropriations.
The Council shall have the authority to restructure the accounts and
redistribute the appropriations for the fiscal year in which the Charter shall
take effect for the operation of the Town government under the provisions
of this Charter.
§ C15-9. Ordinance to implement Charter.
The Town Council shall proceed to enact, adopt, or amend as promptly as
possible all Ordinances, Resolutions, and Rules which may be necessary to
implement the provisions of this Charter.
§ C15-10. Effective date.
This Charter shall become effective on January 1, 1991; amended July 1,
1997; amended November 7, 2000; amended November 2, 2004; amended
November 4, 2008; amended November 4, 2014.
§ C15-5 GLOCESTER CODE § C15-10
C:54
The Code
Part 1: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ C15-10 HOME RULE CHARTER § C15-10
C:55

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 2-17-2005, effective 3-16-2005]
§ 1-1. Legislative intent.
In accordance with § C4-10 of the Charter of the Town of Glocester, the
ordinances and policies of the Town of Glocester, as codified by General
Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of the Home Rule Charter and
Chapters 1 through 406, together with an Appendix, shall be known
collectively as the “Code of the Town of Glocester,” hereafter termed the
“Code.” Wherever reference is made in any of the ordinances and policies
contained in the “Code of the Town of Glocester” to any other ordinance
or policy appearing in said Code, such reference shall be changed to the
appropriate chapter title, chapter number, article number or section
number appearing in the Code as if such ordinance or policy had been
formally amended to so read.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the 2004 Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of the Code by this ordinance, are intended as a continuation
of such ordinances and policies and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the
prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued in
full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the
Town Council of the Town of Glocester, and it is the intention of said Council
that each such provision contained within the Code is hereby reaffirmed
as it appears in said Code, except as specifically modified, amended or
repealed. Only such provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from
this Code shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3
below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of enactments not included in Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the Town of Glocester
in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not contained in
such Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are
hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this ordinance.
§ 1-4. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this ordinance shall not
affect the following classes of ordinances, rights and obligations, which are
hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Town of Glocester prior to the effective date
§ 1-1 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-4
C:57
§ 1-5. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
of this ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability.
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Town of
Glocester or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result
therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Town of Glocester.
D. Any agreement entered into or any franchise, license, right, easement
or privilege heretofore granted or conferred by the Town of Glocester.
E. Any ordinance of the Town of Glocester providing for the laying out,
opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing
grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any
right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or other public place
within the Town of Glocester or any portion thereof.
F. Any ordinance of the Town of Glocester appropriating money or
transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or
authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the Town of
Glocester or other instruments or evidence of the Town's indebtedness.
G. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The annexation or dedication of property.
J. Any ordinance relating to salaries and compensation.
K. Any ordinance amending the Zoning Map.
L. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for Town employees.
M. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the Town.
N. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 11-2-2004.
§ 1-4 GLOCESTER CODE § 1-6
C:58
§ 1-6. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of the
ordinances known collectively as the “Code of the Town of Glocester” or
any new ordinances or policies, when enacted or adopted in such form as
to indicate the intention of the Town Council to be a part thereof, shall
be deemed to be incorporated into such Code so that reference to the
Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements. Whenever such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements to the Code shall be enacted or adopted,
they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in
the loose-leaf book containing said Code as amendments and supplements
thereto. Nothing contained in this ordinance shall affect the status of any
ordinance or policy contained herein, and such ordinances or policies may
be amended, deleted or changed from time to time as the Town Council
deems desirable.
§ 1-8. (Reserved)
§ 1-9. (Reserved)
§ 1-10. (Reserved)
§ 1-11. (Reserved)
§ 1-12. (Reserved)
§ 1-13. (Reserved)
§ 1-6 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-13
C:59

ARTICLE II
Penalties
[Adopted 9-16-1993, effective 10-13-1993 (Ch. III, § 1, 3-01-01, of
the 1991 Code)]
§ 1-14. General penalty; continuing violations.
§ 1-15. Specific penalties.
Specific penalties for violations are as follows:
Violation Penalty Amount
Dogs (Chapter 139)
Violation of Article I in general:
First offense $20.00
Second offense within one year $30.00
Third and subsequent offenses within one
year
$35.00
Failure to license dog (§ 139-3) $10.00
Keeping or harboring of dogs creating
nuisances (§ 139-11)
First offense $20.00/day
Second offense $30.00/day
Third or subsequent offenses committed
within 12 months of the first offense
$35.00/day
Violation of mandatory spaying/neutering
provisions by adopting party (§ 139-17)
First offense $50
Second offense $150
Third and subsequent offenses $400
A. Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Code or in
any other Town ordinance or resolution, or in any rule, regulation or
order promulgated by any officer of agency of the Town under authority
duly vested in him or if any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be
unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is
provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any
other ordinance or resolution of the Town or such rule, regulation or
order shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 30 days.
B. Except where otherwise provided, every day any violation of this Code
or any other ordinance or resolution of the Town or such rule,
regulation or order shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 1-14 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-15
C:61
Violation Penalty Amount
Violation of mandatory spaying/neutering
provisions by releasing agency (§ 139-17)
First offense $100
Second offense $250
Third and subsequent offenses $500
Failure of releasing agency to utilize
forfeited deposits as specified in § 139-18
First offense $100
Second offense $250
Third and subsequent offenses $500
Chapter 151, Camping and Travel Trailer
Parks
Violation of chapter Not more than $100
Billiard, bagatelle, pool, and scippio table
and game room license fees [Added
12-26-1992]
Penalty for maintenance of unlicensed
tables
See R.I.G.L. § 5-2-11
Mandatory recycling. Penalties for violation
of Chapter 234 shall be as follows: [Added
9-16-1993]
Residents violating § 234-3
First offense: Written warning
Second offense: $25.00
Subsequent offenses: $50.00
Haulers violating § 234-4
First offense: Written warning
Second offense: $200.00
Subsequent offenses: Loss of license
§ 1-16. through § 1-19. (Reserved)
§ 1-15 GLOCESTER CODE § 1-16
C:62
ARTICLE III
Comprehensive Community Plan
[Adopted 5-3-2018, effective 5-3-2018]
§ 1-20. Comprehensive Plan update and/or amendment.
The Comprehensive Plan of the Town of Glocester, originally adopted on
June 16, 1994 and duly amended and/or updated from time to time, and
as most recently updated and adopted by the Glocester Town Council
(per R.I.G.L. § 45-22.2-8), on April 19, 2018, entitled "Glocester 2040," is
hereby incorporated in its entirety, by reference, in the Glocester Code of
Ordinances.
§ 1-21. Effective date.
The Comprehensive Plan, as amended, shall take effect for the purpose
of conforming municipal land use decisions and for the purpose of being
transmitted to the Rhode Island Director of Administration for state review
as of the date of adoption by the Town Council.
§ 1-22. through § 1-29. (Reserved)
§ 1-20 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-22
C:63

ARTICLE IV
Emergency Ordinances3
[Adopted as indicated in section histories]
§ 1-30. Ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation
moratorium. [Adopted 6-7-2018, effective 6-7-2018]
§ 1-31. Emergency appropriation for acquisition of total building
generator for Town Hall. [Adopted 7-19-2018, effective 7-19-2018]
3. Editor's Note: The complete text of ordinances listed in this article is available in the
Town offices.
§ 1-30 HOME RULE CHARTER § 1-31
C:65
Chapter 9
COURTS
§ 1-31 GLOCESTER CODE § 1-31
9:66
ARTICLE I
Probate Court
§ 9-1. Judge of probate.
A Judge of Probate for the Town of Glocester shall be appointed by the Town
Council for a term concurrent with that of the Council. The Judge of Probate
shall be an attorney admitted to practice before the Supreme Court of the
State of Rhode Island, and have been engaged in the practice of law in the
State of Rhode Island for at least five years prior to his appointment.
§ 9-2. Vacancies.
Whenever the Judge of the Probate Court of this Town shall be unable to
sit, or shall be absent, or shall be disqualified from sitting in any action
or proceeding within his jurisdiction, then the Town Solicitor shall serve
as Acting Judge of the Probate Court, and if the Town Solicitor be likewise
absent, disqualified, or disqualifies himself, then the Judge of the Probate
Court of any neighboring town may serve as Acting Judge of the Probate
Court of the Town of Glocester, for said action or proceeding.
§ 9-3. Salary of Judge of Probate.
The Judge of Probate shall receive such salary as fixed by the Town Council
annually in the month of July within the amount appropriated by the
preceding annual Financial Town Meeting.
§ 9-4. Probate Clerk.
The Town Clerk of the Town of Glocester shall act as Clerk of the Probate
Court.
§ 9-1 COURTS § 9-4
9:67
Chapter 14
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
§ 14-1. Indemnification authorized.
With respect to any reasonable costs and expenses, including attorneys'
fees, and for any judgment or Town-approved settlement arising out of any
legal proceeding, it is hereby declared and found by the Town Council of
the Town of Glocester (the "Town") to be in the interests of the public
welfare and safety for the Town Council to have the authority to indemnify,
reimburse, defend, advance legal and other related costs, and otherwise
hold harmless any appointed or elected municipal officer who is charged
or found liable in a legal proceeding with having violated or exceeded
his official duties or committed any errors or omissions relating thereto;
provided the conduct complained of occurred in the discharge of the
person's official duty in a matter in which the Town had an interest,
occurred in the discharge of a duty imposed or authorized by law, and was
done in good faith.
§ 14-2. Payment of defense costs and judgments.
In its discretion, the Town Council may provide for or advance the costs of
defending any municipal officer who is charged with violating his official
duties or exceeding the scope thereof, and the Town may advance or
reimburse the costs of any approved settlement or judgment, including legal
fees, arising out of any such claim; provided, however, that in the event that
it is proven that the officer acted in bad faith or has committed a crime, or
has otherwise been found guilty of conduct which has no legal warrant or
basis, the Town has the discretion to refuse to pay any such expenses or
judgment and to recover any expenses or costs previously advanced to said
officer.
§ 14-3. Conditions for indemnification.
In order to indemnify, advance the costs and expenses for, reimburse or
otherwise hold harmless any municipal officer or employee for a claim or
a loss in connection with the discharge of his official duty, the officer or
employee must have:
A. Been acting in a matter in which the Town had an interest;
B. Been acting in the discharge of a duty imposed or authorized by law;
and
C. Acted in good faith.
§ 9-4 GLOCESTER CODE § 14-3
14:68
Chapter 27
MEETINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, Commissions and Committees — See
Part 2 of this Code.
§ 14-3 MEETINGS § 14-3
27:69

ARTICLE I
Absences from Appointed Boards
[Adopted 11-12-1976 (Ch. 1, § 9, 1-09-01, of the 1991 Code)]
§ 27-1. Notice of absences.
Whenever a member of any board, commission, or other appointed body,
the members of which have been, or are, appointed by the Glocester Town
Council, is absent from a duly scheduled meeting of such board, commission
or body three times in succession, or is absent from such meetings
comprising one-half or more of such meetings of such board, commission
or body during any given calendar year, the chairman or presiding officer
of such board, commission, or other body shall notify the Town Council in
writing of such fact, and give a copy of the same notice to the individual
concerned. This notice will also state that the Town Council will consider
such notice at its next regularly scheduled meeting.
§ 27-2. Explanation of absences; removal.
At the next regularly scheduled meeting the Town Council will ask for an
explanation from such individual, provided that such person has not already
offered his resignation to the Town Council, and if the Town Council is not
fully satisfied by such explanation it may, in its full discretion, remove such
person from membership of such board, commission or body.
§ 27-1 MEETINGS § 27-2
27:71

ARTICLE II
Notice of Meetings
[Adopted 12-11-1986 (Ch. 1, § 9, 1-09-02, of the 1991 Code]
§ 27-3. Notice required.
No meeting of the Town Council or of any municipal board, agency,
commission, authority or committee shall be held without reasonable prior
notice to the public and to all members of such Town Council, board,
commission, authority or committee.
§ 27-4. Responsibility for giving notice.
The person or persons calling a meeting of the Town Council, or any
board, commission, authority or committee shall give or cause to be given
reasonable prior notice of such meeting to the public and to all members of
such Town Council, Board, Commission, Authority or Committee.
§ 27-5. Notice to public.
Notice to the public shall be made by posting written notice of the time, date
and place of the meeting in a prominent place of public view in the Town
Hall, at least 48 hours prior to the meeting.
§ 27-6. Notice to board, commission or committee members.
Notice to a member shall be given in person, by direct telephone contact,
or by delivery of written notice of the time, date and place of the meeting to
the member.
§ 27-7. Regularly scheduled meetings.
Notice of regularly scheduled meetings may be given annually or
periodically as the schedule of such meetings is established.
§ 27-8. Emergency meetings.
Notwithstanding anything in this article to the contrary, notice of
emergency meetings shall be given in such manner as the emergency
conditions may reasonably dictate.
§ 27-9. Violations and penalties.
Each deliberate failure or refusal of an individual to give notice to the public
or to a member as required by this article shall be punishable by a fine as
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Penalties.
§ 27-10. Effect of violation on actions taken at meeting.
Noncompliance with this article shall not, in and of itself, affect the validity
of any actions taken at any otherwise lawful meeting.
§ 27-3 MEETINGS § 27-10
27:73
Chapter 35
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 27-10 GLOCESTER CODE § 27-10
35:74
ARTICLE I
Increase or Decrease in Number of Officers
[Adopted 10-11-1974 (Ch. I, § 6, 1-06-01, of the 1991 Code)]
§ 35-1. Conditions for change in number of officers.
The Town Council shall increase or diminish the number of such police
officers, whenever and as often as the electors of the Town of Glocester
qualified to vote on any proposition to impose a tax for the expenditure of
money shall, at the annual Town Financial Meeting, vote that the number
of the Town police officers shall be increased or diminished, and shall
appropriate the necessary sum therefor; except that the Town Council can
vote to increase the number of permanent police officers if the Town has
no direct financial responsibility towards paying the salary or salaries of
those new appointments, or if the appointment of additional police officers
does not exceed the current amount appropriated to the Glocester Police
Department by the duly-qualified electors of the Town at the annual Town
Financial Meeting.
§ 35-1 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 35-1
35:75

ARTICLE II
Retirement of Incapacitated Police Officers
[Adopted 8-15-2002, effective 8-15-2002 (Ch. I, § 6, 1-06-03, of the
1991 Code)]
§ 35-2. Mandatory retirement.
Any police officer, as defined in RIGL 45-19-1, who shall be absent from
his/her regular employment as a police officer for a period of 12 months
by reason of injuries received or sickness contracted in the performance
of his/her duties shall be deemed physically unfit for duty and shall be
required to retire from the Department and will be entitled to retirement
benefits (if any) as may be available under applicable law. A police officer
shall immediately, upon the expiration of such twelve-month period, apply
for disability or regular retirement, as eligible. Said police officer shall pay
to the Town any retirement benefits received for the period from the date of
application to the date of termination of employment.
§ 35-3. When effective; applicability.
This article shall take effect upon passage by the Town Council and shall
apply to any “Injured On Duty Claims” filed prior to and after the date of
passage.
§ 35-2 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 35-3
35:77
Chapter 40
(RESERVED)
Chapter 48
TOWN ROAD MAP
§ 48-1. Map adopted; amendments and appeals.
Pursuant to Title 45, Chapter 23.1, of the Rhode Island General Laws, as
amended, there shall be an official road map of the Town of Glocester. The
establishment of the map, its contents, any additions or changes thereto,
and any appeals of decisions made by Town officials in connection
therewith, shall be as provided in the General Laws.
Part 2: Boards, Commissions and Committees
Chapter 56
BUDGET BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Budget Board — See Charter Article VIII,
§ C8-2.
Rules of procedure for boards and
commissions — See Ch. 392.
§ 56-1. Establishment.
In accordance with the Home Rule Charter, Article VIII, § C8-2, there is
hereby continued a Budget Board for the Town of Glocester.
§ 56-2. Membership.
The Budget Board shall consist of seven members with appointed three-year
terms with appointments in January with one member named as Director of
Finance. The Board members who are first appointed shall be designated
to serve for terms of two members for one year, two members for two
years and two members for three years, respectively. Thereafter, Board
members shall be appointed as aforesaid for a term of three years with
appointments made in January. Appointed members of the Board shall be
eligible for reappointment and upon expiration of their term shall continue
to serve unless replaced. In the event of a vacancy on the Board, interim
appointments of appointed members shall be made by the Town Council to
complete the unexpired term of such position. If a member of such Board
shall cease to be a qualified elector and/or resident of the Town his/her
office shall thereby become vacant.
§ 35-3 GLOCESTER CODE § 56-2
48:78
Chapter 59
BUILDING CODE BOARD OF APPEALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building permits — See Ch. 145. Rules of procedure for boards and
commissions — See Ch. 392.
§ 59-1. Establishment.
In accordance with the Rhode Island State Building Code 23-27.3 through
127.2.1 (effective July 1, 1977), there is hereby continued a Building Code
Board of Appeals for the Town of Glocester, Rhode Island.
§ 59-2. Membership.
§ 59-3. Powers and duties.
The Building Code Board of Appeals shall have all the powers and duties
which are set forth in Title 23, Chapter 27.3, of the General Laws of Rhode
Island as amended so as to enable it to enforce the State Building Code.
Chapter 63
CANVASSING AUTHORITY, BIPARTISAN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Rules of procedure for boards and
commissions — See Ch. 392.
A. The Building Code Board of Appeals shall consist of five members with
appointed five-year terms as per the Enactment, with appointments in
June. One shall be an architect. Two shall be professional engineers.
One shall be a building official not from the municipality from which the
appeal is taken, except that a member of the general public may be
substituted for the building official. One shall be a builder or
superintendent of building construction.
B. Appointed members of the Board shall be eligible for reappointment
and upon expiration of their term shall continue to serve unless
replaced. In the event of a vacancy on the Board, interim appointments
of appointed members shall be made by the Town Council to complete
the unexpired term of such position. If a member of such Board shall
cease to be a qualified elector and/or resident of the Town his/her office
shall thereby become vacant.
§ 56-2 BUILDING CODE BOARD OF APPEALS § 63-1
59:79
§ 63-1. Establishment.
In order to facilitate the uniform registration of voters there shall be a
Bipartisan Canvassing Authority in the Town of Glocester.
§ 63-2. Appointment; membership; terms; vacancies; quorum.
The Town Council of the Town of Glocester shall appoint such Bipartisan
Canvassing Authority. Such Authority shall consist of three qualified
electors of said Town, not more than two of whom shall belong to the
same political party. The terms of the members of said Authority shall be
arranged so that the terms of office of the several members shall expire
in different years. Each member shall be appointed to serve for a term
of six years beginning on the first Monday in March following the date
of his or her appointment and until his or her successor is appointed
and qualified. No person shall be appointed or serve as a member of
such Authority who is an officer or employee of the United States or
of this state or of any city or town of this state. Any member of said
Authority who becomes a candidate for election to any public office and
who fails to file a declination of candidacy within the time allowed by law
shall be disqualified from holding membership upon said Authority and his
successor shall be appointed forthwith by the Town Council, who shall fill
any vacancy because of death, resignation or otherwise. For the purpose of
receiving registrations, a quorum shall be comprised of one member of the
Board; for all other purposes, a quorum shall consist of two members.
§ 63-3. Oath of office.
Every person appointed shall, before entering upon his duties, be sworn to
faithful performance thereof, and a record of such oath shall be kept by the
Clerk of said Authority.
§ 63-4. Transfer of powers to Authority; effect on duties of Town
Clerk.
Upon the establishment and by virtue of such establishment, and not prior
thereto, of a canvassing authority by the Town Council as required herein,
there shall be a transfer of the rights, powers and duties of the Town
Council concerning nominations, elections, registration of voters, and
canvassing rights, preparing and correcting the list of voters and other
matters related thereto to the Canvassing Authority. Nothing herein
contained shall be deemed to affect the powers and duties of the Town Clerk
concerning such matters as they are now exercised by him or her pursuant
to existing law and the provisions of this chapter.
§ 63-5. Clerk.
The Town Clerk shall be ex-officio the Clerk of the Canvassing Authority,
except as may be otherwise provided by law.
Chapter 68
§ 63-1 GLOCESTER CODE § 63-5
63:80
COMMUNITY RESOURCE AND WASTEWATER ADVISORY
COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Rules of procedure for boards and
commissions — See Ch. 392.
§ 68-1. Establishment; membership; terms.
Pursuant to Glocester Home Rule Charter § C13-10, there is hereby
established a Community Resource Commission consisting of seven regular
members and two alternate members, who shall be appointed by the Town
Council for terms concurrent with the terms of the Town Council, with
the exception that members should hold their respective offices until their
successors are qualified.
§ 68-2. Purpose.4
The purpose of the Community Resource Commission is to create a public
body whose primary responsibility is to assist the Town with implementation
and management of green energy resources and to advise the Town Council
and other Town boards and commissions on how the Town can better
utilize the natural, physical and human resources within the Town with the
purpose of offsetting the burden of taxation on the residents and businesses
of the Town.
§ 68-3. Powers and duties.
The Commission is hereby authorized:
A. To advise and make recommendations to the Town Council and other
Town boards and commissions from time to time in accordance with its
stated purpose. The Commission may, with the approval of the Town
Council, seek grant money and financing in coordination with
appropriate Town departments for engineering, construction and/or
installation of green energy resources such as water, solar and wind
power, as well as agricultural and commercial activities which will
benefit the Town and its residents. The Commission is authorized to
adopt bylaws, subject to the approval of the Town Council. The
Commission may assist with the installation, management, supervision
and operation of such facilities in coordination with appropriate Town
departments, subject to the approval of the Town Council. All financial
activities of the Commission shall be under the jurisdiction of the
Finance Department. The Commission is authorized to adopt a specific
charge in accordance with its stated purpose, subject to the approval of
the Town Council.
4. Editor's Note: See § 68-3, Powers and duties.
§ 63-5 CANVASSING AUTHORITY, BIPARTISAN § 68-3
63:81
§ 68-4. Meetings; records.
All meetings of the Commission shall comply with the Rhode Island Open
Meetings Law,5 and any person or his duly constituted representative shall
be entitled to appear and be heard on any matter before the Commission
before it reaches its decision. All records of its proceedings, resolutions and
actions shall be open to public view. The Commission shall come before the
Town Council annually, to display and explain a full and explicit audit of its
operations.
§ 68-5. Officers.
The members of the Commission shall elect a Chairperson and Vice
Chairperson from among their members. The term of office of the
Chairperson and Vice Chairperson, unless otherwise prescribed by the
Town Council, shall be for the calendar year.
§ 68-6. Termination.
The Commission may be terminated at any time by vote of the Town Council.
B. To establish a public education program to make property owners
aware of funding sources for the repair or replacement of on-site
wastewater treatment systems, the proper maintenance and care of
OWTS, and the need for periodic pumping. The education program shall
remain in place to educate new residents and to update the Commission
members and existing residents of the Town on new information or
procedures.
C. To raise funds for the administration, operation, contractual obligations
and services of the wastewater management district by:
(1) Seeking, applying for and obtaining grants and other funds from
the State of Rhode Island and/or the United States of America and/
or private entities.
D. To seek and receive grants of funds from governmental agencies or
private groups.
E. To establish a revolving fund to make available grants and low-interest
loans to individual property owners for the improvement, correction,
repair or replacement of failed OWTS.
F. To provide a list for use by the general public of local contractors who
are licensed to design, install or repair wastewater treatment systems
and local septage haulers and inspectors.
5. Editor's Note: See R.I.G.L § 42-46-1 et seq.
§ 68-3 GLOCESTER CODE § 68-6
63:82
Chapter 70
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 70, Comprehensive Community Plan Coordination
Committee, adopted 11-18-1999, effective 12-6-1999 (Ch. I, § 4,
1-04-01, of the 1991 Code), was repealed 5-3-2018, effective
5-3-2018.]
Chapter 74
CONSERVATION COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Rules of procedure for boards and
commissions — See Ch. 392.
§ 74-1. Establishment; membership; terms; compensation; Clerk;
vacancies.
In accordance with the provisions of R.I.G.L. § 45-35-1, there is established
a Conservation Commission consisting of seven members residing in the
Town to be appointed by the Council. As terms expire, appointments, other
than interim appointments, shall be for terms of three years, and shall
commence in the month of January. Said Commissioners shall continue to
hold their respective offices until their successors are qualified. Members of
said Conservation Commission shall serve without pay. The Recording Clerk
shall be approved by said Commission and appointed by the Town Council.
In event of a vacancy, interim appointments may be made by the appointing
authority to complete the unexpired term of such position.
§ 74-2. Qualifications of members.
At least three members of the Commission must, if possible, be members
of duly incorporated and existing wildlife, conservation, sportsman,
horticultural, or like organizations. Such organizations may present lists of
qualified citizens to the Town Council for consideration when new or interim
appointments must be made.
§ 74-3. Gifts; management of lands; access to lands.
Said Commission may receive gifts of funds, lands, buildings or other
properties in the name of the municipality, subject to the approval of its
Council, and thereafter shall manage same in accordance with the purposes
set forth in this chapter. However, such power shall not be construed
to deny the people access to said lands for all legitimate purposes. No
municipal corporation may deny or restrict to the people free access to said
§ 68-6 CONSERVATION COMMISSION § 74-3
74:83
lands, or to any other land held by or for the municipality for recreation
purposes.
§ 74-4. Meetings; records.
All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public, and any person
or his duly constituted representative shall be entitled to appear and be
heard on any matter before the Commission before it reaches its decision.
All records of its proceedings, resolutions, and actions shall be open to
public view.
Chapter 78
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
§ 78-1. Establishment.
As established by the Glocester Town Council, pursuant to Glocester Home
Rule Charter § C13-10, there is hereby established a Glocester Economic
Development Commission.
§ 78-2. Purpose; guidelines.
A. The charge of said Commission shall be as follows:
(1) To formulate and recommend to the Town Council a comprehensive
economic development program to achieve the goals as stated in
the Comprehensive Plan, entitled "Glocester 2040," Section VI,
Economic Development, Goal 1.
(2) Encourage economic development that aligns with the Town's rural
character and also expands and diversifies the Town's tax base
B. The Glocester Economic Development Commission will concentrate its
efforts on ways to accommodate/attract business to the Town of
Glocester that is conducive to our environment, Comprehensive Plan,
and overall character, as well as improving and securing tourism/retail
opportunities for the Chepachet Historic District. The Commission is
encouraged to work with and include input from the Glocester Business
Association and Historic District Commission when presenting
proposals to the Town Council. When completed, proposals to
implement actions will be submitted to Town Council for approval.
C. Guidelines of the Glocester Economic Development Commission. The
GEDC will examine, formulate and recommend economic development
programs to the Town Council. These programs should be consistent
with the policies stated in Glocester's 2018 Comprehensive Community
Plan:
(1) Broaden and diversify the Town's economic base to reduce the
residential sector's property tax burden.
§ 74-3 GLOCESTER CODE § 78-2
74:84
§ 78-3. Membership; term of office.
The Glocester Economic Development Commission shall consist of seven
voting members and two ad hoc nonvoting members (Ad hoc members may
be nonresidents.) for two-year terms concurrent with the term of the Town
Council.
Chapter 82
HOUSING BOARD OF REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Rules of procedure for boards and
commissions — See Ch. 392.
(2) Encourage the growth of economic activities that have a market
focus at the neighborhood or local levels.
(3) Recognize, preserve, protect and enhance the historical pattern of
Town development by concentrating on properly scaled and
designed economic activities in designated, commercially zoned
areas.
(4) Prevent highway strip development from occurring within the
Town. (NOTE: Subsection C(4) (guidelines) is not intended to
prohibit responsible development but to help mitigate high-traffic
retail strip development, through planning and zoning processes,
to achieve a balanced and appropriately scaled commercial
development with a balanced tenant mix which includes retail,
professional, medical and general business uses, and is consistent
with the Comprehensive Plan.
(5) Prevent the negative effects of economic growth, including
environmental degradation and dramatic changes to community
character, from occurring in the Town.
(6) Allow for alternative means of employment opportunities to be
available to citizens, such as home occupations that are technologydependent
and which cause no noticeable disruption to the living
environment of residential areas.
(7) Support tourism initiatives that promote the historical,
environmental, aesthetic and cultural aspects of the Town
particularly in Chepachet Village.
(8) Support appropriate regional economic development initiatives
that complement the Town's economic development goals.
(9) Support the efforts of the Glocester Business Association to attract
business to the Town.
§ 78-2 HOUSING BOARD OF REVIEW § 78-3
82:85
§ 82-1. Establishment; powers and duties.
Pursuant to Title 45, Chapters 24.2-5 and 24.3-16, of the Rhode Island
General Laws, as amended, the Zoning Board of Review of the Town of
Glocester is hereby also appointed as the Housing Board of Review to hear
all appeals taken pursuant to Title 45, Chapter 24.3-21, of the Rhode Island
General Laws, and to perform such other functions which are allowed and/
or required to be performed by a Housing Board of Review under law.
Chapter 87
JUVENILE HEARING BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Rules of procedure for boards and
commissions — See Ch. 392.
§ 87-1. Establishment; purpose.
There is hereby established within the Towns of Foster and Glocester, a
regional Juvenile Hearing Board with the powers set forth in this chapter
and said statute for the purpose of hearing all cases referred to such Board
by the Chief of Police, or his designee, from the Towns of Foster and
Glocester, involving persons under the age of 18 years, who are charged
with violating the criminal laws of the State of Rhode Island and said
towns, including wayward, misdemeanor and status offenses and violations
of local Town ordinances and the provisions of R.I.G.L. § 16-19 regarding
compulsory school attendance.
§ 87-2. Referrals.
A. Referrals to the Juvenile Hearing Board will be made by the Chief of
Police or his designee.
B. Referral to said Juvenile Hearing Board shall not be offered to any
juvenile who:
(1) Has been charged with the crime of assault or battery, unless
specifically approved by the Chief of Police of the Towns of Foster
and Glocester;
(2) Has been accused of a controlled substance offense, except for the
possession of alcohol, unless specifically approved by the Chief of
Police of the Town of Foster or Glocester;
(3) Shall have been twice previously referred to said Board or who
shall have been once previously referred to said Board and refused
§ 78-3 GLOCESTER CODE § 87-2
87:86
§ 87-3. Refusal to hear cases.
The Board, after investigation, may refuse to hear any case in which it
appears that a juvenile was wrongfully referred in violation of this chapter
and the statute. In addition, the Board may refuse to hear any case in which
the juvenile refuses to supply the Board with requested information, fails
to appear when requested or refuses to cooperate with the proceedings of
the Board. The Board shall immediately notify the Chief of Police from the
applicable jurisdiction, in writing, of any case it refuses to hear, and the
Chief of Police shall take whatever further action he/she deems necessary,
including referral to Family Court.
§ 87-4. Disposition of referrals; sanctions.
or failed to abide by the sanctions imposed or to make restitution
recommended by said Board; or
(4) At the time of the alleged commission of such juvenile offense was
within the custody and control of the Family Court, not to include
guardianship matters.
A. The Juvenile Hearing Board shall hear all cases referred to it by the
Chief of Police or his designee and shall determine whether there is
reasonable cause to believe that the person so referred has committed
the offense alleged and whether such person shall be disciplined as a
result thereof. A further condition of referral is that the juvenile admits
to his/her involvement in the incident and waives his/her rights
pursuant to said statute. In making such determination, the Juvenile
Hearing Board shall not be bound by the customary rules of evidence,
and may consider all probative and relevant evidence, whether or not
such evidence would be admissible in a court of competent jurisdiction.
In those cases in which the Juvenile Hearing Board shall determine that
there is reasonable ground to believe that the offense was committed by
the person so charged and that such person should be disciplined, it
shall recommend sanctions (other than incarceration) and may direct
restitution, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing,
an attempt to provide, with cooperation of the Town Administrator or
the Superintendent of Schools, suitable service to the Towns of Foster
and Glocester. In any such proceeding the Juvenile Hearing Board, prior
to imposing sanctions, shall request the juvenile offender and his
parents to agree to the sanctions imposed, and the amount of
restitution and manner of making the same. In ordering restitution, the
Juvenile Hearing Board shall take into account the juvenile offender's
ability to pay, and the amount of actual damage caused as a result of the
commission of such offense.
B. Sanctions imposed by the Board shall be for a period of time not to
exceed six months and may consist of, but not be limited to: community
service, reasonable restitution, direct work service for the victim,
letters of apology, curfews, referrals for counseling and intervention
§ 87-2 JUVENILE HEARING BOARD § 87-4
87:87
§ 87-5. Membership.
The membership of the Regional Juvenile Hearing Board shall consist of
seven persons and two alternates over the age of 18 years of age, all
of whom shall have been residents of the respective towns for at least
three years, and none of whom shall be attorneys admitted to practice
before the Supreme Court of the State of Rhode Island. The Board shall
consist of citizens of Foster and Glocester who have a background in or
related to the fields of education, probation and parole, human services,
community youth programs, or who are members of the clergy, former
law enforcement or judicial officials or citizens whom the Council deems
have the credentials that would be assets to the Board. The Town Councils
shall appoint seven members as follows: three members from the Town of
Foster, four members from the Town of Glocester. The two alternates will be
comprised of one Foster representative and one Glocester representative.
The Juvenile Justice Planning Committee shall be asked to comment on all
proposed appointments. Each Town Council shall appoint a member whose
term shall expire on September 30, 2000, and who shall serve thereafter
until his/her successor is appointed and qualified; a member whose term
shall expire on September 30, 2001, and who shall serve thereafter until
his/her successor is appointed and qualified; and three members, two from
Glocester and one from Foster, whose terms shall expire on September 30,
2002, and who shall serve thereafter until their successors are appointed
and qualified. The two alternates shall be appointed for a period of oneyear
terms to expire on September 30. During the month of August and
annually thereafter, the Foster and Glocester Town Councils shall appoint
a member or members to succeed the member or members whose terms
will next expire, to serve for a term of three years, commencing on the
first day of October, and thereafter until their successors are appointed and
qualified. In the event of a vacancy occurring in the office of a member by
death, resignation or otherwise, such vacancy shall be filled in like manner
as the original appointment, but only for the remainder of the term of the
services, alternative dispute resolution programs, driver's license
restrictions, etc. The sanctions or conditions set forth shall be in
writing, clearly understood by the juvenile and his or her parents/
guardian and a signed copy shall be provided to them. The specific
sanctions shall be completed within 60 days except with regard to
school-related and counseling issues. If sanctions are not agreeable
to the juvenile or parents/guardian, the offense complaint shall be
returned to the referring person who in turn may refer the matter
to Family Court. If a referral is made to Family Court under such
conditions, a notation shall be included to inform the Court of the
action of the Juvenile Hearing Board to try to resolve the matter and
the reasons why this was unsuccessful. Likewise, if a juvenile fails to
comply with the agreed-upon sanctions, without good cause, the action
of the Juvenile Hearing Board may be vacated and the matter referred
to Family Court with a notation to that effect. The Juvenile Hearing
Board shall provide the Chief Judge of the Family Court with an annual
report as to its activity.
§ 87-4 GLOCESTER CODE § 87-5
87:88
former member. No member of the Regional Juvenile Hearing Board shall
be entitled to receive any compensation by reason of his or her service on
the Board.
§ 87-6. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all juveniles alleged to have committed an
offense after December 16, 1999, effective January 11, 2000.
Chapter 95
LAND TRUST TRUSTEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land Trust — See Charter § C8-9.
Conservation Commission — See Ch. 74.
Planning Board — See Ch. 106, Art. I.
Rules of procedure for boards and
commissions — See Ch. 392.
§ 95-1. Establishment.
In accordance with the Home Rule Charter, Article VIII, § C8-9, and Rhode
Island Public Laws Chapter 548, as established July 1, 1987, there is hereby
continued a Glocester Land Trust Trustee Board for the Town of Glocester,
Rhode Island.
§ 95-2. Membership.
The Glocester Land Trust Trustee Board shall consist of seven trustees, five
of whom shall be appointed by the Town Council. The Trustees who are first
appointed shall be designated to serve for terms of one, two, three, four and
five years respectively. Thereafter, Trustees shall be appointed as aforesaid
for terms of five years, with appointments made in February. In addition to
the five Trustees appointed by the Town Council, the current chairperson or
member designee of the Conservation Commission and the Planning Board
shall also be Trustees with one-year terms with appointments in February.
Trustees shall be electors of the Town of Glocester, shall serve without
compensation and shall hold office until their successors have been named.
If a member of such Board shall cease to be a qualified elector and/or
resident of the Town his/her office shall thereby become vacant. No Trustee
may be an elected officer of the Town.
§ 95-3. Officers.
The members of the Board shall elect a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, and
Treasurer from among their members. The Trustees shall elect or appoint
a Secretary, who need not be a voting member of the Trust. The term
of office of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, Treasurer and Secretary,
§ 87-5 LAND TRUST TRUSTEES § 95-3
95:89
unless otherwise prescribed by the Town Council, shall be for the calendar
year.
Chapter 101
(RESERVED)
Chapter 106
PLANNING BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Rules of procedure for boards and
commissions — See Ch. 392.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 300.
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
§ 95-3 GLOCESTER CODE § 95-3
106:90
ARTICLE I
Establishment, Powers and Duties
[Adopted 10-10-1975, amended 4-17-1979 (Ch. I, § 2, 1-02-05, of the
1991 Code)]
§ 106-1. Establishment.
In accordance with Title 45, Chapter 22, of the General Laws of Rhode
Island, as amended, there is hereby continued a Planning Board for the
Town of Glocester, Rhode Island.
§ 106-2. Membership.
§ 106-3. Compensation.
Members of the Planning Board may receive such compensation as set by
the Glocester Town Council within the limitations of funds appropriated for
this purpose. The Board members may be reimbursed within the limitations
of funds appropriated for expenses incurred in the performance of their
duties.
§ 106-4. Organization; bylaws.
The Planning Board shall organize annually by electing from its membership
a Chairman, Vice Chairman and a Secretary. The Planning Board may adopt
bylaws for the performance of the duties prescribed in this article.
§ 106-5. Technical assistance.
Within the limits of the funds appropriated for its use, the Planning Board
may engage technical or clerical assistance to aid in the discharge of its
duties. The Planning Board may, subject to confirmation of the Glocester
Town Council and within the limits of the funds appropriated to it, enter into
cooperative agreements with private, state, regional or federal agencies for
technical assistance and studies deemed to be in the best interest of the
community.
§ 106-6. Duties.
A. The Planning Board shall consist of seven members who are electors in
the Town of Glocester, who shall serve each for a term of five years.
Appointments shall be made by the Glocester Town Council such that
no more than 1/3 of the membership of the Board shall expire each year.
B. A vacancy in the membership of the Board shall be filled by the Town
Council for the remainder of the unexpired term. Any Planning Board
member may be removed by the Town Council for due cause following a
public hearing.
A. The Planning Board shall prepare and adopt a Comprehensive Plan for
the future development of the Town. Such plan shall, among other
§ 106-1 PLANNING BOARD § 106-6
106:91
things, show the proposed arrangement of land uses, transportation
facilities, public facilities, utility systems, deteriorating neighborhoods
planned for rehabilitation, redevelopment or renewal and natural
resources and historic sites to be preserved. The Planning Board shall
hold public hearings on the Comprehensive Plan or elements thereof.
The Planning Board shall adopt the Comprehensive Plan or elements
thereof as a guide to Planning Board actions related to the features
contained in the plan. The Glocester Town Council may, by the
affirmative vote of 2/3 of its membership and following a public hearing,
adopt a Comprehensive Plan or any portion thereof previously adopted
by the Planning Board and recommended by the Town Council by the
Planning Board. Adoption of such a Comprehensive Plan or portion
thereof by the Town Council shall bind said Council to this plan or
portion thereof in any future action related to the features in the
plan. The Comprehensive Plan or portion thereof may be modified or
amended by the Glocester Town Council following a public hearing. At
least 30 days prior to the date of public hearing said modification or
amendments shall be referred to the Planning Board for an advisory
opinion. Failure of the Planning Board to forward a recommendation
to the Town Council within this thirty-day period shall be deemed an
approval of the modification or amendment by the Planning Board. The
affirmative vote of at least 2/3 of the Town Council shall be necessary
to enact any modification or amendment to the Comprehensive Plan
or element thereof where the Planning Board has rendered an adverse
decision. The Board shall, at intervals no greater than five years, review
the comprehensive community plan or elements thereof and make any
modifications, amendments, or additions deemed necessary in light of
current and projected community development trends and needs.
B. The Planning Board shall make studies of the resources and needs of
the Town with reference to its physical, economic, and social growth
and development as affecting the health, safety, morals and general
welfare of the people. Such studies, plans and reports may concern,
among other things, the following:
(1) Land use and land use regulation.
(2) Transportation facilities.
(3) Public utilities.
(4) Public facilities and site locations, including recreation areas,
schools, fire, police and other principal structures and
developments.
(5) Blighted areas, including plans for redevelopment, renewal,
rehabilitation or conservation.
(6) Problems of housing and the development of housing programs.
(7) Natural resource conservation.
§ 106-6 GLOCESTER CODE § 106-6
106:92
§ 106-7. Reports.
(8) Environmental protection.
(9) Protection from disaster.
(10) Economic and sociological characteristics.
(11) Preservation of historic sites and buildings.
(12) Economic development.
C. The Planning Board shall submit an advisory opinion and
recommendation on all zoning matters referred to it or any other matter
referred to it by the Town Council.
D. The Planning Board shall have the authority to call upon other
departments, boards and committees of the Town of Glocester and upon
regional, state and federal agencies for assistance in the performance
of its designated functions and shall cooperate with such city or Town,
regional, state and federal agencies for assistance in the performance
of its designated functions and shall cooperate with such city or Town,
regional, state and federal agencies on matters of community, regional
and state planning.
E. The Planning Board shall carry out such other duties as may be
assigned to said Board from time to time by any act of the General
Assembly or by any ordinance, code, regulation, order or resolution of
the Town Council.
A. The Planning Board shall submit an annual report to the Town Council
summarizing the work of the preceding year and recommending
programs, plans and actions for future development.
B. A copy of the annual report shall be forwarded to the Rhode Island
Department of Community Affairs. All studies, plans, and reports of the
Planning Board shall be submitted to the Town Council and to any other
designated agency or official and thereafter, upon approval of the Town
Council, may be published for general distribution.
§ 106-6 PLANNING BOARD § 106-7
106:93

ARTICLE II
Duties Regarding Land Development and Subdivision
[Adopted 11-16-1995, effective 11-16-1995 (Ch. I, § 2, 1-02-06, of
the 1991 Code)]
§ 106-8. Authority to adopt regulations.
The Planning Board of the Town of Glocester is authorized to adopt
regulations governing land development and subdivision projects within the
Town of Glocester in substantially the form filed in the minutes of the Town
Council Meeting of November 16, 1995.
§ 106-9. Authority to amend regulations.
The Planning Board of the Town of Glocester is authorized to modify and
amend said land development and subdivision regulations in form and
manner not substantially inconsistent with the form filed in the minutes of
the Town Council Meeting of November 16, 1995.
§ 106-10. Administration of regulations.
The Planning Board of the Town of Glocester is authorized to enact rules
and otherwise to provide for the administration, interpretation and
enforcement of said land development and subdivision regulations.
§ 106-11. Appeals.
The Zoning Board of Review of the Town of Glocester is appointed and
established as the Board of Appeal under said land development and
subdivision regulations.
§ 106-8 PLANNING BOARD § 106-11
106:95
Chapter 113
RECREATION COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recreation Commission — See Charter
§ C13-8.
Conservation Commission — See Ch. 74.
Rules of procedure for boards and
commissions — See Ch. 392.
§ 113-1. Establishment; membership; terms.
There is hereby continued, under R.I.G.L. § 32-3-4, as amended, and Article
XIII, § C13-8, of the Glocester Home Rule Charter, a Recreation Commission
having five regular members who shall be appointed by the Town Council.
In addition, there shall be three ex-officio members, one each from the Town
Council, School Committee and Conservation Commission. The terms of all
members shall be concurrent with the term of the Town Council.
§ 113-2. Existing membership.
Members of the Commission sitting at the time of passage of this chapter
shall remain until the expiration of the current Council term.
Chapter 118
SAFETY COMMISSION, ADVISORY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Rules of procedure for boards and
commissions — See Ch. 392.
§ 118-1. Establishment; membership; bylaws.
A. There is hereby continued a Glocester Safety Commission ("the
Commission") consisting of no more than 10 members appointed by the
Town Council for terms concurrent with the term of the Council. Each
of the following Town departments, agencies or organizations shall be
represented on said Commission:
(1) Police;
(2) Civil defense;
(3) Public works; and
(4) Each village fire company.
§ 106-11 GLOCESTER CODE § 118-1
113:96
§ 118-2. Powers and duties.
The Commission is hereby endowed with full authority and power to
perform and carry out the following duties and responsibilities:
B. The Commission shall appoint from its membership a Chairman and
may designate by rules, regulations, or bylaws such other officers and
procedures not inconsistent with this chapter or other laws as may be
necessary to carry out its duties and responsibilities. All such rules,
regulations, and bylaws must be approved by a majority of the Town
Council before they become effective.
A. Advise and make recommendations to the Town Council from time to
time with respect to all matters pertaining to public safety in the Town
of Glocester, including, but not limited to: fire, traffic, weather-related
conditions, water safety, civil defense, emergency preparedness,
structural and safety soundness of buildings, and other areas which
may similarly impact upon public safety;
B. Analyze and collect all data necessary to measure, ascertain, and make
recommendations concerning the detection and correction of existing
safety problems and the prevention of future safety problems in the
Town;
C. Upon prior written authorization obtained from the Town Council, make
reasonable inspections of all premises and places to which the general
public has access, and, upon prior written authorization obtained from
the Town Council and a warrant, make reasonable inspections of
private premises and places in the Town where public safety may be
affected. Such authorization shall not be granted unless there is
probable cause to believe that safety problems exist thereon or that
there are other reasonable grounds for inspection. Reasonable grounds
for inspection will be deemed to exist where the Safety Commission
requests permission to make an annual inspection of premises, places,
or areas whose condition may adversely affect public safety;
D. Establish rules and regulations governing the use of public highways by
vehicles and pedestrians within the limits established by R.I.G.L.
§ 31-12-12, as amended, including but not limited to the installation of
traffic control devices; regulating the standing or parking of vehicles;
designation of through-way and stop streets; creation of crosswalks and
safety zones; regulation of the speed of vehicles as authorized in
R.I.G.L. §§ 31-14-5 and 31-14-6; designation of emergency snow
removal routes, emergency no-parking zones and streets at which
drivers shall not make right or left turns;
E. Function as the Town's Emergency Response Commission, which will
work when necessary with the State Emergency Management Agency.
Said Commission shall, in the event of natural or man-made
emergencies, determine whether disaster assistance is needed by
evaluating:
§ 118-1 SAFETY COMMISSION, ADVISORY § 118-2
118:97
§ 118-3. Purpose.
The purpose of the establishment of a Safety Commission is to create a
public body whose primary responsibility is to advise the Town Council on
matters affecting the safety of the Town and its residents.
§ 118-4. Quorum.
The presence of five members shall constitute a quorum for purposes of any
meeting of the Commission, and the concurrence of at least a majority of
those present at Commission meetings shall be necessary for purposes of
authorizing any official action of the Commission and for forwarding official
recommendations or advice to the Town Council pursuant to this chapter.
§ 118-5. Existing laws pertaining to safety.
All existing laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations pertaining to safety
shall remain in full force and effect.
Chapter 120
VETERANS ADVISOR
§ 120-1. Position created.
There is hereby created by the Town Council, pursuant to Town Charter
§ C13-10, the position of Veterans Advisor for the Town of Glocester. This
position shall be filled by a resident with experience in veterans affairs and
shall be appointed by the Town Council. The Veterans Advisor position shall
be a volunteer position.
§ 120-2. Purpose.
The purpose of said position is to assist our veterans with obtaining the
information needed in their daily lives to insure their needs are met.
(1) Casualties;
(2) Commercial/Residential destruction;
(3) Commercial/Residential damage;
(4) Flooded areas;
(5) Possibility of additional flooding.
F. Carry out special assignments from the Town Council relating to
matters of public safety.
§ 118-2 GLOCESTER CODE § 120-3
118:98
§ 120-3. Duties.
The duties of the Veterans Advisor shall be to obtain and maintain current
information regarding veterans rights and available benefits. The Advisor
shall be a resource to Glocester's veterans by providing information from
state and federal veterans agencies.
§ 120-4. Term.
The appointed term is concurrent with the term of the Town Council.
§ 120-5. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective upon passage.
Part 3: General Legislation
Chapter 130
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disorderly conduct and indecency — See Ch.
157.
Entertainment licenses — See Ch. 173.
§ 120-3 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 120-5
130:99

ARTICLE I
Prohibition Against Nudity on Premises Where Alcoholic Beverages
Are Sold
[Adopted 8-17-1995, effective 9-11-1995 (Ch. II, § 12, 2-12-11, of
the 1991 Code)]
§ 130-1. Prohibitions applicable to owners of commercial
establishments.
It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining, owning, or operating a
commercial establishment located within the Town of Glocester at which
alcoholic beverages are offered for sale for consumption on the premises to
suffer or permit:
§ 130-2. Prohibitions applicable to females.
It shall be unlawful for any female person, while on the premises of a
commercial establishment located within the Town of Glocester, at which
alcoholic beverages are offered for sale for consumption on the premises, to
expose to public view that area of the human female breast at or below the
areola thereof, or to employ any device or covering which is intended to give
the appearance or simulate such areas of the female breast as described
herein.
§ 130-3. Prohibitions applicable to any person.
It shall be unlawful for any person, while on the premises of a commercial
establishment located within the Town of Glocester, at which alcoholic
beverages are offered for sale for consumption on the premises, to expose to
public view his or her genitals, pubic area, anus or anal cleft or cleavage, or
to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance
of or simulate the genitals, pubic area, or anal cleft or cleavage.
A. Any female person, while on the premises of the commercial
establishment, to expose to the public view that area of the human
breast at or below the areola thereof.
B. Any female person, while on the premises of the commercial
establishment, to employ any device or covering which is intended to
give the appearance of or simulate such portions of the human female
breast as described in Subsection A above.
C. Any person, while on the premises of the commercial establishment, to
expose to public view his or her genitals, pubic area, anus, or anal cleft
or cleavage.
D. Any person, while on the premises of the commercial establishment, to
employ any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance
of or simulate the genitals, pubic area, anus, anal cleft or cleavage.
§ 130-1 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 130-4
130:101
§ 130-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be guilty of
an offense against the Town punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article II, Penalties.
§ 130-4 GLOCESTER CODE § 130-4
130:102
Chapter 134
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult entertainment — See Ch. 130.
Disorderly conduct and indecency — See Ch.
157.
Fees — See Ch. 368.
§ 130-4 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 130-4
134:103

ARTICLE I
Liquor License Transfer Fees
[Adopted 5-10-1990 (Ch. II, § 12, 2-12-10, of the 1991 Code)6]
§ 134-1. Fees established.
The fee for the application for transfer of a liquor license shall be
determined from time to time by the Town Council.
§ 134-2. Advertising costs.
All advertising costs shall be paid by the applicant before issuance of the
transfer of a liquor license.
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 134-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 134-2
134:105

ARTICLE II
Public Consumption
[Adopted 4-15-2004, effective 5-11-2004 (Ch. II, § 3, 2-03-04, of the
1991 Code)]
§ 134-3. Consumption prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic beverages from any
bottle, glass or metal container or any other container on any public street,
highway, park, recreation area or other public place, including while in or
upon a motor vehicle in Town.
§ 134-4. Possession prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess an alcoholic beverage, other
than in its original container unopened condition, on any public street,
highway, park, recreation area or other public place, including while in or
upon a motor vehicle, in the Town.
§ 134-5. Exception.
This article shall not apply when an F-1 license has been granted.
§ 134-3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 134-5
134:107
Chapter 139
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 217. Zoning — See Ch. 350.
§ 134-5 GLOCESTER CODE § 134-5
139:108
ARTICLE I
Dog Control
[Adopted 1-9-1970, as amended 10-11-1975 and 9-9-1977 (Ch. II,
§ 4, 2-04-01, of the 1991 Code). Subsequent amendments noted
where applicable.]
§ 139-1. Definitions.
As used in this article the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — The person or persons employed by the
Town as its enforcement officer and shall include any police officer of said
Town.
ANIMAL SHELTER — Any premises designated by action of the Town for
the purpose of impounding and caring for all dogs found running at large in
violation of this article.
AT LARGE — Any dog shall be deemed to be at large when it is off the
property of its owner and not under restraint as hereinafter defined.
EXPOSED TO RABIES — A dog has been exposed to rabies within the
meaning of this article if it has been bitten by, or been exposed to, any
animal known to have been infected with rabies.
OWNER — Any person, group of persons, or corporation owning, keeping
or harboring a dog or dogs.
RESTRAINT — Any dog is under restraint within the meaning of this article
if it is controlled, or at "heel" beside a competent person and obedient to
that person's commands, on or within a vehicle being driven or parked on
the streets, or within the property limits of its owner or keeper.
SPAYED FEMALE — Any bitch which has been operated upon to prevent
conception.
§ 139-2. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Animal Control Officer
of the Town of Glocester and any police officer of said Town.
§ 139-3. Licensing.
A. In accordance with R.I.G.L. § 4-13-4, every owner or keeper of a dog
shall annually in the month of April cause that dog to be licensed from
the first day of the following May. Such license shall be obtained in the
Town Clerk's office for a fee as set from time to time by the Town
Council.7 Any person who becomes the owner or keeper of a dog shall
obtain for such dog a license as provided above within 30 days of
becoming the owner or keeper of the dog. No license shall be issued by
7. Editor's Note: See Ch. 368, Fees.
§ 139-1 ANIMALS § 139-3
139:109
§ 139-4. Impoundment.
§ 139-5. Redemption of impounded dogs.
the Town unless the dog has been inoculated against rabies for the
period during which the license would be valid.
B. Every person who fails to obtain a dog license as herein required shall
be fined as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II,
Penalties.
A. Any dog or dogs described in §§ 139-7 and 139-11 hereof shall be taken
up by the Animal Control Officer and impounded in the shelter
designated as the Town Animal Shelter. Dogs not claimed by their
owners before the expiration of seven days may be disposed of at the
discretion of the Animal Control Officer, except as hereinafter provided
in the cases of certain dogs.
B. The Animal Control Officer may transfer title to any dog held at the
animal shelter to the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
and/or the Animal Rescue League after the legal detention period has
expired and such dog has not been claimed by its owner.
C. Immediately upon impounding dogs, the Animal Control Officer shall
make every possible reasonable effort to notify the owners of such dogs
so impounded, and inform such owners of the conditions whereby they
may regain custody of such dogs.
D. Any dog found running at large within the Town limits may be
impounded or disposed of according to law when such action is
required either to protect the dog or to protect the residents of the
Town.
A. The owner shall be entitled to regain possession of any impounded dog,
except as hereinafter provided in the cases of certain dogs, upon the
payment of impoundment fees set forth in Chapter 368, Fees. (Proof of
ownership might include a license receipt, affidavits of neighbors, a
photograph, etc.)
B. Any dog impounded under the provisions of this article and not
reclaimed by its owner within seven days may be humanely destroyed
by the Animal Control Officer, have its title transferred to the Society
for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals and/or the Animal Rescue
League as provided for in § 139-4B, or placed in the custody of some
person deemed to be a responsible and suitable owner, who will agree
to comply with the provisions of this article and such other regulations
as shall be fixed by the Town of Glocester; provided, however, that if the
animal is one as to which the respective rights of the owner and the
person in possession or custody are determined by state law, such law
shall be complied with. Under no circumstances shall the ownership of
§ 139-3 GLOCESTER CODE § 139-5
139:110
§ 139-6. Vicious dogs.
any dog be transferred to any person, agency or group engaged in
animal research or vivisection.
A. Definition. A vicious dog is:
(1) Any dog which, when unprovoked, approaches any person in a
vicious or terrorizing manner in an apparent attitude of attack upon
the streets, sidewalks, or in any public place; or
(2) Any dog with a known propensity or tendency to attack
unprovoked, to cause injury, or otherwise endanger human beings
or domestic animals; or
(3) Any dog which bites, inflicts injury, assaults or otherwise attacks a
human being or domestic animal without provocation on public or
private property; or
(4) Any dog owned or kept primarily or in part for the purpose of dog
fighting or any dog trained for dog fighting.8
B. No dog may be declared vicious if it injures or damages a person who,
at the time of injury or damage, was committing a willful trespass or
other tort upon premises owned or occupied by the owner or keeper of
the dog, or was teasing, tormenting or assaulting the dog or was
attempting to commit a crime. No dog may be declared vicious if the
dog was protecting a human being within the immediate vicinity of the
dog from an unjustified attack or assault.
C. Hearing. If the Animal Control Officer or a Town law enforcement
officer has probable cause to believe that a dog is vicious, the Animal
Control Officer or the Chief of Police, or his/her designee, may convene
a hearing to determine whether or not the dog should be declared
vicious.
(1) The Animal Control Officer or Chief of Police shall conduct or cause
to be conducted an investigation and shall notify the owner or
keeper of the dog that a hearing is to be held. The owner or keeper
shall have the opportunity to present evidence at the hearing as to
why the dog should not be declared vicious. The hearing shall be
informal and open to the public, and shall be held not less than five
nor more than 10 days after service of notice upon the owner or
keeper of the dog. The hearing shall be conducted by a panel of
three persons, including the Chief of Police or his or her designee,
the executive director of the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty
to Animals (SPCA) or his or her designee, and a third person chosen
by the Chief of Police and the executive director of the SPCA. The
8. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(5), regarding dogs not licensed under Town or state
law, which immediately followed this subsection, was deleted at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 139-5 ANIMALS § 139-6
139:111
§ 139-7. Confinement of certain dogs.
§ 139-8. Rabies control.
owner or keeper shall be notified in writing of the results of the
hearing. The owner or keeper of a dog declared vicious as herein
provided shall, in accordance with a schedule established by the
Animal Control Officer or Chief of Police (but in no case more than
30 days after the determination), comply with the provisions of
Chapter 13.1, Title 4 of the Rhode Island General Laws, pertaining
to the regulation of vicious dogs and providing for special
registration, fines and liability insurance for such dogs. An owner
or keeper wishing to contest a declaration of viciousness may
petition for a hearing de novo in district court as provided in
R.I.G.L. § 14-13.1-12.
(2) If the Animal Control Officer or a Town law enforcement officer has
probable cause to believe that a dog is vicious, the dog may be
impounded pending the outcome of a hearing as provided herein.
A. The owner shall confine within a building or secure enclosure every
fierce, dangerous, or vicious dog, as defined in § 139-6A herein, and
shall not take such dog out of such building or secure enclosure unless
such dog is securely muzzled.
B. Every female dog in heat shall be kept confined until no longer in heat
in a building or secure enclosure, or in a veterinary hospital or boarding
kennel, in such a manner that such female dog or other animals cannot
come in contact with another dog or animal, except for intentional
breeding purposes.
C. Any dog described in the foregoing subsections of this section, found at
large, shall be impounded by the Animal Control Officer and may not be
reclaimed by owners, unless such reclamation be authorized by any
court having jurisdiction.
D. Any dog may, the first time it is impounded for being a public nuisance,
be reclaimed as provided in § 139-5A hereof but may not be reclaimed
when so impounded on a second or subsequent occasion unless such
reclamation is authorized by a court having jurisdiction in the matter.
A. Every dog shall be inoculated for rabies prior to licensing as required
under R.I.G.L. § 4-13-4.
B. Every dog which bites a person shall be promptly reported to the
Animal Control Officer, and shall thereupon be securely quarantined at
the direction of the Animal Control Officer for a period of 14 days and
shall not be released from such quarantine except by written
permission of the Animal Control Officer. At the discretion of the Animal
Control Officer, such quarantine may be on the premises of the owner,
at the shelter designated as the animal shelter or, at the owner's option
§ 139-6 GLOCESTER CODE § 139-8
139:112
§ 139-9. Reports of bite cases.
It shall be the duty of every physician or other medical practitioner to
report to the Animal Control Officer or the Police Department the names
and addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted by animals, together
with such other information as will be helpful in rabies control.
§ 139-10. Responsibilities of veterinarians.
It shall be the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report to the Animal
Control Officer any animal considered by him/her to be a rabies suspect.
and expense, in a veterinary hospital of his/her choice. In the case of
stray animals, or in the cases of animals whose ownership is not known,
such quarantine shall be at the shelter designated by the Animal
Control Officer.
C. The owner, upon demand by the Animal Control Officer, shall forthwith
surrender any animal which has bitten a human, or which is suspected
of having been exposed to rabies, for supervised quarantine, or, at the
discretion of the Animal Control Officer or the Chief of Police, for the
determination of whether the dog may be declared vicious under
§ 139-6 of this article, the expense of which shall be borne by the owner.
Said animal may be reclaimed by the owner if it is adjudged free of
rabies, upon payment of fees set forth in Chapter 368, Fees.
D. When rabies has been diagnosed in an animal under quarantine or
rabies is suspected by a licensed veterinarian, and the animal dies while
under such observation, the Animal Control Officer shall immediately
send the head of such animal to the State Health Department for
pathological examination, and shall notify the proper public health
office of reports of human contacts and the diagnosis.
E. Any person, including the Animal Control Officer, licensed veterinarian,
and all Town officials, shall notify the State Director of Health
immediately upon detection of rabies in any animal.
F. No person shall kill, or cause to be killed, any rabid animal, any animal
suspected of having been exposed to rabies, or any animal biting a
human, except as herein provided, nor remove from the Town limits
without written permission from the Animal Control Officer.
G. The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall, upon demand,
be surrendered to the Animal Control Officer.
H. The Animal Control Officer shall direct the disposition of any animal
found to be infected with rabies.
I. No person shall fail or refuse to surrender any animal for quarantine or
destruction as required herein when demand is made therefor by the
Animal Control Officer.
§ 139-8 ANIMALS § 139-11
139:113
§ 139-11. Nuisance abatement.9
§ 139-12. Dogs on school property; number of dogs restricted;
complaints.
§ 139-13. Investigation.
In the discharge of the duties imposed by this article, the Animal Control
Officer or any police officer of this Town shall have the authority at all
A. The keeping or harboring of any dog, whether licensed or not, which by
habitual howling, yelping, barking or other noise disturbs or annoys any
considerable number of persons or neighborhood is unlawful, and is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and each day that the offense
continues shall constitute a separate offense. Notwithstanding other
provisions herein, the penalty for violation of this article shall be as
indicated in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Penalties. If said
dog is impounded under Subsection B below, the Animal Control Officer
shall retain said animal until the owner demonstrates that he/she has
taken or will take measures, such as construction of an opaque fencedin
enclosure, use of a muzzle or other device, or other action
recommended by said Animal Control Officer which will abate the
howling, yelping, barking or other noise.
B. It shall be unlawful to allow or permit any dog to trespass on private or
public property so as to damage or destroy any property or thing of
value, and the same is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and any such
animal may be impounded by the Animal Control Officer. Whenever it
shall be affirmed in writing by three or more residents, or persons
regularly employed in the neighborhood, that any animal is an habitual
nuisance by damage to property, being vicious or by its actions
potentially vicious or in any other manner causing undue annoyance,
the Animal Control Officer, if he/she finds such nuisance to exist, shall
serve notice upon the owner or custodian that such nuisance must be
abated. In the event said nuisance and/or annoyance is not thereupon
abated, the Animal Control Officer shall impound said animal.
A. No dogs are allowed in school yards or on school property whether at
large or under restraint, seeing-eye dogs, so-called, excepted.
B. It shall be unlawful to keep more than three dogs at the same residence,
except as permitted by special exception to the Chapter 350, Zoning.
This provision shall not apply to licensed kennels.
C. All complaints made under the provisions of this article shall be made to
the Animal Control Officer and may be made orally; provided, however,
that such complaint shall be, within 48 hours, reduced to writing and
shall be signed by the complainant showing his/her address and
telephone number, if any.
9. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 139-11 GLOCESTER CODE § 139-13
139:114
reasonable times to enter upon any premises (but such authority should not
include the right to enter any residence on such premises) to examine a dog
or other animal which is allegedly in violation of a provision of this article.
Such officer shall have the further authority to take possession of any such
dog or other animal and remove it from such premises.
§ 139-14. Interference with enforcement officers.10
No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest the Animal Control Officer
or any police officer of this Town in the performance of his/her duties, or
seek to release any animal in the custody of the Animal Control Officer or
any police officer, except as herein provided.
§ 139-15. Records.
§ 139-16. Violations and penalties.11
Except as otherwise provided herein, any person convicted of violating any
provision of this article may be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article II, Penalties. If such violation be continued, each day's
violation may constitute a separate offense as provided therein.
A. It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer to keep, or cause to be
kept, accurate and detailed records of the impoundment and disposition
of all animals coming into its custody.
B. It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer to keep, or cause to be
kept, accurate and detailed records of all bite cases reported to him/her
and his/her investigation of the same.
10.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
11.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 139-13 ANIMALS § 139-16
139:115

ARTICLE II
Animal Shelter Adoption Regulations
[Adopted 6-16-1994, effective 7-14-1994 (Ch. II, § 4, 2-04-02, of the
1991 Code)]
§ 139-17. Mandatory altering of dogs and cats adopted from
releasing agency.
A. No releasing agency shall release, sell, trade, give away, exchange,
adopt out, or otherwise transfer, with or without a fee, any dog or cat
that has not been spayed or neutered unless the adopting party
executes a written agreement with the releasing agency to have the dog
or cat spayed or neutered within 30 days of the adoption date or within
30 days from the date that the dog or cat reaches sexual maturity, with
the cost of such spaying or neutering to be the responsibility of the
adopting party. The written agreement must include the dog's or cat's
age, sex, and general description; the date of adoption and the date by
which the dog or cat must be spayed or neutered; the adopting party's
name, address, phone number, and signature; the releasing agency's
name, address, phone number, and the dollar amount of the deposit
remitted. In addition to executing the written agreement the adopting
party must leave with the releasing agency a deposit as set from time to
time by the Town Council. The amount of the deposit shall be
determined by the releasing agency. Said deposit will be refunded by
the releasing agency to the adopting party upon presentation of a
written statement or receipt from a licensed veterinarian of the
adopting party's choice where the dog or cat was spayed or neutered,
provided that the spaying or neutering was performed within the thirtyday
period. Alternatively, the releasing agency shall make appropriate
arrangements for the spaying or neutering of the dog or cat by a
licensed veterinarian and have the surgery completed before releasing
the dog or cat to the adopting party.
B. Exceptions.
(1) The following are exemptions from the provisions of Subsection A:
(a) A releasing agency returns a stray dog or cat to its owner;
(b) A releasing agency receives a written report from a licensed
veterinarian stating that the life of the dog or cat would be
jeopardized by the surgery and that such health condition is
likely to be permanent;
(c) A releasing agency receives a written report from a licensed
veterinarian stating that there is a temporary health condition,
including sexual immaturity, which would make surgery life
threatening to the dog or cat or impracticable, in which
instance the releasing agency shall grant the adopting party an
appropriate extension of time in which to have the dog or cat
spayed or neutered based on the veterinarian's report.
§ 139-17 ANIMALS § 139-17
139:117
§ 139-18. Forfeited deposits.
Deposits required by § 139-17 which are unclaimed after 60 days from
the date of adoption or 60 days from when the dog or cat reaches sexual
maturity, whichever is later, will be forfeited by the adopting party and
retained by the releasing agency and shall be used for the following
purposes:
§ 139-19. Violations and penalties; disposition of fines.
(2) The exemptions provided in Subsection B(1)(b) and (c) above shall
only be applicable if the releasing agency receives said written
report from a licensed veterinarian within the thirty-day period
during which the spaying or neutering would otherwise be
required, or in the case of a report contemplated by Subsection
B(1)(b) above, said report may be provided to the releasing agency
during any temporary extension period provided by Subsection
B(1)(c) above if the health condition of the dog or cat has changed.
C. If requested to do so, a releasing agency shall refund deposited funds to
the adopting party upon reasonable proof being presented to the
releasing agency by the adopting party that the dog or cat died before
the expiration of the period during which the spaying or neutering was
required to be completed.
D. Any and all releasing agencies:
(1) May enter into cooperative agreements with each other and with
veterinarians in carrying out the provisions of this section; and
(2) Shall make a good faith effort to cause an adopting party to comply
with the provisions of this section.
A. A public education program to prevent overpopulation in dogs and cats;
B. A program to spay and neuter dogs and cats that are available for
adoption by the releasing agency;
C. A follow-up program to assure that dogs and cats adopted from the
releasing agency are spayed or neutered; and
D. To defray additional costs incurred by the releasing agency in
complying with § 139-17.
A. Violations by adopting party.
(1) Violations of the provisions of § 139-17 or the written agreement
executed pursuant thereto by an adopting party shall be punishable
as indicated in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Penalties.
Each and every incidence of noncompliance by an adopting party
which continues unremedied for 30 days after written notice of a
violation hereunder shall constitute a subsequent offense and the
attendant penalties will apply. Second and subsequent offenses
§ 139-17 GLOCESTER CODE § 139-19
139:118
may constitute grounds for seizure and forfeiture of the dog or cat,
which seizure will be conducted by the Animal Control Officer or
a police officer for the town in which the adopting party resides,
and the seized animal will be returned to the releasing agency from
which it was adopted, which releasing agency will be free to adopt
out or euthanize the seized dog or cat. The adopting party shall lose
all ownership rights in the seized dog or cat, shall forfeit all rights
to any fee or deposit paid for the dog or cat, and shall have no claim
against the releasing agency or any other person for any expenses
incurred by the adopting party for the dog's or cat's maintenance.12
(2) The provisions of §§ 139-17 through 139-19 will be enforced
against an adopting party by the Animal Control Officer or a police
officer for the town in which the adopting party resides.
B. Violations of the provisions of § 139-17 or 139-18 by a releasing agency
shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article II, Penalties. The third and subsequent offenses may result in the
temporary or permanent revocation of the releasing agency's license to
operate. Compliance by the releasing agency with the provisions of
§§ 139-17 through 139-19 will be monitored as to the releasing agencies
by the State Veterinarian.13
C. All fines collected under Subsection A will be remitted to the Town
Clerk of Glocester where the adopting party of the dog or cat resides.
Such fines shall be used by the Town only for enforcing animal control
laws or ordinances or for programs to reduce the population of
unwanted stray dogs and cats in the Town, including humane education
programs or programs for the spaying or neutering of dogs or cats. All
fines collected under Subsection B will be remitted to the Finance
Director and placed in a separate fund within the general fund to be
called the "Animal Health Fund," which shall be administered by the
Finance Director in the same manner as the general fund. All funds
deposited in the Animal Health Fund shall be made available to the
Department of Environmental Management Division of Agriculture to
defray any costs or expenses incurred by the State Veterinarian in the
enforcement of §§ 139-17, 139-18 and 139-19.
12.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
13.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 139-19 ANIMALS § 139-19
139:119
Chapter 145
BUILDING PERMITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Board — See Ch. 106.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 300.
Fees — See Ch. 368.
§ 139-19 GLOCESTER CODE § 139-19
145:120
ARTICLE I
Fees14
[Adopted 9-14-1989 (Ch. II, § 1, 2-01-01, Section 1, of the 1991
Code)15]
§ 145-1. Application for building permit.
A. Any person contemplating the erection, extension, alteration or repair,
moving or demolition of a structure or contemplating the structural
alteration, reroofing, electrical wiring or installation of plumbing or
mechanical equipment, in an existing or new structure, shall make
application for a permit on the prescribed forms in the office of the
Building Official. Said application shall be submitted prior to the start of
construction and shall be accompanied by a fee according to the
schedule established from time to time by the Town Council for the
following. Permit fees are based on valuation of current construction
cost per square foot of floor area as determined by the Building Official.
There shall be available in the Building Official's office a schedule of
current construction costs according to the following categories:
First floor of building
Second floor of building
Third floor of building
Unfinished second floors, etc.
Finished basements
Unfinished basements
Garages
Barns
Breezeways and enclosed porches
Open porches
Sheds
Swimming pools, in-ground
Swimming pools, aboveground
Wooden decks
B. Permit fees for:
(1) A permit for the construction, alteration, removal, demolition,
equipment, electrical work, signs, fire escapes, swimming pools,
etc., and moving buildings.
(2) Electrical permits.
14.Editor's Note: See Ch. 368, Fees, for specific fee amounts.
15.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 145-1 BUILDING PERMITS § 145-1
145:121
(3) Plumbing permits.
(4) Mechanical permits.
(5) Demolition or moving permits.
(6) Wood stove permits.
(7) Sign permits.
(8) Reinspection fee per failed or rejected electrical, plumbing or
mechanical inspection. The reinspection fee will apply if an
inspector is locked out of a house after inspection has been
requested and arrangements for access to project were made with
Building Official's office.
(9) Commercial.
(a) Permit fees for gasoline stations. The fees for the erection of
gasoline station buildings or alterations of gasoline stations
shall be the amount specified in the Chapter 368, Fees, and in
addition fees will be established for the following:
[1] Each gas pump.
[2] Each tank for petroleum products.
(10) Late filing fees.
C. No building permit shall be issued by the Building Official unless all
past-due taxes, assessments, fines or fees on the real estate thereon,
due to the Town, have been paid. Notification of such shall be evidenced
by a certificate executed by the Tax Collector or Deputy Tax Collector.
D. Permit fees for libraries, fire departments, police departments,
municipal buildings and public schools shall be waived. Inspection fees
for each inspection for electrical, plumbing, and mechanical shall be
required. [Amended 4-15-1993, effective 5-12-1993]
E. There shall be no refund, in whole or in part, of any fee relating to the
application for building, electrical, plumbing or mechanical permit(s).
[Amended 3-17-1994, effective 4-14-1994]
§ 145-1 GLOCESTER CODE § 145-1
145:122
ARTICLE II
Permits for Construction of New Buildings
[Adopted 9-14-1989 (Ch. II, § 1, 2-01-01, Section 2, of the 1991
Code)]
§ 145-2. Building lot to abut improved street.
No permit for the erection of any building shall be issued unless the building
lot abuts a street which has been placed on the official road map of the
Town giving access to the proposed structure. In addition, before a building
permit may be issued, on a non-Town road (street), such street and the
part of the street abutting the building lot shall have been certified by
the Glocester Planning Board to be suitably improved in accordance with
standards for street design contained in the Glocester Subdivision
Regulations,16 or such suitable improvements shall have been assured by
means of a performance guarantee, in accordance with rules and
regulations adopted by the Glocester Planning Board. Such certification
by the Glocester Planning Board shall be subject to final approval by the
Glocester Town Council.
§ 145-3. Exceptions.
Where enforcement of this article would entail practical difficulty or
unnecessary hardship, or where circumstances do not require the building
to be related to a street, the Glocester Town Council may, in a specific
case and after a public hearing for which reasonable notice has been given
to all interested parties, and at which parties in interest and others shall
have an opportunity to be heard, make reasonable exceptions and issue
a permit subject to conditions that will assure adequate access for school
buses, fire-fighting equipment, ambulances and other emergency and Town
vehicles necessary for the protection of the health and safety, and that will
protect any future street layout shown on the official road map. Applications
for such exceptions will be referred by the Glocester Town Council to the
Glocester Planning Board for an advisory opinion thereon, but all such
applications shall be subject to a decision by the Glocester Town Council
after a hearing as provided herein.
§ 145-4. Amendments.
The Glocester Planning Board is authorized to adopt, modify and amend
rules and regulations reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes and
intent of this article, subject to the final approval of the Glocester Town
Council.
16.Editor's Note: See Ch. 300, Subdivision of Land.
§ 145-2 BUILDING PERMITS § 145-4
145:123
Chapter 148
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building permits — See Ch. 145.
Mobile homes and house trailers — See Ch.
208.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 300.
§ 148-1. Establishment of system.
There shall be, in the Town of Glocester, a uniform system for the
numbering of residential, commercial and industrial buildings and lots.
§ 148-2. Purpose.
The standards set forth in this chapter are made for the purpose of
promoting the public health and safety by providing a means of locating
residential and other structures by police, fire, and other emergency
services and for such other purposes requiring the location of residential
and other structures as may be required.
§ 148-3. Administration.
This building and lot numbering system shall be administered by the
Glocester Town Council, which shall assign building numbers to all
residential, commercial, and industrial structures and lots in conformity
with the plan developed pursuant to this chapter. The Town Council shall
also be responsible for maintaining the following official records of this
numbering system:
§ 148-4. Numbering system.
The following criteria shall govern the development of the numbering
system and the assignment of numbers:
A. Town maps for official use showing said numbering system.
B. A Town-wide alphabetical list of property owners by last name, showing
the assigned numbers.
C. A Town-wide alphabetical list of streets with property owners listed in
order of their assigned numbers.
A. Number intervals. Each 400 feet of every street shall be assigned 16
number intervals, eight odd numbers and eight even numbers at
intervals of 50 feet on each side of the street. Number intervals in
heavily populated areas shall be every 25 feet, and mobile home parks
shall be by lot number.
§ 145-4 GLOCESTER CODE § 148-4
148:124
§ 148-5. Display of assigned numbers.
All residents and other occupants shall display assigned numbers in the
following manner.
B. Odd and even numbers. Odd numbers shall be on the right-hand side of
all streets, facing from the point of number origin to the point of
number destination of each street.
C. Number origins.
(1) On through streets which terminate at another street at both ends,
numbers shall start at the northerly end of streets which run in a
generally north-south direction and shall start at the easterly end of
streets which run in a generally east-west direction. Streets
running in other directions shall start numbers at whichever end is
most northerly or easterly.
(2) On dead-end streets or cul-de-sacs, numbers will start at the
intersection of origin of the street and run toward the dead end or
turnaround.
(3) Exceptions to either of the above shall be decided on a case-by-case
basis.
D. Common access. Where several residences or other structures are
served by a common driveway or a private right-of-way which is not on a
street recognized by the Town, the number at the entrance shall apply
to all residences and structures served by the drive or way, and each
separate residence or structure shall be identified by a suffix letter in
counterclockwise rotation starting with the structure on the immediate
right of the drive or accessway. Where possible, letters shall be
assigned using the same interval in feet as used on recognized streets.
E. Number assignment. The number assigned to each residence or other
structure shall be the number which falls closest to the main entry or
driveway providing access to the property as shown on the official map
of street numbers.
A. Number on the structure or residence. Where the residence or
structure is within 50 feet of the edge of a street right-of-way, the
assigned number shall be displayed on the front of the residence or
structure in the vicinity of the front door or entry.
B. Number at the street line. Where the residence or structure is over 50
feet from the edge of the street right-of-way, or when 50 feet or less but
not visible from the street, the assigned number shall be displayed on a
post, fence, wall, or the mailbox at the property line adjacent to the
walk or access drive to the residence or structure.
§ 148-4 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 148-5
148:125
§ 148-6. New development.
Whenever any residence or other structure is constructed or developed,
it shall be the duty of the new owner to procure an assigned number or
numbers from the Town Building Official. This shall be done at the time of
the issuance of the building permit.
§ 148-7. New subdivisions.
Any prospective subdivider shall show a proposed lot numbering system at
the time of submission of a final plan to the Glocester Planning Board.
§ 148-8. Names of streets.
The Town Council shall have final approval over the naming of streets, and
shall ensure that the name of each street is readily distinguishable from the
names of other Town streets.
§ 148-9. Rental properties.
Owners of structures or residences which are rented or leased shall submit
to the Building Official the names of all renters, lessees or tenants.
§ 148-10. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon passage, and number assignment shall
be initiated by the Town Council upon completion of the official map of
street numbers and the availability of such official maps of street numbers
in the office of the Glocester Town Clerk.
Chapter 151
CAMPING AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disorderly conduct and indecency — See Ch.
157.
Mobile homes and house trailers — See Ch.
208.
Parking and storage of vehicles — See Ch.
263.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 300.
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
C. Size and color number. Numbers shall be a minimum of three inches
high, displayed in a contrasting color and shall be located as to be
visible from the street.
D. Interior location. All residents and other occupants are requested to
post the assigned number and street name adjacent to their telephone
for emergency reference.
§ 148-5 GLOCESTER CODE § 151-1
151:126
§ 151-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CAMPER — Any construction used or arranged for temporary living or
sleeping purposes, and mounted or attached on a vehicle and capable of
being removed from such vehicle. 17
CAMPING AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARK — A parcel of land in which two or
more spaces are occupied or intended for occupancy by trailers or campers
for transient dwelling purposes.
CAMPING AND TRAVEL TRAILER SPACE — A parcel of land in a camping
and travel trailer park for which a fee is paid by the occupant(s) of the
space. 18
DEPENDENT TRAILER — A trailer which is dependent upon a service
building for toilet and lavatory facilities.
GROSS SITE AREA — The portion of land designated as the camping and
travel trailer park.
LICENSE — A written license issued by the Town Council allowing a person
to operate and maintain a camping and travel trailer parking area under the
provisions of this chapter and regulations issued hereunder.
PERMIT — A written permit issued by the Town Council permitting the
construction, alteration, or extension of a camping and travel trailer parking
area under the provisions of this chapter and regulations issued hereunder.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, trust, partnership, public or private
association, or corporation.
SANITARY STATION — A facility used for removing and disposing of wastes
from trailer holding tanks.
SELF-CONTAINED TRAILER — A trailer which can operate independent
of connections to sewer, water and electrical systems. It contains a waterflushed
toilet, lavatory, shower and kitchen sink, all of which are connected
to water storage and sewerage holding tanks located within the trailer.
SERVICE BUILDING — A structure housing toilet, lavatory and such other
facilities as may be required by this chapter.
SEWER CONNECTION — The connection consisting of all pipes, fittings
and appurtenances from the drain outlet of the trailer to the inlet of the
corresponding sewer riser pipe of the sewerage system serving the camping
and trailer parking area.
SEWER RISER PIPE — That portion of the sewer lateral which extends
vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at each camping and
travel space.
17.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 151-1 CAMPING AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS § 151-1
151:127
TOWN COUNCIL — The legally designated Town Council of the Town of
Glocester.
TRAILER — Any of the following:
TRAILER STAND — That part of an individual trailer or camp space which
has been reserved for the placement of a single trailer or tent and its
accessory structures.
TENT — Any portable structure other than the above-defined trailers, which
must be pitched and prepared before use as a shelter.
WATER CONNECTION — The connection consisting of all pipes, fittings,
and appurtenances from the water riser pipe to the water inlet pipe of the
distribution system within the trailer.
WATER RISER PIPE — That portion of the water supply system serving the
camping trailer park which extends vertically to the ground elevation and
terminates at a designated point at each trailer and camping space.
WATER STATION — A facility for supplying water storage tanks of trailers
and campers with potable water.
§ 151-2. Permits.
TRAVEL TRAILER — A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis,
designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational
and vacation uses, permanently identified “travel trailer” by the
manufacturer of the trailer, and when factory equipped for the road, it
shall have a body width not exceeding eight feet, and a body length not
exceeding 34 feet.
A.
PICK-UP COACH — A structure designed to be mounted on a truck
chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and
vacation.
B.
MOTOR HOME — A portable, temporary dwelling to be used for travel,
recreation and vacation, constructed as an integral part of a selfpropelled
vehicle.
C.
CAMPING TRAILER — A canvas, folding structure, mounted on wheels
and designated for travel, recreation and vacation use.
D.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter or extend any
camping and travel trailer park within the limits of the Town of
Glocester (or to expand the number of the camping and trailer spaces
within such a park) unless he holds a valid permit issued by the Town
Council in the name of such person for the specific construction,
alteration, extension, expansion, or enlargement proposed in
conformity with Chapter 350, Zoning, and other applicable laws.
B. All applications for permits shall be made to the Town Council and shall
contain the following:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
§ 151-1 GLOCESTER CODE § 151-2
151:128
(2) Ownership interest of the applicant in the camping and travel
trailer park.
(3) Location and legal description of the camping and travel trailer
park.
(4) A U.S. Soil Conservation Service standard soil survey to determine
suitability for a campground.
(5) A two-phase review of the plan shall be as follows:
(a) Preliminary approval or disapproval will follow a general
presentation of the proposal to the Town Council. The
presentation will include the statement that buildings, water,
electrical and disposal systems will be subject to state codes,
the approval of the Department of Environmental Management
and the Department of Health.
(b) After obtaining preliminary approval, complete engineering
plans based on any local or state specifications applicable to
the proposed camping and travel trailer park will be presented.
The complete plans will include the following:
[1] The area and dimensions of the tract of land, and names of
abutting property owners.
[2] The number, location, and size of all camping and trailer
spaces.
[3] The location and width of roadways and walkways.
[4] The location of service buildings, sanitary stations and any
other proposed structures.
[5] The location of water and sewer lines and riser pipes.
[6] Plans and specifications of the water supply and refuse
and sewage disposal facilities.
[7] Plans and specifications of all buildings constructed or to
be constructed within the camping and travel trailer park.
[8] Planned uses for recreational facilities.
C. All applications shall be accompanied by the deposit of a fee as set by
the Town Council from time to time, plus the cost of advertising any
hearing on the application. The fee will be applied to the license fee
with the license. However, in the event an application is not approved or
withdrawn, such fee will not be refunded.19
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 151-2 CAMPING AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS § 151-2
151:129
§ 151-3. Licenses and special licenses.
D. When, upon review of a complete application, the Town Council is
satisfied that the proposed plan meets the requirements of this chapter
and regulations issued hereunder, a permit shall be issued.
E. Upon receipt of a proper application, the Town Council shall schedule a
public hearing on the same and shall cause notice of such hearing to be
advertised in a newspaper published of general circulation in the Town
of Glocester once a week for three successive weeks immediately prior
to the hearing and shall cause notices to be sent by certified mail, with
return receipts requested, to each of the property owners shown on the
plans required at least two weeks prior to the date of such hearing.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any camping and travel
trailer park within the limits of the Town of Glocester unless he holds a
valid license issued annually by the Town Council in the name of such
person for the specific camping and travel trailer park. All applications
for licenses shall be made to the Town Council, which shall issue a
license upon compliance by the applicant with provisions of this chapter
and regulations issued hereunder and of other applicable legal
requirements. All licenses shall run from April 15 to October 31, except
that winter camping may be allowed in accordance with the
requirements of § 151-19. [Amended 1-16-1992]
B. Every person holding a license shall give notice in writing to the Town
Council within 24 hours after having sold, transferred, given away or
otherwise disposed of interest in or control of any camping and travel
trailer park. Such notice shall include the name and address of the
person succeeding to the ownership or control of such camping and
travel trailer park. Upon application in writing for transfer of the
license and deposit of a fee as set from time to time by the Town
Council, the license shall be transferred if the camping and travel
trailer park is in compliance with all applicable provisions of this
chapter and regulations issued hereunder.20
C. Applications.
(1) Application for original licenses shall be in writing signed by the
applicant, accompanied by an affidavit of the applicant as to the
truth of the application and by the deposit fee as set from time to
time by the Town Council, less permit fee, and will contain:21
(a) The name and address of the applicant.
(b) The location and legal description of the camping and travel
trailer park.
20.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 151-2 GLOCESTER CODE § 151-3
151:130
(c) A comprehensive site plan of the camping and travel trailer
park showing:
[1] The area and dimensions of the tract of land, and the
names of abutting property owners.
[2] The number, location, and size of all camping and trailer
spaces.
[3] The location and width of roadways and walkways.
[4] The location and service buildings, sanitary stations, and
any other structures.
[5] The location of water and sewer lines and riser pipes.
(d) Written approval from the Rhode Island Health Department
assuring adequate water, sewerage and sanitary facilities and
written approval of the Zoning and Electrical Inspector,
evidencing uniformity to engineering plans and to other
provisions of this chapter.
(2) Renewal. Applications for annual renewals of licenses shall be
made in writing by the holder of the licenses, shall be accompanied
by the deposit of a fee as set from time to time by the Town Council,
and shall contain any change in the information submitted since the
original license was issued or the latest renewal granted.
D. Suspension. Whenever, upon inspection of any camping and travel
trailer park, the Town Council finds that conditions or practices exist
which are in violation of any provision of the chapter or regulations
issued hereunder, the Town Council shall give notice in writing, which
includes an explanation of the violation and possible corrective action,
in accordance with § 151-5A to the person to whom the license was
issued. The notice will state that unless such conditions or practices are
corrected within a reasonable period of time specified in the notice by
the Town Council, the license will be suspended. At the end of such
period, the Town Council shall reinspect such camping and travel
trailer park and, if such have not been corrected, it shall suspend the
license and give notice of such suspension to the person to whom the
license is issued. Upon receipt of such notice of suspension, such
person shall cease operation of such camping and travel trailer park
except as provided in § 151-5B.
E. Any person whose license has been suspended, or who has received
notice from the Town Council that his license will be suspended unless
certain conditions or practices at the camping and travel trailer park
are corrected, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the
matter before the Town Council under the procedure provided by
§ 151-5 of this chapter; provided that when no petition for such hearing
shall have been filed within 10 days following the day on which notice of
suspension was served, such license shall be deemed to have been
§ 151-3 CAMPING AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS § 151-3
151:131
§ 151-4. Inspection.
automatically revoked at the expiration of such ten-day period, or upon
expiration of the period specified in the notice described in Subsection
D above (whichever is the last to occur) if appropriate corrective action
has not been completed.
F. Any person desiring to furnish temporary facilities for accommodating a
camper and travel trailer rally, or other group of campers and trailers
assembled for the purpose of traveling together, shall make application
for such activity to the Town Council. The requirements for service
building and other sanitary and physical facilities as set forth in
§ 151-11 herein may be waived by the health authority on the
determination that public health will not be endangered; but the
location of the site, the facilities which are provided, and the method of
conducting such rally shall be acceptable to the Town Council before a
special license shall be issued specifying the location of the site and the
period of issuance.
G. Provisions may be made within the campground for safari-type camping
and affinity group tent camping, provided that the necessary space,
sanitary, and health facilities are available.
A. The Town Council and its agents are hereby authorized and directed to
make such inspections as are necessary to determine satisfactory
compliance with this chapter and regulations issued hereunder.
B. The Town Council and its agents shall have the power to enter at
reasonable times upon any private or public property for the purpose of
inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of
this chapter and regulations issued hereunder.
C. It shall be the duty of the owners of the camping and travel trailer parks
to give the Town Council and its agents free access to such premises at
reasonable times for the purpose of inspection.
D. It shall be the duty of every occupant of a camping and travel trailer
park to give the owner thereof or his agent or employees access to any
part of such camping and travel trailer park or its premises at
reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations
as are necessary to effect compliance with this chapter and regulations
issued hereunder, or with any lawful order issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
E. In the event that the Town Council or its agents are refused entry to
camping and travel trailer parks for the purpose of conducting an
inspection, or are refused access to places located in such parks from
which the general public is prohibited, the Town Council and its agents
shall generally be required to first obtain a warrant authorizing the
inspection before proceeding with same, unless emergency or other
§ 151-3 GLOCESTER CODE § 151-4
151:132
§ 151-5. Notices, hearings and orders.
conditions exist which constitute adequate excuse for not seeking to
obtain a warrant prior to entry.
(1) The warrant which issues should indicate the scope of the
inspection and the purpose therefor. The inspection should not
exceed the limits set forth in the warrant.
(2) Warrants should issue upon a showing that there is probable cause
to believe a violation of the chapter exists or, upon a showing that
an inspection would be in compliance with the general
administrative plan for enforcement of the chapter. A sworn
statement by a Town Council member or one of its agents
(including without limitation, the Building Inspector or police
officers) that a warrant is sought for the purpose of ascertaining
compliance with or verifying matters pertaining to specific permits,
licenses, and/or applications therefor shall constitute a sufficient
showing under this section.
(3) Applications for warrants should indicate the specific purpose,
scope, and manner of conducting the inspection requested.
F. The Town Council hereby establishes a general administrative plan for
the enforcement of the chapter which involves periodic inspections of
camping and travel trailer parks with the Town on a monthly basis to
ascertain compliance with and verification of matters pertaining to
specific permits, licenses, and/or applications therefor.
A. The Town Council may initiate a hearing to determine whether there
has been a violation of any provisions of this chapter or a material
change in the conditions or circumstances presumed to exist at the time
an application for a permit or license was originally considered, by
giving notice of such alleged violation and hearing date to the person to
whom the permit or license was issued, as hereinafter provided. Such
notice shall:
(1) Be in writing.
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance.
(3) Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires.
(4) Be served upon the owner or his agents as the case may require;
provided that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been
properly served upon such owner or agent when a copy thereof has
been sent by registered mail to his last known address; or when he
has been served with such notice by any other method authorized
or required by the laws of this state.
§ 151-4 CAMPING AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS § 151-5
151:133
(5) Contain an outline of remedial action, which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and regulations
issued hereunder.
B. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in accordance
with Subsection A above or Subsection E below may request and shall
be granted a hearing on the matter before the Town Council; provided
that such person shall file in the office of the Town Clerk a written
petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of
the grounds therefor within 10 days after the day the notice was served.
The filing of the request for hearing shall operate as a stay of the notice
and of the suspension except in the case of any order issued under
Subsection E. Upon receipt of such petition, the Town Council shall set
a time and place for such hearing, and shall give the petitioner written
notice thereof. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an
opportunity to be heard, and to show why such notice should be
modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be commenced not later than
10 days after the day on which the petition was filed; provided that
upon application of the petitioner, the Town Council may postpone the
date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such ten-day period
when in its judgment the petitioner has submitted good and sufficient
reasons for such postponement.
C. After such hearing, the Town Council shall make findings as to
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and regulations issued
hereunder and shall issue an order in writing sustaining, modifying or
withdrawing the notice, which shall be served as provided in
Subsection A(4). Upon failure to comply with any order sustaining or
modifying a notice, the permit or license of the camping and travel
trailer park affected by the order shall be revoked.
D. The proceedings at such a hearing, including the findings and decision
of the Town Council, and together with a copy of every notice related
thereto shall be entered as a matter of public record in the office of the
Town Clerk. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Town Council
may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as
provided by laws of this state.
E. Whenever the Town Council finds that an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect public health, it may, without
notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an
emergency and requiring that such action be taken as it may deem
necessary to meet the emergency, including the suspension of the
license or permit. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter,
such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such an
order is directed shall comply therewith immediately but, upon petition
to the Town Council, shall be afforded a hearing within 30 days. The
provisions of Subsections C and D shall be applicable to such hearing
and the order issued thereafter.
§ 151-5 GLOCESTER CODE § 151-6
151:134
§ 151-6. Adoption of regulations by Council.
The Town Council is hereby authorized to make and, after public hearing,
to adopt such written regulations as may be necessary for the proper
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. Such regulations shall have
the same force and effect as the provisions of this chapter, and the penalty
for the violation of the provisions thereof shall be the same as the penalty
for the violation of the provisions of this chapter, as hereinafter provided.
§ 151-7. Open space and access requirements.
A. General requirements. The condition of soil, groundwater level,
drainage and topography shall not create hazards to the property or
health or safety to the occupants. The site shall not be exposed to
objectionable smoke, noise, odors or other adverse influences, and no
portion subject to unpredictable and/or sudden flooding subsidence
(rock slide, land slide) or erosion shall be used for any purpose which
would expose persons or property to hazard.
B. Soil and ground cover requirements. Exposed ground surfaces in all
parts of every parking area or camping site shall be paved, or covered
with gravel surface, or other solid material, or protected with a
vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and of
eliminating objectionable dust.
C. Required separation between trailers or campsites. Campsites and
trailers shall be separated from each other and from other structures by
at least 40 feet. Any accessory structure such as attached awnings,
carports, or individual storage facilities shall, for purposes of this
separation requirement, be considered to be part of the trailer.
Provisions may be made whereby a maximum of 10% of available sites
be double campsites servicing no more than two vehicles.
D. Density requirement.
(1) The density shall not exceed 10 trailer spaces or camping spaces
per acre of gross site area, except that the Town Council may,
under specific circumstances, permit a higher density, provided all
other environmental, open space, and access requirements of this
chapter and regulations issued hereunder are adhered to. Any
person desiring a higher density shall make application for such
exemption to the Town Council specifying the reasons therefor. If a
lighter density is permitted, the Town Council shall issue a special
license specifying the location of the camping and parking area, the
expiration date of the license, and the conditions of issuance.
(2) The density shall not exceed a maximum of eight persons per trailer
or camping space or one immediate family if larger. For purposes of
this subsection, “immediate family” is defined as including a
spouse, mother, father, brother, sister or child.22
§ 151-6 CAMPING AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS § 151-7
151:135
E. Required recreation area. In all camping and travel trailer parks there
shall be at least one recreation area which shall be easily accessible
from all camping and trailer spaces. The aggregate size of such
recreation areas shall be not less than 8% of the gross site area or 2,500
square feet, whichever is greater.
F. Required setbacks from public streets and abutting properties. All
campers and trailers and other structures shall be located at least 200
feet from any park boundary line abutting upon a public street or
highway and at least 200 feet from any boundary line. The setback line
may be reduced from 200 feet to 50 feet upon agreement with the
abutting property owner.
G. Park street system.
(1) General requirements. All parking areas and camping spaces shall
be provided with safe and convenient vehicular access from
abutting public streets or roads to each camping and trailer space.
Alignment and grading shall be properly adapted to topography.
Surfacing and maintenance shall provide a smooth, hard and dense
surface which shall be well drained.
(2) Access. Access to camping and travel trailers shall be designed to
minimize congestion and hazards at their entrance or exit and
allow free movement of traffic and adjacent streets. All traffic into
or out of the parking areas shall be through such entrances and
exits.
(3) Internal streets. Roadways shall be of adequate width to
accommodate anticipated traffic and in any case shall meet the
following minimum requirements:
(a) One-way, no parking (acceptable only if less than 500 feet total
length and serving fewer than 25 camping or trailer spaces):
12 feet.
(b) One-way, parking on one side only, or Two-way, no parking
(acceptable only if serving fewer than 50 camping or trailer
spaces): 18 feet.
(c) Two-way, no parking: 24 feet.
(d) Two-way, parking on one side only: 30 feet.
(4) Off-street parking and maneuvering space. Each camping and
trailer park shall provide sufficient parking and maneuvering space
so that the parking, loading or maneuvering of trailers incidental to
parking shall not necessitate the use of any public street, sidewalk
or right-of-way or any private grounds not part of the camping and
travel trailer park.
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 151-7 GLOCESTER CODE § 151-8
151:136
§ 151-8. Water supply.
An adequate, accessible, safe and potable supply of water shall be provided
in each camping and travel trailer park. Where a public supply of water
of satisfactory quantity, quality, and pressure is available, connection shall
be made thereto and its supply used exclusively. When a satisfactory public
water supply is not available, a private water supply system may be
developed and used as approved by the Rhode Island Department of Health.
§ 151-9. Sewerage requirements.
An adequate and safe sewerage system shall be provided in all camping and
travel trailer parks for conveying and disposing of all sewage. Such system
shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with state
and local laws and shall be approved by the Rhode Island Department of
Health.
§ 151-10. Electrical distribution system.
A. General requirements. If an electrical wiring system is provided, it shall
consist of approved fixtures, equipment and appurtenances, which shall
be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable codes and
regulations governing such systems.
B. Power distribution lines.
(1) Main power lines not located underground shall be suspended at
least 18 feet above the ground. There shall be a minimum
horizontal clearance of three feet between overhead wiring and any
trailer, service building or other structure.
(2) All direct burial conductors or cables shall be buried at least 18
inches below the ground surface and shall be insulated and
specially approved for the purpose. Such conductors shall be
located not less than one foot radial distance from water, sewer, gas
or communication lines.
C. Individual electrical connections.
(1) If individual camping and trailer spaces are connected to the
electrical wiring system, an approved type of disconnecting device
and overcurrent protective equipment shall be provided. The
service per outlet shall be 120 volts AC, 15 amperes and/or 30
amperes.
(2) Outlet receptacles at individual camping and trailer spaces shall be
located not more than 25 feet from the overcurrent protective
devices in the trailer, and a three-wire grounding type shall be
used. Receptacles shall be of weatherproof construction, and
configurations shall be in accordance with American Standard
Outlet Receptacle C-73.1.
§ 151-8 CAMPING AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS § 151-10
151:137
§ 151-11. Service buildings and other service facilities.
(3) The trailer shall be connected to the outlet receptacle by an
approved type of flexible cable with connectors and a male
attachment plug.
D. Required grounding. All exposed noncurrent-carrying metal parts of
trailers and all other equipment shall be grounded by means of a
grounding conductor run with branch circuit conductors or other
method of approved grounds metallic wiring. The neutral conductor
shall not be used as an equipment ground for trailers or other
equipment.
A. General. The requirements of this section shall apply to service
buildings, recreation buildings and other service facilities such as:
(1) Management offices, repair shops and storage areas.
(2) Sanitary facilities.
(3) Laundry facilities.
(4) Indoor recreation areas.
(5) Commercial uses supplying essential goods or services for the
exclusive use of camp and trailer occupants.
(6) Sanitary stations.
B. Service buildings.
(1) Service buildings containing the necessary toilet and other
plumbing fixtures as specified by the Rhode Island Department of
Health shall be provided in camping and travel trailer parks which
provide space for dependent trailers and campsites. Service
buildings shall be conveniently located within a radius of
approximately 500 feet to the spaces to be served and not closer
than 50 feet to any campsite.
(2) Where a camping and travel trailer parking section is designed for
and exclusively limited to use by self-contained trailers, only the
following minimum emergency sanitary facilities shall be required:
for each 100 camping and trailer spaces, or fractional part thereof,
there shall be one flush toilet and one lavatory for each sex. This
sanitary station shall be conveniently located and shall meet state
and local requirements.
(3) When a camping and travel trailer parking area requiring a service
building is operated in connection with a resort or other business
establishment, the number of sanitary facilities for such business
establishment shall be in excess of those required by the schedule
for camping and trailer spaces and shall be based on the total
number of persons using such facilities.
§ 151-10 GLOCESTER CODE § 151-11
151:138
C. Structural requirements for buildings.
(1) All portions of the structure shall be properly protected from
damage by ordinary use and by decay, corrosion, termites and
other destructive elements. Exterior portions shall be of such
materials and be so constructed and protected as to prevent
entrance or penetration of moisture and weather.
(2) All rooms containing sanitary or laundry facilities shall:
(a) Have sound-resistant walls extending to the ceiling between
male and female sanitary facilities. Walls and partitions around
showers, bathtubs, lavatories and other plumbing fixtures shall
be constructed of dense, nonabsorbent, waterproof material or
covered with moisture-resistant material.
(b) Have at least one window or skylight facing directly to the
outdoors. The minimum aggregate gross area of windows for
each required room shall not be less than 10% of floor area
served by them.
(c) Have at least one window which can be easily opened or a
mechanical device which will adequately ventilate the room.
(3) Toilets shall be located in separate compartments equipped with
self-closing doors. The shower stalls shall be of the individual type.
The rooms shall be screened to prevent direct view of the interior
when the exterior doors are open.
(4) Illumination levels shall be maintained as follows:
(a) General seeing tasks: five footcandles.
(b) Laundry room work area: 40 footcandles.
(c) Toilet room in front of mirrors: 10 footcandles.
(5) Hot and cold water shall be furnished to every lavatory, sink,
bathtub, shower, and laundry fixture, and cold water shall be
furnished to every water closet and urinal. If laundry fixtures are
specifically designed for cold water and cold water soap, the hot
water requirement may be waived for such fixtures.
D. Barbecue pits, fireplaces, stoves and incinerators. Cooking shelters,
barbecue pits, fireplaces, woodburning stoves and incinerators shall be
so located, constructed, maintained and used to minimize fire hazard
and smoke nuisances both on the property on which it is used and on
neighboring property. No open fire shall be permitted except in
facilities provided. No open fire shall be left unattended. No fuel shall
be used and no material burned which emits dense smoke or
objectionable odors. All fires shall be totally extinguished before they
are left, and all ashes shall be disposed of as other refuse and shall not
be scattered on the ground.
§ 151-11 CAMPING AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS § 151-11
151:139
§ 151-12. Refuse handling.
§ 151-13. Insect and rodent control.
§ 151-14. Fuel supply and storage.
E. A sanitary dumping station shall be conveniently located. This station
shall meet state and local requirements.
A. The storage, collection, and disposal of refuse in the camping and travel
trailer park shall be so constructed as to create no health hazards,
rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident or fire hazards, or air
pollution.
B. All refuse shall be stored in flytight, watertight, rodent-proof
containers, which shall be located not more than 150 feet from any
camping and trailer space. Containers shall be provided in sufficient
number and capacity to properly store all refuse.
C. Refuse collection stands shall be provided for all refuse containers.
Such container stands shall be so designed as to prevent containers
from being tipped, to minimize spillage and container deterioration and
facilitate cleaning around them.
D. All refuse containing garbage shall be collected at least twice a week or
more often if necessary. Where suitable collection service is not
available from municipal or private agencies, the owner or operator of
the camping and travel trailer park shall provide this service. All refuse
shall be collected and transported in covered vehicles or covered
containers.
E. Where municipal or private disposal service is not available, the owner
or operator of the camping and travel trailer park shall dispose of the
refuse by transporting it to a disposal site approved by the Town
Council.
A. Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect
and rodent harborage and infestation. Extermination methods and
other measures to control insects and rodents shall conform with
requirements of the Town Council.
B. Parks shall be maintained free of accumulations of debris which may
provide rodent harborage or breeding places for flies, mosquitoes and
other pests.
C. Storage areas shall be so maintained as to prevent rodent harborage;
lumber, pipe and other building material shall be stored at least one
foot above the ground.
D. Where the potential for insect and rodent infestation exists, all exterior
openings in or beneath any structure shall be appropriately screened
with wire mesh or other suitable materials.
§ 151-11 GLOCESTER CODE § 151-14
151:140
§ 151-15. Fire protection.
§ 151-16. Supervision; temporary dwelling only.
§ 151-17. Registration of occupants.
Every owner or operator of a camping and travel trailer park shall maintain
a register containing a record of all tents, trailers, and occupants. Such
register shall be available to any authorized person inspecting the camping
A. Liquefied petroleum gas.
(1) Liquefied petroleum gas containers installed on a camping and
trailer space shall be securely, but not permanently, fastened to
prevent accidental overturning. Such containers shall not be less
than 12 or more than 60 U.S. gallons' gross capacity.
(2) No liquefied petroleum gas vessel shall be stored or located inside
or beneath any storage cabinet, carport, tent, trailer, or any other
structure, unless such installations are approved by the Town
Council.
B. Fuel oil storage.
(1) All fuel oil storage tanks or cylinders shall be securely fastened in
place and shall not be located inside or beneath any camper or
trailer or less than five feet from any camper or trailer exit.
(2) Storage tanks located in areas subject to traffic shall be protected
against physical damage.
A. The camping and travel trailer park shall be subject to the rules and
regulations of the fire prevention authorities.
B. Camping and travel trailer parks shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and
other flammable materials.
C. Portable fire extinguishers of a type approved by the fire prevention
authority shall be kept in service buildings and at all locations
designated by such fire prevention authority and shall be maintained in
good operating condition.
D. Fires shall be made only in stoves and other equipment intended for
such purposes.
A. The person to whom a license is issued shall at all times operate the
camping and travel trailer park in compliance with this chapter and
shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the camping and trailer
park, its facilities, and equipment in good repair and in a clean and
sanitary condition at all times.
B. The camping and trailer dwelling and/or spaces shall not be rented,
loaned or in any way occupied for a permanent residence or abode.
§ 151-14 CAMPING AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS § 151-17
151:141
and travel trailer park and shall be preserved for the period required by the
Town Council. Such register shall contain:
§ 151-18. Reporting communicable diseases.
Every owner, operator, attendant or other person operating a camping
and travel trailer park shall notify the Town Council of any suspected
communicable or contagious disease within the camping and travel trailer
park. In case of disease diagnosed by a physician as quarantinable, the
departure of a camper or trailer or its occupants, or the removal therefrom
of clothing or other articles which have been exposed to infection, without
approval of the Town Council is prohibited.
§ 151-19. Restriction of animals and pets.
No owner or person in charge of a dog, cat or other pet animal shall permit
it to run at large or to commit any nuisance within the limits of any camping
and travel trailer park.
§ 151-20. Policing.
The Town Council may require the owner or operator to employ such police
constables as are necessary for traffic control or the policing of special
events.
§ 151-21. Existing facilities.
This chapter shall apply to all existing camping and travel trailer parks in
the Town of Glocester; provided, however:
A. The names and permanent addresses of all tent and trailer occupants.
B. The make, model, and license number of the camper, trailer, or tent
trailer, and tow or carry vehicle.
C. The dates of arrival and departure of a camper or trailer and its
occupants.
A. The structural and dimensional requirements of this chapter shall not
apply to those structures and facilities which have been constructed
prior to the effective date of the enabling act and are located within
existing camping and travel trailer parks.
B. In order for existing camping and travel trailer parks to qualify for the
exemption provided in this section, the owners or representatives of
said parks must submit to the Town Council, within two months of the
effective date of said enabling act, an application for exemption which
lists and describes those structures and facilities for which exemption is
sought. Said application must contain the information set forth in
§ 151-3C(1)(c) of this chapter. The Town Council, upon verification of
the information provided, shall approve the application with respect to
§ 151-17 GLOCESTER CODE § 151-21
151:142
§ 151-22. Accessory uses.
Accessory uses are limited to campground stores supplying camping
supplies and provisions (but not a restaurant subject to a victualling
license). All other uses will be limited to those specified in the original
application.
§ 151-23. Violations and penalties.23
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall upon conviction
be punished in accordance with Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II,
Penalties. Each day's failure of compliance with any such provision shall
constitute a separate violation. Such conviction shall be in the appropriate
court or courts of this state, and shall be in addition to, and not require
the prior resort to, any other procedures of this chapter. In addition, the
Town may proceed to enforce this chapter in the same manner as provided
for the enforcement of Zoning Ordinances without prior resort to any other
equitable relief without the necessity of establishing the existence of a
nuisance, property damage, or threat thereof.
§ 151-24. Maximum number of licenses.
The maximum number of licenses to be issued for purposes of a camping
and travel trailer park shall be limited to one such license for each 600
inhabitants of the Town of Glocester.
§ 151-25. Winter camping.
Winter camping may be allowed by permission of the Town Council under
the following conditions:
those structures and facilities that have been constructed prior to the
effective date of said enabling act.
C. Except as provided above in Subsections A and B of this section, this
chapter shall apply to existing camping and travel trailer parks, and
nothing contained herein shall be construed to authorize or waive any
violations or illegal conduct existing as of the effective date hereof.
D. All existing camping and travel trailer parks shall comply with the
licensing procedure set forth in § 151-3 of this chapter, except that
existing parks shall be exempt from § 151-3A(1)(d) of this chapter upon
compliance and approval in accordance with § 151-21B above.
A. That the park shall be the subject of a valid current license issued prior
to the October 31 next preceding the winter camping;
B. That the park shall at all times maintain full and safe access to the park
and all campers, trailers and campsites in use for emergency vehicles,
including police vehicles and fire and rescue apparatus;
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 151-21 CAMPING AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS § 151-25
151:143
Chapter 157
DISORDERLY CONDUCT AND INDECENCY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult entertainment — See Ch. 130.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 134.
Entertainment licenses — See Ch. 173.
Hawkers and peddlers — See Ch. 190.
§ 157-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the general public has access and
a right to resort for business, entertainment, or other lawful purpose, but
does not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the public. It
shall also include the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant,
tavern, or other place of business, and also public grounds, areas, or parks.
§ 157-2. Disorderly conduct prohibited.
A person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct if, with the purpose of causing
public danger, alarm, disorder, nuisance, or if his or her conduct is likely to
cause public danger, alarm, disorder, or nuisance, he or she willfully does
any of the following acts in a public place, or in a place openly observable
from a public place:
C. That the park shall not contract to rent or loan or grant permission for
the use of any camping and trailer space for any period longer than six
weeks;
D. That, due to the inherent dangers involved, the occupancy of any
camper, trailer or campsite by children shall not be permitted except on
weekends when it does not reasonably appear that weather will impede
possible access of emergency vehicles; and
E. That the Town Council may impose such additional conditions as it may
deem appropriate.
A. Commits an act in a violent and tumultuous manner toward another
whereby that other is placed in fear of safety of his/her life, limb or
health;
B. Commits an act in a violent and tumultuous manner toward another
whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being
destroyed or damaged;
C. Causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as
to endanger the life, limb, health, or property of another;
§ 151-25 GLOCESTER CODE § 157-2
157:144
D. Interferes with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation by acts of
violence;
E. Is in a public place under the influence of an intoxicating liquor or drug
in such condition as to be unable to exercise care for his/her own safety
or the safety of others;
F. Resists or obstructs the performance of duties by the Glocester Police
or any other authorized official of the Town, when known to be such an
official;
G. Incites, attempts to incite, or is involved in attempting to incite a riot;
H. Addresses abusive language or threats to any member of the Glocester
Police Department, any other authorized official of the Town of
Glocester who is engaged in the lawful performance of his/her duties, or
any other person when such words have a direct tendency to cause acts
of violence. Words merely causing displeasure, annoyance or
resentment are not prohibited;
I. Damages, befouls, or disturbs public property or the property of
another so as to create a hazardous, unhealthy, or physically offensive
condition;
J. Fails to obey a lawful order to disperse by a police officer when known
to be such an official, where one or more persons are committing acts of
disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity, and the public health and
safety is imminently threatened;
K. Uses abusive or obscene language, or makes an obscene gesture;
L. Uses violent and forceful behavior at any time in or near a public place,
such that there is a clear and present danger that free movement of
other persons will be arrested or restrained, or other persons will be
incapacitated in the lawful exercise of business or amusement;
M. Disturbs the peace of others by violent, indecent, offensive or
boisterous conduct or language which was calculated to cause anguish
or injury to another;
N. Roughly crowds or pushes any person in any public place;
O. Throws any stone, snowball, or any other missile upon or at any person,
vehicle, building, tree, sign or other public or private property;
P. Wantonly makes a false alarm with reference to the request of firefighting
apparatus or cries “fire” in any public place for the sole
purpose of causing turmoil;
Q. Prowls or wanders upon the private property of another, peeks in the
door or window of any inhabited building or structure located thereon
without visible or lawful business with the owner or occupant thereof;
§ 157-2 DISORDERLY CONDUCT AND INDECENCY § 157-2
157:145
§ 157-3. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not be construed to suppress the right to lawful assembly,
picketing, public speaking, or other lawful means of expressing public
opinion not in contravention of other laws.
§ 157-4. Violations and penalties.24
Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine or
imprisonment as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I,
Penalties; provided, however, that no person shall be fined more than $20
or imprisoned for more than 10 days for indecent intoxication.
Chapter 162
DRAINAGE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Earth removal — See Ch. 166.
Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 177.
Excavations, holes and wells — See Ch. 181.
Deposit of materials on highway — See Ch.
242, Art. I.
§ 162-1. Accumulation or disposition of water on public streets
prohibited.
No person shall allow any cesspool water, well water, or other water or
fluid which has been collected, diverted or conducted in any manner on
R. Maliciously interrupts the speaker of any lawful assembly or impairs
the lawful rights of others to participate effectively in such assembly or
meeting when such conduct is calculated to provoke or tend to cause
turmoil or disturbance;
S. Acts in a manner which tends to cause or provoke a disturbance near
any public building wherein matters affecting the public are being
considered, deliberated, designed, or implemented, and said conduct
interferes with said public matters;
T. Frequents any public place with intent to obtain money from other
persons by illegal and fraudulent schemes, tricks, artifices or devices;
U. Displays any deadly weapon in a public place in a manner which is
calculated to alarm or frighten other persons present;
V. Exposes his or her genitals to the view of others under circumstances in
which his/her conduct is likely to cause affront, distress, or alarm to
such other persons.
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 157-2 GLOCESTER CODE § 162-1
162:146
private property occupied by such person, or under his control, to run, flow
or otherwise seep into or upon any public street or road in the Town.
Chapter 166
EARTH REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 177.
Excavations, holes and wells — See Ch. 181.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 300.
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
§ 166-1. Purpose.
For the purposes of promoting health, safety, or general welfare and in
order to effect uniform regulation within the Town of Glocester for earth
removal as hereinafter defined, and in order to protect and preserve the
valuable natural resources, groundwaters, aquifers and environment of the
Town of Glocester, and in order to further the objectives of the Glocester
Comprehensive Community Plan, the Town of Glocester shall have the
power in accordance with the provisions of this chapter to provide for the
regulation, control and licensing of earth removal as hereinafter defined,
such power to be restricted and exercised in accordance with §§ 166-2
through 166-10 of this chapter.
§ 166-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGRICULTURAL — Includes any commercial enterprise which has as its
primary purpose horticulture, viticulture, viniculture, floriculture, forestry,
dairy farming, or aquaculture, or the raising of livestock, fur-bearing
animals, poultry, or bees.
EARTH REMOVAL — The extraction, quarrying or removal of any soil, loam,
sand, gravel, stone, clay, shale, or other earth material from deposits on
any tract of land on which it is found, excluding, however, earth removal as
follows:
Fewer than 10 cubic yards of material in the aggregate in any year from
any lot;
A.
In grading land for construction of a roadway or for an agricultural
use as defined herein, but not to exceed 25,000 cubic yards of earth
material or to extend for a period more than three months within a oneyear
time period;
B.
For the construction of a building for which a building permit has been
issued;
C.
§ 162-1 EARTH REMOVAL § 166-2
166:147
LICENSING AUTHORITY — The Town Council of the Town of Glocester.25
TOWN COUNCIL — The duly elected Town Council of the Town of Glocester.
ZONING BOARD OF REVIEW — The Zoning Board of Review established by
the Town of Glocester.
ZONING OFFICER — That person appointed by the Glocester Town Council
and charged with the duty to enforce the provisions of Chapter 350, Zoning.
§ 166-3. Operating conditions.
Earth removal operations on any tract of land in the Town of Glocester shall
be subject to the following provisions:
For an approved subdivision in accordance with a plat plan or plans
approved by or in accordance with Chapter 300, Subdivision of Land;
provided, however, that the removal of such material necessarily
excavated in connection with the lawful construction of a building,
structure, street, driveway, sidewalk, path or other appurtenance does
not exceed that actually displaced by the portion of such buildings,
structures, streets, driveways, sidewalks, or paths or other
appurtenances below finished grade.
D.
A. Hours. Earth removal operations shall be limited to the hours between
7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday,
Friday or Saturday (except a legal holiday) except for reasonable
conditions specially designed to safeguard the neighborhood and its
residents or to accommodate the neighborhood schools and bus routes,
which conditions may be imposed by the Town Council in issuing an
earth removal license. No earth removal shall be allowed on Sundays or
legal holidays.
B. Initiation or lateral expansion. The initiation or lateral expansion of
earth removal is hereby prohibited, except where the applicant can
demonstrate that no adverse impact will be created by implementation
of a lesser requirement, as affirmed by the Town Council:
(1) Within 200 feet of a public road;
(2) Within 200 feet of neighboring lot lines.
C. Fencing. Fencing shall be required of those portions of the boundary of
the tract of land upon which earth removal is being conducted adjacent
to residentially developed property, such fencing to be six feet in height
and effective to control access to the area in which such earth removal
is being conducted, to include a gate to be locked during hours of
nonoperation. When an excavation will have a depth of more than 15
feet with a slope in excess of one to two, a fence at least six feet high
shall be erected to limit access to this area.
D. Reduction of dust; recording instruments.
25.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 166-2 GLOCESTER CODE § 166-3
166:148
(1) Calcium chloride or water shall be applied to reduce dust and mud
on all non-hard-surfaced roads to be used for vehicular ingress or
egress to the tract of land on which earth removal is to be
conducted.
(2) Where deemed appropriate by the Town Council, the installation,
maintenance, and operation by the applicant of continuous
recording instruments may be required to measure the
effectiveness of all equipment used for drilling, digging, and
hauling, to control or lessen noise, vibration, smoke, water
pollution, odors, fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors, gases, and other
forms of air pollution, toxic gases, heat, glare and fire or other
safety hazards. The Town Council also may require that such
recording instruments be tested at reasonable intervals under the
direction of the Zoning Officer to determine their accuracy and that
the results of such test be filed with the Town Council.
E. Drainage, groundwater table elevation; permanent water bodies.
(1) Drainage shall be provided to prevent the permanent collection and
stagnation of surface or underground waters, and to prevent the
flooding and erosion of surrounding property and the pollution of
ponds and streams.
(2) Earth removal shall not encroach closer than four feet to the
groundwater table.
(a) Groundwater table elevation determinations shall be made on
all land from which earth products will be removed.
Procedures for groundwater table elevation determinations
shall be made in the same manner as required by the
Department of Environmental Management (DEM) in its "Rules
and Regulations Establishing Minimum Standards Relating to
Location, Design Construction and Maintenance of Individual
Sewage Disposal Systems" (R23-1-SD15.00-0l and 02). Where
"subsurface seepage system" is used in the DEM regulations,
"excavation of earth removal" shall be substituted. Where
"director" or "agent of the director" is used in the DEM
regulations, "Zoning Officer" shall be substituted.
(b) When the director of the DEM determines specific dates, on a
yearly basis, relative to seasonal changes in highest
groundwater table elevation, such dates may be used by the
Zoning Officer. When groundwater determinations are made
outside the wet season and percolation tests are required, such
percolation tests shall follow the percolation test procedure as
set forth in the DEM Regulations.
(c) The Zoning Officer or his appointed representative shall
witness all percolation and groundwater determinations and
shall certify to the accuracy of technical data recorded. Any
changes made in such DEM regulations relative to
§ 166-3 EARTH REMOVAL § 166-3
166:149
§ 166-4. Approval of Zoning Board of Review required.
As a condition precedent to the application for a license pursuant to § 166-5
hereof, the following shall be required:
groundwater level determination and percolation tests from
time to time shall be considered part of this chapter.
(3) Permanent water bodies shall not be created as a result of earth
removal activities except as approved by the Zoning Officer as a
part of an erosion and sediment control plan in accordance with
Chapter 177, Erosion and Sediment Control.
F. Off-street parking; posting of signs; access roads; truck routes.
(1) Off-street parking shall be provided and utilized by all vehicles
engaged in or related to the earth removal operation.
(2) Any access to excavated areas or areas in the process of excavation
shall be adequately posted with “keep out - danger” signs.
(3) Access roads shall be constructed with a curve so as to help screen
the operation from the public view.
(4) All trucking routes and methods shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Glocester Safety Commission. The Town Council
may require, after review by the Safety Commission, that such
routes shall be cleaned, repaired and/or resurfaced by the earth
removal operator where such is required by the Town Council.
G. Explosives. The use of explosives shall be in accordance with the
regulations for storage or handling of explosives as set forth by the
State of Rhode Island.
H. The storage of hydrocarbons or hazardous materials shall be prohibited
above any designated groundwater aquifer. Vehicular maintenance/
fueling areas shall provide the following:
(1) Impervious surface.
(2) Collection and disposal of contaminated drainage and/or waste
products.
(3) Approval of the local fire authority having jurisdiction.
A. Zoning Board of Review approval for a special use permit as required
by Chapter 350, Zoning, or nonconforming status under Chapter 350,
Zoning, for the tract upon which earth removal shall occur which shall
be evidenced by a valid prior earth removal license; and
B. The applicant's submission to the Town Council and the Town Council
approval of:
§ 166-3 GLOCESTER CODE § 166-4
166:150
(1) Site plan. A site plan at a scale of not less than 100 feet to the inch
and with contours of not more than two feet, prepared by a
registered engineer, land surveyor or landscape architect, in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and setting forth:
(a) Lot lines, ownership, abutters, adjacent public streets,
watercourses, existing contours at intervals of not more than
two feet and location plan at a scale of not less than 400 feet to
the inch;
(b) Proper provision for vehicular traffic, service roads, control of
entrances and exits to highways and Town roads;
(c) The relation of temporary and future buildings and operations
machinery to the removal areas.
(d) Delineation of removal areas and depths with estimates of
cubic yards of material to be removed; fencing; fueling areas;
method of removal; distance of excavation to street and lot
lines.
(2) Restoration plan.
(a) A restoration or reclamation plan prepared by a registered
engineer, land surveyor or landscape architect, in compliance
with the provisions of this chapter at the same scale required
for the site plan in Subsection A(2)(a) and as required by
Chapter 177, Erosion and Sediment Control, based upon
classifications of preliminary samples, the nature of the
material to be removed, including:
[1] The existing contours of the tract of land with a vertical
contour interval of not more than two feet;
[2] The final contours of the tract of land upon completion of
earth removal operations with a contour interval not
exceeding two feet; and
[3] The type of ground cover to be planted or applied upon
completion of earth removal operations to effectively
control wind and water erosion; provided, however, if
suitable fertile ground cover existed at the beginning of
earth removal, enough of said ground cover is to be held in
reserve and reapplied for a minimum thickness of three
inches.
(b) The land restoration plan and its implementation apply to the
conversion of the site and its planned restoration. It is,
therefore, required that:
[1] Any land restoration plan correspond to a situation which
could reasonably occur in the immediate future (zero to
§ 166-4 EARTH REMOVAL § 166-4
166:151
five years), and be revised as necessary as the existing
physical character of the removal area changes;
[2] The land restoration plan or any part thereof which is
reasonably applied to an area shall be put into effect
within one year of cessation of normal earth removal
operation for that area and completed by the timetable of
the restoration plan.
[3] The land restoration plan shall cover the entire site owned
by or under control or potential control of the applicant
and shall include provisions for closure of operations by
phases on portions of the site and for removal of
equipment from the site.
(c) The decision of the Zoning Officer shall be final in determining
when a restoration plan shall be put into effect, either on the
entire site or on any portion thereof.
(3) Erosion and sediment control plan. An erosion and sediment
control plan shall be submitted and approved by the Zoning Officer
as required by Chapter 177, Erosion and Sediment Control, as
amended.
(4) Certificate of compliance. Upon completion of earth removal
operations, or any portion thereof which may be required
elsewhere in this chapter, a certificate of compliance shall be
submitted by a registered engineer, landscape architect or
registered land surveyor stating that completion of said activity
complies with the approved restoration plan.
(5) Bonding. A bond to insure compliance with the restoration plan and
to insure repairs to Town roads of damage caused by any hauling
operations related to the earth removal activity.
(a) The amount of the bond shall be calculated as follows:
[1] An amount not to exceed $500 per acre of said tract of
land;
[2] Any reasonable additional amounts required by the Town
Council for anticipated road damage; and
[3] Any amounts required pursuant to Chapter 177, Erosion
and Sediment Control.
(b) The bond guaranty period shall extend beyond the license
period until such time as the Town Council issues a license
renewal.
C. Conditions for release or partial release of bond guaranty shall be
based on determination by the Town Council that:
§ 166-4 GLOCESTER CODE § 166-4
166:152
§ 166-5. License required.
(1) Vegetation planted has been determined to be successfully
established;
(2) Drainage is satisfactory;
(3) The approved soil erosion and sediment control plan and conditions
are fully implemented;
(4) No slope exceeds one vertical to three horizontal and so graded in
accordance with approved plan;
(5) All debris, equipment, and structures are removed;
(6) Restoration is complete for the entire area or the phased area,
whichever is applicable.
D. Forfeiture of bond. Failure to comply with requirements and conditions
of license upon written notice and public hearing may be just cause for
forfeiture by the licensing authority.
E. Noncompliance. If the plan set forth in Subsection B(2) above is not
complied with, the Town is authorized and empowered to undertake
and complete such plan and the owner of said tract of land shall
reimburse the Town and the Town shall have a lien on said tract of land
for such expenses.
A. As a condition precedent to any earth removal herein defined, a license
shall be issued by the Glocester Town Council following a public
hearing to be held by the Town Council, with public notice thereof at
least 10 days prior to the date of hearing in a newspaper of general
circulation and with notice by certified or registered mail to the
applicant and all property owners within a two-hundred-foot radius of
all property lines, and upon the submission of the documents required
by §§ 166-4 and 166-5 of this chapter, and approval thereof by the
Zoning Officer, and the payment of a license fee as set from time to time
by the Town Council.26
B. The license shall be issued only to the property owner of record of the
land upon which the earth removal shall take place and shall not be
transferable. Should the land for which a license is issued be sold or
otherwise conveyed, the transferee must obtain a new license.
C. The license shall expire at the end of two years and must be subject to
renewal biennially with an application for renewal of an earth removal
license and payment of the renewal fee as set from time to time by the
Town Council. Plans shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer, showing
any change or anticipated change from originally submitted plans of
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 166-4 EARTH REMOVAL § 166-5
166:153
§ 166-6. Appeals.
Appeals from the decisions of the Town Council shall be taken in accordance
with Title 45, Chapter 5, Sections 16 and 17, of the General Laws of Rhode
Island.
§ 166-7. Revocation of license.
Any license issued under the authority of this chapter by the Town Council
may be revoked after notice and public hearing for violation of any of the
provisions or conditions/stipulations imposed upon said license. The Town
Council shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing on revocation, give public
notice thereof at least two weeks prior to the date of hearing, as well as due
notice to the party in interest, by certified mail, return receipt requested,
and decide the same within a reasonable time, which decision shall be in
writing and contain appropriate findings of fact. Upon hearing, any party
may appear in person or by agent or by attorney.
§ 166-8. Enforcement.
earth removal activities. If no changes are anticipated for the coming
two-year license period, submission of new plans is not required.
D. The Zoning Officer, upon the Town of Glocester's receipt of an
application for renewal of an earth removal license, shall make a field
inspection of such earth removal activities to determine compliance
with plans and approvals on file. Such findings shall be sent to the Town
Council with a determination of compliance or noncompliance. The
Town Council shall issue the license for another two years upon
determination of compliance and the biennial fee. Upon determination
of noncompliance, the license shall not be reissued until compliance
with this chapter.
E. In granting or reissuing a license hereunder, the Town Council may
impose such other additional, reasonable conditions specifically
designed to safeguard the neighborhood and the Town, which may
include conditions as to the overall operations set forth in this chapter
and as relating to the site plan and restoration plan requirements. The
Town Council may also conditionally approve a license renewal pending
the applicant's compliance with the additional reasonable conditions
that it imposes.
A. Penalty for violations. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of
the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine as a penalty not
exceeding $100 for each offense; each and every violation of or
nonconformance to this chapter, or each day that any provision shall
have been violated, shall be construed as a separate and distinct
violation thereof. All such fines shall inure to the benefit of the Town.
§ 166-5 GLOCESTER CODE § 166-8
166:154
§ 166-9. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to all presently licensed earth removal activity
being conducted on the date of its enactment on any tract of land within
the Town of Glocester until 180 days after the enactment of this chapter.
All existing earth removal operations in the Town of Glocester shall be
subject to this chapter, but all earth removal licenses issued prior to the
enactment of this chapter shall be valid until the Town Council acts on
any new applications that are filed within 180 days after enactment of this
chapter. If a timely application for a license is not filed by a property owner
within 180 days after the enactment of this chapter, any earth removal
license issued for said property prior thereto by the Town of Glocester shall
expire.
§ 166-10. Town to comply with chapter.
If the Town of Glocester shall engage in earth removal for municipal
purposes, it shall substantially comply with the provisions of this chapter.
Chapter 173
ENTERTAINMENT LICENSES
§ 173-1. License required for certain forms of entertainment.
It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate any theatrical or musical
performance, show, exhibition, public roller skating in rinks or halls, dances
and balls, or spectator sporting event within the Town of Glocester which
is open to the general public where the number of persons in attendance
is more than 50 without having first obtained a license therefor from the
Glocester Town Council.
§ 173-2. Application.
B. Suit. Suit may be brought in the superior court in the name of the Town
to restrain any violation of or compel compliance with the provisions of
this chapter.
A. Written application for granting or renewal of entertainment licenses
shall be made to the Glocester Town Clerk preceding the date of the
scheduled entertainment, or the date of the first scheduled
entertainment should the license application be for a series of
entertainment dates, by an amount of time sufficient to allow for
advertising and hearing by the Town Council.
B. Each application shall specify the name and address of the applicant
and of the owner or lessor of the property where the proposed
entertainment will be conducted, the nature of the proposed
entertainment, location, date(s) of proposed entertainment(s), as well
as what provisions will be made for medical assistance, fire protection,
§ 166-8 ENTERTAINMENT LICENSES § 173-2
173:155
§ 173-3. Public hearing; notice.
§ 173-4. Issuance.
The Town Council shall conduct a hearing upon each application for each
new entertainment license.
police protection, parking facilities, protection of the neighboring
property, and crowd control and sanitary facilities. If the applicant is
a corporation, partnership or other entity, the application shall also
specify the names and addresses of the principal shareholders, partners
or those in control of the corporation, partnership or other entity.
Each application shall include a list of the names of the owners of all
properties within 300 feet of the perimeter of the premises in or on
which the entertainment is sought to be located.
C. Each application shall also contain a specific description of any other
entertainment or amusement conducted or operated by the applicant,
within or without the Town, and shall include such references, if any, as
applicant deems appropriate with respect to such entertainment or
amusement.
A. Upon receipt of such application, the Town Clerk shall assign said
application for public hearing before the Glocester Town Council at its
next regular meeting. A notice of such hearing shall be sent by regular
mail at least one week prior to the hearing to the owners of all
properties within 300 feet of the perimeter of the premises in or on
which the entertainment is sought to be located. The application and
public hearing shall also be advertised in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Town by the Town Clerk. The Town Council may, in its
discretion, waive the notice requirements set forth in this section where
the applicant is a nonprofit entity.
B. The Town Clerk shall also give similar notice to the Chief of Police at
least one week prior to the hearing so that the application and the
provisions set forth in § 173-2 of this chapter can be reviewed.
A. The Town Council shall grant said license only if the Town Council shall
find that:
(1) The proposed entertainment would not constitute a public
nuisance,
(2) The proposed entertainment would not violate any other applicable
legal requirements, and
(3) All requirements set forth in § 173-2 of this chapter have been met.
B. The issuance of such license shall be for such period, not to exceed one
year, and subject to such conditions as the Town Council in its
discretion shall reasonably determine. Any license issued for a series of
entertainment dates shall expire no later than one year after the date of
§ 173-2 GLOCESTER CODE § 173-4
173:156
§ 173-5. Presence of police at events.
At the time of the issuance or renewal of any license, or thereafter during
the term of any license, the Town Council, in order to maintain order and
to insure public safety, may direct the Chief of Police to assign one or more
police officers to the location at which the license was granted at such times
as the Town Council may direct. The licensee shall pay for the services of
said police officer or officers at the prevailing rate.
§ 173-6. No issuance in case of unpaid taxes or assessments.
No entertainment license shall be issued to or renewed by any applicant
currently in arrears in any tax or assessments levied by the Town of
Glocester, or for use upon any premises for which any such taxes or
assessments are unpaid at the time of the filing of the application.
§ 173-7. Renewal.
The holder of any license issued for a series of entertainment dates may
apply to the Town Clerk for renewal of such license upon its expiration.
§ 173-8. Revocation.
Any license issued by the Town Council may be revoked by the Town
Council:
issuance of such license but may be renewed as provided in § 173-7 of
this chapter.
A. The Town Clerk shall permit such renewal only if the Town Council shall
find that:
(1) The proposed entertainment would not constitute a public
nuisance; and
(2) The proposed entertainment will not violate any other applicable
legal requirements.
B. The Town Council, at its discretion, may hold a public hearing with
respect to any application to renew an entertainment license, but no
such hearing shall be a condition to consideration by the Town Council
of any renewal application.
A. For violation by the holder of the license of any provision of this
chapter;
B. Because the entertainment constitutes or results in a public nuisance;
or
C. For other reasonable cause shown.
§ 173-4 ENTERTAINMENT LICENSES § 173-9
173:157
§ 173-9. Fees; penalties for violations.
Schedules of fees and expenses can be found in Chapter 368, Fees. Penalties
for violation of this chapter are in accordance with Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article II, Penalties.
Chapter 174
ENTERTAINMENT - SPECIAL EVENTS FOR LIQUOR
ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 174-1. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this article is to promote temperance and public safety
with respect to those establishments which hold liquor licenses and wish
to hold special events on or about the licensed premises. This article is
also intended to protect and promote the peaceful enjoyment of property by
those residents who abut or adjoin a licensed establishment.
§ 174-2. Definition.
Special events for establishments that hold liquor licenses are those events
that are held outside the normal course of business and outside a licensed
building at which outdoor entertainment is offered, including but not limited
to sporting events, fund-raisers, car washes, car shows and bike runs that
either commence or end at the licensed establishment.
§ 174-3. License required.
No person or entity shall conduct or operate a special event at a licensed
establishment without first obtaining approval as provided in this article
from the Town Council acting as the Liquor Licensing Board for the Town
and a license from the Town Licensing Clerk.
§ 174-4. Application procedure.
A. Applications for approval of the issuance of special event licenses shall
be made to the Town at the same time that applications are made for
the issuance or renewal of the underlying liquor license but, in no
event, no less than 30 days prior to the date of the scheduled special
event. Applications shall be made upon forms prepared by the Town
Clerk and shall include the following information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant;
(2) The nature of the proposed special event(s), including any
entertainment, location and date(s);
(3) The provisions for medical assistance, fire protection, police
protection, parking facilities, protection of the neighboring
property, crowd control and sanitary facilities;
§ 173-9 GLOCESTER CODE § 174-4
173:158
§ 174-5. Standards for approval.
(4) The hours of operation; and
(5) Such other information as the Town Council shall find reasonably
necessary to effectuate the purpose of this article and to arrive at a
fair determination of whether the terms to this article have been
complied with.
B. An application hereunder shall be accompanied by a plat or drawing of
the area or areas where the special event is to take place showing its
location, size and capacity, location and size of entrances and exits, size
and location of walls, fences or barriers surrounding said location, a
three-hundred-foot radius map, and a list of the names and addresses of
all owners of property within the radius area.
C. Upon receipt of such application, the Town Clerk shall assign said
application for hearing before the Town Council. A notice shall be sent
by regular mail at least one week prior to the hearing to the owners of
all properties within 300 feet of the perimeter of the premises in or on
which the special events are sought to be located. The application and
public hearing shall also be advertised in newspaper of general
circulation in the Town by the Town Clerk.
D. The Town Clerk shall also give notice to the Chief of Police at least one
week prior to the hearing.
E. The applicant shall be responsible for the cost of advertising and notice
to abutters.
A. The Town Council shall conduct a hearing upon each application for
approval of issuance of special event licenses. The Town Clerk may
grant said licenses only if the Town Council shall approve said special
events upon finding that the proposed special events meet all
requirements set forth in this article and that said special events will
not constitute a threat to public safety, will not constitute public
nuisance and will not interfere with reasonable and peaceful enjoyment
of property by residents who abut, adjoin or reside in proximity to the
licensed premises.
B. Upon receiving Town Council approval for the issuance of special
events licenses, the liquor license holder shall at least six business days
before any special event make application to the Town Clerk for the
issuance of a license. Failure to submit a completed application within
the time frame set forth above shall constitute grounds for the Town
Clerk to deny issuance of a special events license.
Whenever an application for a license shall be made, the Chief of Police
shall examine said application to determine if any police officer or
officers shall be assigned to such event; thereupon, the Chief of Police
shall file with the Town Clerk a statement of the necessity and number
§ 174-4 ENTERTAINMENT LICENSES § 174-5
173:159
§ 174-6. License fee.
The license fee for special events shall be $10 per diem.
§ 174-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person or entity that holds a special event without complying with the
provisions of this article shall be fined not more than $500 for each offense.
Each day of the existence of a violation shall be deemed a separate offense.
Any violation of any provision of this article shall be grounds for the Town
Council to take action against the underlying liquor license.
Chapter 177
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Drainage — See Ch. 162.
Earth removal — See Ch. 166.
Excavation, holes and wells — See Ch. 181.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 300.
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
of police officers to be assigned to such event, which will become part
of the licensing requirement.
The applicant shall be responsible for the cost of any police detail.
C. No special events license shall be issued to any applicant currently in
arrears in any tax or assessments levied by the Town, or for use upon
any premises for which any such taxes or assessments are unpaid at the
time of the filing of the application.
D. The Town Council shall have the authority to take action against the
special events license and the underlying liquor license, including but
not limited to warnings, suspension and revocation.
§ 174-5 GLOCESTER CODE § 174-7
177:160
ARTICLE I
Purpose; Applicability
§ 177-1. Purpose.
§ 177-2. Applicability.
This chapter shall be applicable to any situation involving any disturbances
to the terrain, topsoil or vegetative ground cover upon any property within
the Town of Glocester after determination of applicability by the Building
Official or his/her designee based upon criteria outlined in Article II, § 177-3
below. Compliance with the requirements as described herein shall not
be construed to relieve the owner/applicant of any obligations to obtain
necessary state or federal permits.
A. The Glocester Town Council hereby finds that excessive quantities of
soil are eroding from certain areas that are undergoing development
for nonagricultural uses, such as housing developments, industrial
areas, recreational facilities and roads. This erosion makes necessary
costly repairs to gullies, washed out fills, roads, and embankments. The
resulting sediment clogs the storm sewers, road ditches, and muddies
streams, leaves deposits of silt in ponds and reservoirs and is
considered a major water pollutant.
B. The purpose of this chapter is to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation
from occurring as a result of nonagricultural development within the
Town of Glocester by requiring proper provisions for water disposal,
and the protection of soil surfaces during and after construction, in
order to promote safety, public health and general welfare of the Town.
§ 177-1 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 177-2
177:161

ARTICLE II
Determinations of Applicability
§ 177-3. Determination of applicability required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any existing vegetation,
grades, and contours of land in a manner which may increase the potential
for soil erosion, without first applying for a determination of applicability
from the Building Official or his/her designee. Upon determination of
applicability, the owner/applicant shall submit a soil erosion and sediment
control plan for approval by the Building Official or his/her designee, as
provided in Article III. The application for determination of applicability
shall describe the location, nature, character, and time schedule of the
proposed land disturbing activity in sufficient detail to allow the Building
Official or his/her designee to determine the potential for soil erosion
and sedimentation resulting from the proposed project. In determining
the applicability of this chapter to a particular land disturbing activity,
the Building Official or his/her designee shall consider site topography,
drainage patterns, soils, proximity to watercourses, and other such
information as deemed appropriate by the Building Official or his/her
designee. A particular land disturbing activity shall not be subject to the
requirements of this chapter if the Building Official or his/her designee finds
that erosion resulting from the land disturbing activity is insignificant and
represents no threat to adjacent properties or to the quality of any coastal
feature or watercourse, as defined herein. The current "Rhode Island Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook," US Department of Agriculture
Soil Conservation Service, RI Department of Environmental Management,
and RI State Conservation Committee shall be consulted in making this
determination.
§ 177-4. Exceptions.
No determination of applicability shall be required for the following:
A. This chapter shall not apply to existing quarrying operations actively
engaged in excavating rock, but shall apply to sand and gravel
extraction operations.
B. Construction, alteration or use of any additions to existing single-family
or duplex homes or related structures, provided the ground coverage of
such addition is less than 1,000 square feet, and such construction,
alteration and use does not occur within 100 feet of any watercourse or
coastal feature, and the slopes at the site of land disturbance do not
exceed 10%.
C. Use of a home garden in association with on-site residential use.
D. Accepted agricultural management practices such as seasonal tilling
and harvest activities associated with property utilized for private and/
or commercial agricultural or silvicultural purposes, notwithstanding
other applicable Town and state regulations.
§ 177-3 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 177-4
177:163
E. Excavations for improvements other than those described in Subsection
A above which exhibit all of the following characteristics:
(1) Do not result in a total displacement of more than 50 cubic yards of
material;
(2) Have no slopes steeper than 10 feet vertical and 100 feet horizontal
or approximately 10%; and
(3) Have all disturbed surface areas promptly and effectively protected
to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation.
F. Grading, as a maintenance measure, or for landscaping purposes on
existing developed land and parcels or lots, provided that all bare
surface is immediately seeded, sodded or otherwise protected from
erosive actions and all of the following conditions are met:
(1) The aggregate of the area(s) of such activity does not exceed 2,000
square feet; and
(2) The change of elevation does not exceed two feet at any point; and
(3) The grading does not involve a quantity of fill greater than 18 cubic
yards; except where fill is excavated from another portion of the
same parcel and the quantity does not exceed 50 cubic yards.
(4) Loggers return tracks to their original condition and to original
grade.
G. Grading, filling, removal, or excavation activities and operations
undertaken by the Town under the direction and supervision of the
Director of Public Works for work on streets, roads, and rights-of-way
dedicated to public use; provided, however, that adequate and
acceptable erosion and sediment controls are employed. Appropriate
controls shall apply during construction as well as after the completion
of such activities. All such work shall be undertaken in accordance with
the performance principals provided for in Article IV, § 177-12, and
standards and definitions as may be adopted to implement said
performance principles.
§ 177-4 GLOCESTER CODE § 177-4
177:164
ARTICLE III
Requirements and Procedures
§ 177-5. Plan.
§ 177-6. Fees.
The Town of Glocester may collect fair and reasonable fees from each
applicant requesting approval of a soil erosion and sediment control plan
for the purposes of administering this chapter.
§ 177-7. Plan review.
§ 177-8. Plan approval.
A. To obtain approval for a land disturbing activity as found applicable by
the Building Official or his/her designee under Article II, an applicant
shall first file an erosion and sediment control plan signed by the owner
of the property, or authorized agent, on which the work subject to
approval is to be performed. The plan or drawings, as described in
Article IV, shall include proposed erosion and sediment control
measures to be employed by the applicant or the applicant's agent.
B. RI freshwater wetlands permit. Where any portion of a proposed
development requires approval under the RI Freshwater Wetlands Act
(R.I.G.L. § 2-1-15 et seq.), as amended, and where said approval
contains provisions for soil erosion and sediment control, that approved
plan shall be a component of the overall soil erosion and sediment
control plan required hereunder for the development.
A. Within five working days of the receipt of a completed plan, the
Building Official or his/her designee shall send a copy of the plan to the
review authorities, which may include the Public Works Department,
the Planning Board, or Planning Department and Conservation
Commission, for the purpose of review and comment. The Building
Official or his/her designee may also within the above time frame
submit copies of the plan to other local departments or agencies,
including the conservation district that services their county, in order to
better achieve the purposes of this chapter. Failure of the
aforementioned review authorities to respond within 21 days of their
receipt of the plan shall be deemed as no objection to the plan as
submitted.
B. The time allowed for plan review shall be commensurate with the
proposed development project, and shall be done simultaneously with
other reviews.
A. The Building Official or his/her designee shall take action in writing
either approving or disapproving this plan with reasons stated within
10 days after he/she has received the written opinion of the
aforementioned review authorities.
§ 177-5 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 177-8
177:165
§ 177-9. Appeals.
B. In approving a plan, the Building Official or his/her designee may attach
such conditions as deemed reasonably necessary by the
aforementioned review authorities to further the purpose of this
chapter. Such conditions pertaining to erosion and sediment control
measures and/or devices may include, but are not limited to, the
erection of walls, drains, dams, and structures, planting vegetation,
trees, shrubs, furnishings, necessary easements, and specifying a
method of performing various kinds of work, and the sequence for
timing thereof.
C. The applicant/owner shall notify the Building Official or his/her
designee in advance of his or her intent to begin clearing and
construction work described in the erosion and sediment control plan.
The applicant shall have the erosion and sediment control plan on the
site during grading and construction.
A. Administrative procedures. If the ruling made by the Building Official or
his/her designee is unsatisfactory to the applicant/owner, the applicant/
owner may file a written appeal. The appeal of plans for soil erosion and
sediment control shall be to the Zoning Board of Review or other
appropriate board of review, as determined by the Town Council.
B. Appeal procedures shall follow current requirements for appeal to
boards above.
C. During the period in which the request for appeal is filed, and until such
time as a final decision is rendered on the appeal, the decision of the
Building Official or his/her designee shall remain in effect.
D. Expert opinions. The official or his/her designee, the Zoning Board of
Review or other board of review, may seek technical assistance on any
soil erosion and sediment control plan. Such expert opinion must be
made available in the office of the Building Official or his/her designee
as a public record prior to the appeals hearing.
§ 177-8 GLOCESTER CODE § 177-9
177:166
ARTICLE IV
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan
§ 177-10. Plan preparation.
The erosion and sediment control plan shall be prepared by a registered
engineer, or landscape architect or a Soil and Water Conservation Society
certified Erosion and Sediment Control Specialist, and four copies of the
plan shall be submitted to the Building Official or his/her designee.
§ 177-11. Plan contents.
The erosion and sediment control plan shall include sufficient information
about the proposed activities and land parcel(s) to form a clear basis
for discussion and review and to assure compliance with all applicable
requirements of this chapter. The plan shall be consistent with the data
collection, data analysis, and plan preparation guidelines in the current
"Rhode Island Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook," prepared
by the US Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, RI
Department of Environmental Management, RI State Conservation, and at
a minimum shall contain:
§ 177-12. Performance principles.
The contents of the erosion and sediment control plan shall clearly
demonstrate how the principles, outlined below, have been met in the
design and are to be accomplished by the proposed development project.
A. A narrative describing the proposed land disturbing activity and the soil
erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater management
measures to be installed to control erosion that could result from the
proposed activity. Supporting documentation, such as a drainage area,
existing site, and soil maps, shall be provided as required by the
Building Official or his/her designee.
B. Construction drawings illustrating in detail existing and proposed
contours, drainage features, and vegetation; limits of clearing and
grading; the location of soil erosion and sediment control and
stormwater management measures; detail drawings of measures; stock
piles and borrow areas; sequence and staging of land disturbing
activities; and other such information needed for construction.
C. Other information or construction plans and details as deemed
necessary by the Building Official or his/her designee for thorough
review of the plan prior to action being taken as prescribed in this
chapter. Withholding or delay of such information may be reasons for
the Building Official or his/her designee to judge the application as
incomplete and grounds for disapproval.
A. The site selected shall show due regard for natural drainage
characteristics and topography.
§ 177-10 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 177-12
177:167
§ 177-13. Existing uses and facilities.27
B. To the extent possible, steep slopes shall be avoided.
C. The grade of slopes created shall be minimized.
D. Post-development runoff rates should not exceed predevelopment rates,
consistent with other stormwater requirements which may be in effect.
Any increase in storm runoff shall be retained and recharged as close as
feasible to its place of origin by means of detention ponds or basins,
seepage areas, subsurface drains, porous paving, or similar techniques.
E. Original boundaries, alignment and slope of watercourses within the
project locus shall be preserved to the greatest extent feasible.
F. In general, drainage shall be directed away from structures intended
for human occupancy, leaching field areas, municipal or utility use, or
similar structures.
G. All drainage provisions shall be of such a design and capacity so as to
adequately handle stormwater runoff, including runoff from tributary
upstream areas which may be outside the locus of the project.
H. Drainage facilities shall be installed as early as feasible during
construction, prior to site clearance, if possible.
I. Fill located adjacent to watercourses shall be suitably protected from
erosion by means of rip-rap, gabions, retaining walls, vegetative
stabilization, or similar measures.
J. Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect bare
areas and stockpiles from erosion during construction; the smallest
areas feasible shall be exposed at any one time; disturbed areas shall be
protected during the nongrowing months, November through March.
K. Permanent vegetation shall be placed immediately following fine
grading.
L. Trees and other existing vegetation shall be retained whenever
feasible; the area within the dripline shall be fenced or roped off to
protect trees from construction equipment.
M. All areas damaged during construction shall be resodded, reseeded, or
otherwise restored. Monitoring and maintenance schedules, where
required, shall be predetermined.
A. The Building Official and/or his or her designee shall accept plans for
existing uses and facilities which by their nature may cause erosion and
sedimentation, such as excavation and quarrying operations, provided
that this section shall not apply to Article II, § 177-3. Plans or
satisfactory evidence to demonstrate that the existing operations
27.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 177-12 GLOCESTER CODE § 177-13
177:168
accomplish the objectives of the section shall be submitted to the
Building Official and/or his/her designee within 120 days from the date
of the determination of applicability. Implementation of the plan shall
be initiated upon approval of the plan.
B. When the preexisting use is a gravel extraction operation, the property
owner shall conduct the operation in a manner so as not to devalue
abutting properties; to protect abutting property from wind erosion and
soil erosion due to increased runoff, sedimentation of reservoirs, and
drainage systems; and to limit the depth of extraction so as not to
interfere with the existing nearby water table.
§ 177-13 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 177-13
177:169

ARTICLE V
Enforcement
§ 177-14. Bond or other security required.
A. Before approving an erosion sediment control plan, the Building Official
or his/her designee may require the applicant/owner to file a surety
company performance bond, deposit of money negotiable securities or
other method of surety, as specified by the Building Official or his/her
designee. When any land disturbing activity is to take place within 100
feet of any watercourse or coastal feature or within an identified flood
hazard district, or on slopes in excess of 10%, the filing of a
performance bond shall be required. The amount of such bond, as
determined by the Public Works Department or, in its absence, the
Building Official or his/her designee, shall be sufficient to cover the cost
of implementing all erosion and sediment control measures as shown on
the plan.
(1) The bond or negotiable security filed by the applicant shall be
subject to approval of the form, content, amount, and manner of
execution by the Public Works Director and the Town Solicitor.
(2) A performance bond for an erosion sediment control plan for a
subdivision may be included in the performance bond of the
subdivision. The posting of such bond as part of the subdivision
performance bond does not, however, relieve the owner of any
requirement(s) of this chapter.
B. Notice of default of performance secured by bond.
(1) Whenever the Building Official or his/her designee shall find that a
default has occurred in the performance of any term(s) or
condition(s) of the bond or in the implementation of measures
secured by the bond, written notice thereof shall be made to the
applicant and to the surety of the bond by the Town Solicitor. Such
notice shall state the nature of default, work to be done, the
estimated cost thereof, and the period of time deemed by the
Building Official or his/her designee to be reasonably necessary for
the completion of such work.
(2) Failure of the applicant to acknowledge and comply with the
provisions and deadlines outlined in such notice of default shall
mean the institution, by the Town Solicitor, without further notice
of proceedings whatsoever, of appropriate measures to utilize the
performance bond to cause the required work to be completed by
the Town, by contract or by other appropriate means as determined
by the Town Solicitor.
C. Notice of default on performance secured by cash or negotiable
securities deposit. If a cash or negotiable securities deposit has been
§ 177-14 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 177-14
177:171
§ 177-15. Expiration and renewal of approval.
§ 177-16. Maintenance of erosion and sediment control measures.
Maintenance of all erosion-sediment control devices under this chapter
shall be the responsibility of the owner. Such erosion-sediment control
devices shall be maintained in good condition and working order on a
continuing basis. Watercourses originating and located completely on
private property shall be the responsibility of the owner to their point of
open discharge at the property line or at a communal watercourse within
the property.
§ 177-17. Liability of applicant.
Neither approval of an erosion and sediment control plan nor compliance
with any condition of this chapter shall relieve the owner/applicant from any
responsibility for damage to persons or property, nor impose any liability
upon the Town for damages to persons or property.
posted by the applicant, notice and procedure shall be the same as
provided for Subsection B of this section.
D. Release from performance bond conditions. The performance bonding
requirement shall remain in full force and effect for 12 months
following completion of the project, or longer if deemed necessary by
the Building Official or his/her designee.
A. Every approval granted herein shall expire at the end of the time period
set forth in the conditions. The developer shall fully perform and
complete all of the work required within the specified time period.
B. If the developer is unable to complete the work within the designated
time period, he shall, at least 30 days prior to the expiration date,
submit a written request for an extension of time to the Building Official
or his/her designee, setting forth the reasons underlying the requested
time extension. If the extension is warranted, the Building Official or
his/her designee may grant an extension of time up to a maximum of
one year from the date of the original deadline. Subsequent extensions
under the same conditions may be granted at the discretion of the
Building Official.
§ 177-14 GLOCESTER CODE § 177-17
177:172
ARTICLE VI
Inspections
§ 177-18. Periodic inspections.
§ 177-19. Final inspection; release of performance bond.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by
the Building Official or his or her designee.
B. All work shall be subject to periodic inspections by the Building Official,
or his or her designee.
C. All work shall be performed in accordance with an inspection and
construction control schedule approved by the Building Official or his or
her designee, who shall maintain a permanent file on all of his or her
inspections. Upon completion of the work, the developer or owner(s)
shall notify the Building Official or his/her designee that all grading,
drainage, erosion, and sediment control measures and devices, and
vegetation and ground cover planting has been completed in
conformance with the approval, all attached plans, specifications,
conditions, and other applicable provisions of this chapter.
A. Upon such notification of the completion by the owner, the Building
Official or his/her designee shall make a final inspection of the site in
question and prepare a final summary inspection report of its findings
which shall be retained in the Department of Public Works' permanent
inspections file.
B. The applicant/owner may request the release of his/her performance
bond from the Building Official or his/her designee 12 months after the
final site inspection has been completed and approved. In the instance
where the performance bond has been posted with the recording of a
final subdivision, the bond shall be released by the Building Official or
his/her designee 12 months after the final site inspection has been
completed and approved. In the instance where the performance bond
has been posted with the recording of a final subdivision, the bond shall
be released after the Building Official or his/her designee has been
notified by the Town Planning Director of successful completion of all
plat improvements by the applicant/owner.
§ 177-18 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 177-19
177:173

ARTICLE VII
Violations
§ 177-20. Noncompliance.
If, at any stage, the work in progress and/or completed under the terms
of an approved erosion and sediment control plan does not conform to
such plan, a written notice from the Building Official or his/her designee
to comply shall be transmitted by certified mail to the owner. Such notice
shall set forth the nature of the temporary and permanent corrections
required and the time limit within which corrections shall be completed
as set forth in Article VII, § 177-21B. Failure to comply with the required
corrections within the specified time limits shall be considered a violation
of this chapter, in which case the performance bond or cash or negotiable
securities deposit shall be subject to notice of default, in accordance with
Article V, § 177-14B and C of this chapter.
§ 177-21. Revocation or suspension of approval; violations and
penalties.
A. Revocation or suspension of approval: The approval of an erosion and
sediment control plan under this chapter may be revoked or suspended
by the Building Official and all work on the project halted for an
indefinite time period by the Building Official after written notification
is transmitted by the Building Official to the developer for one or more
of the following reasons:
(1) Violation of any condition of the approval plan, conditions, or
specifications pertaining thereto;
(2) Violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule, or regulation related to the work or site of
work; and
(3) The existence of any condition or the performance of any act
constituting or creating a nuisance, hazard, or endangerment to
human life or the property of others, or contrary to the spirit or
intent of this chapter.
B. Other penalties.
(1) In addition thereto, whenever there is a failure to comply with the
provisions of this chapter, the Town shall have the right to notify
the applicant/owner that he or she has five days from the receipt of
notice to temporarily correct the violations and 30 days from
receipt of notice to permanently correct the violations.
(2) Should the applicant/owner fail to take the temporary corrective
measures within the five-day period and the permanent corrective
measures within the thirty-day period, the Town shall then have the
right to take whatever actions it deems necessary to correct the
violations and to assert a lien on the subject property in an amount
§ 177-20 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 177-21
177:175
equal to the costs of remedial actions. The lien shall be enforced in
the manner provided or authorized by law for the enforcement of
common law liens on personal property. The lien shall be recorded
with the records of land evidence of the municipality, and the lien
shall incur legal interest from the date of recording. The imposition
of any penalty shall not exempt the offender from compliance
with the provisions of this chapter, including revocation of the
performance bond or assessment of a lien on the property by the
Town.
§ 177-21 GLOCESTER CODE § 177-21
177:176
ARTICLE VIII
Definitions.
§ 177-22. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — Any person(s), corporation, or public or private organization
proposing a development which would involve disturbance to the natural
terrain as herein defined.
CUT — An excavation; the difference between a point on the original ground
and a designated point of lower elevation on the final grade; also, the
material removed in excavation.
DEVELOPMENT PROJECT — Any construction, reconstruction, demolition,
or removal or structures, roadways, parking, or other paved areas, utilities,
or other similar facilities, including any action requiring a building permit
by the Town.
EROSION — The removal of mineral and/or organic matter by the action of
wind, water and/or gravity.
EXCAVATE — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other
similar material is dug into, cut, removed, displaced, relocated, or
bulldozed, and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
FILL — Any act by which earth, sand, or other material is placed or moved
to a new location above ground. The fill is also the difference in elevation
between a point of existing undisturbed ground and a designated point of
higher elevation of the final grade.
LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY — Any physical land development activity
which includes such actions as clearance of vegetation; moving or filling
of land; removal or excavation of soil or mineral resources; or similar
activities.
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT — The municipal agency charged with the
responsibility to maintain the transportation network of streets, roads and
public rights-of-way. The director shall be that person who supervises the
functions of such an agency.
RUNOFF — The surface water discharge or rate of discharge of a given
watershed after a fall of rain or snow and including seepage flows that do
not enter the soil but run off the surface of the land; also, that portion of
water that is not absorbed by the soil, but runs off the land surface.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, both mineral and/or organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site or origin
by wind, water and/or gravity as a product of erosion.
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLANS — The (approved)
document required before any person may cause a disturbance to the
natural terrain within the Town as herein regulated; also, herein referred to
as “erosion and sediment control plan” or “approved plan.”
§ 177-22 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 177-22
177:177
WATERCOURSE — Any tidewater or coastal wetland and its mean high
water level, and any freshwater wetland at its seasonal high water level,
including but not limited to any river, stream, brook, pond, lake, swamp,
marsh, bog, fen, wet meadow, or any other standing or flowing body of
water. The edge of the watercourse as herein defined shall be used for
delineation purposes.
§ 177-22 GLOCESTER CODE § 177-22
177:178
Chapter 181
EXCAVATIONS, HOLES AND WELLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Drainage — See Ch. 162. Earth removal — See Ch. 166.
§ 181-1. Open excavations, holes and wells as public nuisances.
Any open, unattended, unguarded or abandoned hole, excavation, well,
cistern or cesspool on private property within the Town of Glocester which
is dangerous to the health, safety and welfare of any person may be
declared to be a public nuisance.
§ 181-2. Complaint; inspection of property; notice to owner.
Whenever a condition as described in § 181-1 of this chapter is complained
of on any plot of land, lot, right-of-way or other private premises or place by
any resident or property owner of the Town of Glocester, and the Building
Official, acting upon such complaint or upon his/her own initiative, upon
inspection of the premises, declares that the condition constitutes a public
nuisance, the Town Clerk shall notify the owner and possessor of the land
complained of, in writing, either personally or by registered or certified
mail, return receipt requested, to take such steps as will effectively remove
said complained-of nuisance within 10 days after receipt of notice.
§ 181-3. Reinspection of property.
The Building Official shall reinspect said land after the ten-day period has
expired and shall report in writing to the Town Clerk whether or not the
unlawful condition complained of has been abated or remedied.
§ 181-4. Abatement of dangerous condition by Town Council.
In the event that the owner or possessor of said land shall refuse or neglect
to abate or remedy the condition complained of and which constitutes a
violation of this chapter after said ten-day notice, the Town Council may
cause the condition complained of to be abated.
§ 181-5. Certification of costs of abatement.
After said condition has been abated and remedied pursuant to the
authorization conferred by § 181-4 of this chapter, the Town Council shall
have a certificate of the costs thereof prepared by the Town Clerk and
presented to it.
§ 177-22 EXCAVATIONS, HOLES AND WELLS § 181-6
181:179
§ 181-6. Cost of abatement as lien upon property.
Upon approval of said certificate by the Town Council, the amount charged
against said land shall forthwith become a lien upon said land, the same
to bear interest at the same rate as taxes and to be enforced by the same
officers and in the same manner as taxes. A certified copy of the certification
of cost shall be forwarded to the Tax Assessor after its approval by the Town
Council.
§ 181-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
shall, for each offense, either pay a fine as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article II, Penalties, or be imprisoned for a term not to exceed
30 days. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
§ 181-8. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Town Council
through the Building Official.
Chapter 185
FEES AND FINES, PAYMENT OF
§ 185-1. Payment to General Fund.
In all cases of complaints for a violation of any ordinance of the Town,
or a violation of any statute of the State of Rhode Island, all fines, fees,
forfeitures and witness, complaint or warrant fees shall be made payable
to the General Fund of the Town of Glocester, unless otherwise provided by
law.
Chapter 190
HAWKERS AND PEDDLERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disorderly conduct and indecency — See Ch.
157.
Noise — See Ch. 217, Art. I.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 258.
Yard sales — See Ch. 279.
§ 190-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
§ 181-6 GLOCESTER CODE § 190-1
185:180
HAWKER — One selling or offering for sale any goods, wares or
merchandise whatsoever on any public street, highway or right-of-way from
a stationary location.
PEDDLER — One selling or offering for sale any goods, wares or
merchandise whatsoever on any public street, highway or right-of-way from
a vehicle, cart or any other conveyance which is not stationary.
§ 190-2. License.
A. Except as hereinafter provided, on and after the 26th day of July, A.D.
1915, all hawkers and peddlers desiring to sell or offer for sale as
hawkers and peddlers any articles or substances within the Town of
Glocester, and all persons desiring to sell or offer for sale any goods,
wares, merchandise, fruits or vegetables or other articles or substances
on any street in said Town, shall first obtain a license therefor to be
issued by the Town Clerk of said Town, and to that end shall make
application to the Town Clerk of said Town for such license therefor
respectively as may be desired, and said Town Clerk may issue a license
accordingly to such persons respectively to sell the articles and
substances hereinbefore mentioned in such manner as shall be
specified in such license, upon any street in said Town, or to hawkers
and peddlers authorizing them to sell or offer for sale as hawkers and
peddlers any articles or substances within said Town for the period
from the date of such license until the first day of April next ensuing
such date.
B. Conditions for issuance.
(1) No such license shall be issued until the applicant for said license
shall have filed with the Town Clerk a certificate under oath setting
forth the following:
(a) That he is a citizen of the United States, or a resident alien.
(b) His full name, present residential address and date of birth.
(c) That he has not been convicted of any criminal offenses.
(2) No such license shall be issued until the applicant for said license
has presented a valid permit to make sales at retail from the State
Division of Taxation.28
C. All persons offering for sale, taking orders for sale or selling any goods,
wares, merchandise, or any other articles or substances on any street,
highway or right-of-way within the Town shall make application to the
Town Clerk for a license. Such application shall be made even if the
applicant holds a state peddlers license, and upon approval of such
application by the Town Clerk, the Town Clerk shall issue a license to
such person to sell the articles or substances herein mentioned upon
28.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 190-1 HAWKERS AND PEDDLERS § 190-2
190:181
any street, highway, or right-of-way in the Town; provided, however,
that no license to sell or offer to sell shall be issued for the sale of any
meats, fruits, poultry, fish, vegetables or food products of a perishable
nature unless all necessary state approvals have first been obtained
by the applicant. All peddlers, hawkers, or other persons requiring a
license under this chapter, who sell food or beverages of any kind or
product for human consumption, shall, before the license is issued,
have their truck, cart, or other equipment inspected and approved by
all necessary state agencies; no beverages of any kind shall be sold
other than in a single-service disposable-type container.
D. The application required in Subsection C shall specify the days and
hours of such day during which the applicant wishes to operate, the
goods and articles which will be sold, the year, make, model and
registration number of any vehicle to be used and the location or
locations at which the operation shall take place.
E. The applicant shall, upon approval for a license required under this
chapter, provide two so-called passport-size photographs of the
individual authorized to act under such license. The Town Clerk shall, in
addition to the license specified above, issue an identification badge
containing one of the photographs of the authorized individual along
with the effective dates of the license and such other information as the
Town Clerk shall deem appropriate. The Town Clerk shall maintain the
other photograph with the application. Exception to this requirement
may be allowed only under § 190-9, Special event licenses.
F. No such license shall be issued also until such time as the Chief of
Police of said Town of Glocester shall approve the application of said
license in writing; provided, however, that such approval shall not be
unreasonably withheld. Failure on the part of the Chief of Police to
object in writing within 14 days of the application with the Town Clerk
shall be deemed to be an approval by said Chief of Police.
G. No person shall peddle or hawk within the Town or offer for sale, take
orders for sale or sell on any street, highway, or right-of-way, within the
Town, any goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, flowers, magazines,
subscriptions, books or any other articles or substances from any
vehicle, cart, pushcart, basket or hand carried, without first obtaining a
license from the Town Clerk.
H. No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable, nor
shall it authorize any person other than the individual to whom it was
issued and named therein to act thereunder; provided, however, a
licensee may employ a driver and such driver may operate on the
license as long as he/she is registered with the Town Clerk as a driver
for the license. A separate license shall be required for each vehicle,
cart or pushcart. Every licensee shall carry with him/her such license
while engaged in peddling and produce the same when required by an
inhabitant of the state or any person having a license under this
§ 190-2 GLOCESTER CODE § 190-2
190:182
§ 190-3. Fees.
§ 190-4. Regulations.
chapter, and failure on his/her part to produce the same within 10
minutes shall be cause for the revocation of such license.
I. Every licensee shall wear, while engaged in any activity regulated by
this chapter, the identification badge issued by the Town Clerk. Such
identification badge shall be worn so that it is clearly visible. Violation
of this subsection shall be cause for the revocation of the license issued
under this chapter.
J. Exceptions.
(1) No license shall be required under this chapter for the following:
(a) The sale of religious books or publications on behalf of Bible,
tract, or other religious or moral societies for the purpose of
promoting religious or moral improvement and not for
pecuniary profit.
(b) The sale of flowers or vegetables which are grown and sold on
the seller's property.
A. All applicants licensed under this chapter shall pay a fee as provided in
Chapter 368, Fees, which shall be retained by the Town whether such
license is granted or denied.
B. No license fee shall be charged to any nonprofit organization or
nonprofit corporation.
A. Peddlers or other persons requiring a license under this chapter shall
be moving at all times except to service customers and shall not remain
in any location awaiting patrons. Stopping for servicing customers shall
be in a manner not to impede the flow of traffic; nor block traffic or
create a traffic hazard.
B. There shall be no solicitation of motor vehicles while a motor vehicle is
stopped in traffic or stopped at a traffic light or intersection. All
peddlers, hawkers or other persons requiring a license shall be
prohibited from blocking any sidewalk.
C. Hawkers shall be allowed only under the sections of this chapter
entitled "Special event licenses".
D. The Chief of Police may, from time to time, submit to the Town Council
locations, public streets, highways or rights-of-way throughout the
Town which in his/her opinion, because of excess traffic and congestion,
are rendered unsafe for the public welfare to allow the selling or
offering for sale of merchandise by peddlers, hawkers, or other persons
requiring a license under this chapter.
§ 190-2 HAWKERS AND PEDDLERS § 190-4
190:183
§ 190-5. Sales prohibited during certain hours.
No peddling, hawking or other activity regulated by this chapter shall be
permitted anywhere in the Town, except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
8:00 p.m. in residential districts and between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m. in business districts and industrial districts; provided, however,
that food, beverages or other products for immediate human consumption
may be sold in industrial districts between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m.
E. Prohibited locations.
(1) All peddlers shall be prohibited from selling or displaying goods at
the following locations:
(a) At the intersection of Route 44 and 102;
(b) At the intersection of Route 44 and 100;
(c) At the intersection of Route 100 and 102;
(d) At the intersection of Route 44 and Douglas Hook Road;
(e) At the intersection of Route 44 and Farnum Road;
(f) At the intersection of Route 44 and Saw Mill Road;
(g) At the intersection of Route 44 and Pine Orchard Road;
(2) Exceptions to Subsection E(1)(a), (b), (c), (d), (e) and (g) may be
allowed only under § 190-9, Special event licenses.
F. At no time shall any peddler, hawker, or other person requiring a license
under this chapter impede the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
The Chief of Police shall have the authority to suspend the operation of
such licensee at any time and for such period of time where conditions
exist that he/she deems it in the interest of public safety to do so,
without prior request to the Town Council.
G. No licensee shall offer for sale at any Town-owned park or recreational
area any goods or services, excepting on behalf of any nonprofit
organization or nonprofit corporation, where no part of the income of
such sale will be distributed to such persons, or the members, directors
or officers of such nonprofit organization or nonprofit corporation. In
addition, all such nonprofit organization and nonprofit corporations
shall obtain a written permit from the Recreation Director in advance of
making an application.
H. No peddler shall stop to service customers within 100 feet of any
establishment offering for sale similar goods or services.
I. No peddler or hawker shall wear clothing that to the reasonable person
shall be considered suggestive and/or offensive to the community.
§ 190-4 GLOCESTER CODE § 190-6
190:184
§ 190-6. Excessive nuisance prohibited.
No peddler, hawker, or other persons requiring a license under this chapter
shall attempt to sell his/her wares by means of any loudspeaker, voice
amplification system or electronic noisemaking device intended to attract
public attention, nor shall he/she create a nuisance situation.
§ 190-7. License expiration, revocation and suspension; violations
and penalties.
§ 190-8. Categories of licenses; existing licenses; vacancies.
A. Each license to peddle or hawk shall expire on the first day of April each
year, but may be revoked or suspended at any time by the Town Council
for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or for any other
good cause.
B. A peddler, hawker, or other person requiring a license under this
chapter while engaged in an activity regulated by this chapter, who
shall neglect or refuse to wear the identification badge specified in this
chapter or who shall neglect or refuse for a space of 10 minutes after
demand by any inhabitant of the state or any other person having a
license under this chapter, to exhibit the license, issued pursuant to this
chapter, and allow the same to be read, shall, if sued or prosecuted
under Title 5, Chapter 11 of the General Laws, be adjudged to pay the
costs of such suit or prosecution, although it shall appear on trial that
he/she had a license duly issued and in force at the time of the alleged
offense.
C. Any person selling any goods, wares or merchandise in the Town of
Glocester in violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined or
imprisoned as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II,
Penalties; provided, however, that no person shall be fined more than
$200 or imprisoned more than 10 days for such violation.
A. Enumerated. For the purpose of this chapter, the Town shall have three
categories of licenses:
(1) Category 1: those persons or business selling or offering to sell
perishable foodstuffs and soft beverages;
(2) Category 2: those persons selling or offering for sale articles or
goods made by their own hands;
(3) Category 3: those persons or businesses selling or offering for sale
other articles of general merchandise or manufacture, including
magazines and subscriptions.
B. Limitations. As of the effective date of the adoption of this section, the
maximum number of licenses in each category shall be as follows: a
maximum of five licenses in Category 1; a maximum of three licenses in
Category 2; and a maximum of three licenses in Category 3; provided,
§ 190-6 HAWKERS AND PEDDLERS § 190-8
190:185
§ 190-9. Special event licenses.
§ 190-10. Special license.
however, that the reduction in the number of authorized licenses shall
not be deemed to affect the right of any current license holder to
continue to renew the license annually. All licensees who have obtained
a license prior to the effective date of this section shall be entitled
to annually renew the license, notwithstanding the limitations on the
number of licenses authorized to be issued, so long as the licensee
complies with all of the provisions of this chapter and any applicable
regulations. Any licensee who fails to renew his/her license prior to the
expiration date shall not be entitled to renew the license unless and
until there is a license available in the category applied for. No new
licenses in any of the categories shall be issued until the total number of
licenses issued for a specific category is less than the maximum number
set forth above.
C. Vacancies. The Town Clerk shall maintain a list of persons interested in
obtaining each category of license and, upon the occurrence of a
vacancy in such category, shall notify the person whose name appears
first on the waiting list of such category of the availability of a license. If
the person so notified fails to make application within 10 days after
notification, the Town Clerk shall remove that person's name from the
list and notify the person whose name appears next on said list until an
application is received. In the event that the Town Clerk does not
approve the application; any applicant may appeal to the Town Council
within 30 days of the date of any denial by the Town Clerk of any such
application. In order to be considered by the Town Council, any such
appeal must be properly delivered in writing by the applicant no later
than the close of business on the Monday immediately preceding the
next Town Council agenda meeting.
A. In addition to the other licenses referred to in this chapter, the Town
Clerk shall have the authority to issue special event licenses that shall
include any parade, concert, carnival, festival or other event as may be
designated by the Town Council. Such licenses shall authorize the
holder to engage in activities similar to those regulated by this chapter
and shall subject the holder thereof to all of the provisions of this
chapter with respect to such activities.
B. A fee shall be charged for all applications for special event licenses in
accordance with § 190-3 of this chapter and shall be retained by the
Town whether the license is granted or denied.
A. In addition to the other licenses referred to in this chapter, the Town
Clerk shall have the authority to issue a hawkers license(s) to the
premises of a nonprofit farm cooperative agency(ies) jointly with an
applicant for the sale of vegetables, fruits and flowers.
(1) Requirements:
§ 190-8 GLOCESTER CODE § 190-10
190:186
Chapter 195
HISTORICAL AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL BURIAL SITES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Earth removal — See Ch. 166.
Excavations — See Ch. 181.
Historic District Commission — See Ch. A423.
§ 195-1. Authority.
In order to comply with the Rhode Island General Laws, Title 23, Chapter
18, the Town adopts the following regulations governing the preservation of
historic and archaeological burial sites in the Town.
§ 195-2. Purpose.
The Town Council finds that historic and archaeological gravesites possess
archaeological and scientific value, often are of great artistic, cultural
and religious significance, and represent for all cultures a respect for the
sanctity of human life. It is, therefore, the policy of the Town that marked or
unmarked historic cemeteries are to be preserved and are not to be altered
or removed except as provided in this section. Nothing in this section
shall be construed to violate any provision of the Native American Graves
Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA).
§ 195-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — The owner of the land on which an archaeological burial
site or family cemetery is located for which a permit must be sought for
alteration or removal.
(a) The applicant must be a Town resident.
(b) All items to be sold must be grown on the applicant's premises.
(2) Limitations:
(a) A maximum of two licenses per nonprofit farm cooperative
agency; per granted date(s).
B. A fee shall be charged for all applications for a special license in
accordance with § 190-3 of this chapter and shall be retained by the
Town whether the license is granted or denied.
§ 190-10 HAWKERS AND PEDDLERS § 195-3
190:187
ARCHAEOLOGICAL BURIAL SITE — An area of land that has been used for
interment of human remains in precontact or distant past. Archaeological
burial sites may include Native American or other ethnic groupings.
FAMILY CEMETERY — An historic cemetery that is not associated with
a specific religious organization but that is the site of burial for persons
related by blood, marriage or household.
HISTORIC CEMETERY — Any tract of land that was used more than 100
years ago as a burial place, whether or not marked with an historic marker
or gravestone, including, but not limited to, ancient burial places known or
suspected to contain the remains of one or more Native Americans. For the
purpose of this chapter, "historic cemetery" shall also include an area 25
feet in width around the perimeter of the cemetery.
HUMAN REMAINS — Any parts or remains of deceased persons, including
skeletal remains or cremated ashes.
GRAVE — Any site where human remains have been purposefully interred.
The term shall also include grave markers, funerary objects and associated
cultural remains and artifacts. A grave shall include mausoleums, crypts or
other structures designed to house human remains.
LEAST DISRUPTIVE — A means of construction, excavation, removal or
any other activity that, in the opinion of the Rhode Island Historical
Preservation and Heritage Commission (RIHPHC), has the least overall
destructive impact on the grave, human remains or cemetery.
OWNER — The owner of a parcel of land.
RELIGIOUS CEMETERY — Any cemetery owned or maintained by a
religious organization.
RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION — The organization representing the
adherents of any religious society.
SITE ALTERATION PLAN — A document showing in written text and by
drawing the proposed alteration of an historic cemetery, archaeological
burial site or family cemetery, including detailed specifications for
alteration, removal and reinterment of human remains.
§ 195-4. Prohibited acts; issuance of permit; submission of
information; previously unknown burial sites.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb, excavate, deposit, fill in or
on, remove or destroy grave markers, burial objects or buried human
remains, or conduct any other activities that would damage or diminish
the integrity of any historic cemetery or archaeological burial site or
family cemetery without first obtaining a permit from the Glocester
Town Council to alter or remove said cemetery.
B. The Town Council may issue a permit to allow the alteration or removal
of historic cemeteries, archaeological cemeteries or family cemeteries
only after concluding, based on evidence submitted to the Council at a
public hearing that all alternatives to the proposed activity have been
§ 195-3 GLOCESTER CODE § 195-4
190:188
examined and that no prudent and feasible alternative to the proposed
activity exists or that said alteration only serves the interests, health,
welfare and safety of the public and is not for commercial expediency.
C. In order for the Town Council to clearly assess the proposed project, the
following information shall be submitted unless otherwise required by
the Town Council:
(1) Detailed site plans drawn to scale and stamped by a registered land
surveyor at a minimum scale of one inch equals 40 feet, showing
the boundaries of the property in question, topographical contour
intervals of no more than one foot, a surveyed boundary of the
cemetery and a setback area of no less than 25 feet, and a proposed
plan of all improvements proposed on the site that necessitate
disturbance of the cemetery;
(2) If known, a written description of the cemetery; its age and
condition; historical importance; whether the cemetery is religious,
family, organization, publicly owned or other kind of cemetery; a
listing of names and vital dates of those interred as may be
determined from grave markers on site; and a cemetery plan
indicating position of graves, and to the extent possible, the
identities of those interred;
(3) A detailed site alteration plan indicating the extent of disruption of
the cemetery, methods of construction or removal of human
remains, reburial plan, including in text and drawing the relocation
of graves;
(4) In the event of a family cemetery, a genealogical study to identify
whether descendants of the families of the interred still reside in
Rhode Island;
(5) In the event of a religious cemetery, a listing of the religious
organization that owns or maintains the cemetery;
(6) Permittees should follow the provisions of NAGPRA;
(7) Any further information and study the Town Council deems
necessary to complete its consideration of the request to alter a
cemetery in compliance with RIGL Chapter 23-18;
D. Previously unknown archaeological cemeteries and burial sites.
(1) Once a discovery of a previously unknown burial site is made or
suspected, the owner or contractor shall immediately notify the
Building Inspector, who shall in turn contact the State Medical
Examiner and State Historical Preservation and Heritage
Commission (RIHPHC) pursuant to RIGL Chapter 23-18.
(2) The Town shall require the cessation of construction activities,
pending preliminary verification by the State Medical Examiner or
RIHPHC. If the site is verified as a human burial site, work within
§ 195-4 HAWKERS AND PEDDLERS § 195-4
190:189
§ 195-5. Hearing; violations and penalties.
25 feet of the site shall be halted unless or until a permit to alter or
remove is issued by the Town pursuant to these regulations.
(3) The owner shall be required at his or her expense to have an
archaeological investigation of the area conducted by an
archaeologist approved by the RIHPHC to establish the boundaries
of the cemetery/burial sites via the least disruptive means feasible.
The least disruptive means shall be determined in consultation with
the RIHPHC. A survey report shall be produced incorporating the
findings of the investigation in text and graphic form. The applicant
shall then submit the report and a detailed survey plan as in
Subsection C(1) of this section of the proposed construction
project, and all other activities on the property in question that in
the opinion of the applicant necessitates disruption of the
cemetery/burial site.
(4) The applicant shall also submit a detailed site alteration plan
proposal of the extent and method of removal of human remains
and a reburial plan in text and drawing of the new gravesite.
A. Public notice. Upon receipt of the required documents, the Town
Council shall set the date of hearing and cause the matter to be publicly
advertised at the applicant's expense in a local newspaper not less than
two weeks prior to the hearing. The RIHPHC and Tribal Historical
Preservation Officer shall simultaneously be notified and an advisory
opinion shall be requested of the Planning Board.
B. Notice to interested parties.
(1) In the event of archaeological burials and historic Native American
graves, the applicant shall cause the Tribal Council of the
Wampanoag and Narragansett tribes to be notified by regular mail
of the subject, date and time of the public hearing.
(2) In the event an application involves the cemetery of an extant
religious society, said society shall be notified by regular mail.
(3) In the event the application involves a family cemetery, the interred
of which have living lineal descendants, the applicant, at his or her
expense shall make all reasonable efforts to notify lineal
descendants, including sending notice to descendants via certified
mail, or publication of the notice in a daily newspaper of statewide
circulation at least once per week for three successive weeks prior
to the hearing.
C. Burden of proof. At the hearing, the applicant shall prove to the
satisfaction of the Town Council that:
§ 195-4 GLOCESTER CODE § 195-5
190:190
Chapter 197
HYDRONIC HEATERS AND WOOD BOILERS, OUTDOOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building permits — See Ch. 145.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 300.
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
§ 197-1. Purpose.
(1) The applicant has examined all alternatives and conclusively
demonstrated that no prudent or feasible alternative to the
proposed alteration is possible; or
(2) That the proposed alteration serves only the interests of health,
welfare and safety of the public.
D. Final action. The Town Council shall conduct a public hearing on the
proposed project and shall render a decision approving, denying or
approving with reasonable conditions, the proposed site alteration plan,
and may set other requirements of the applicant deemed sufficient to
carry out the purposes of RIGL 23-18 et seq.
E. Legal status. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the
routine maintenance and repair of historical gravesites or the use of
historic cemeteries as places of interment; nor shall it be construed to
preclude the boards or commissions or agents of the Town from
otherwise acting within their authority to regulate and protect
historical and archaeological cemeteries.
F. Severability. If any section, clause, provision or portion of this section
shall be held invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of
constitutionality of any other section, clause, provision or portion of this
section.
G. Appeal. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Town Council shall
have a right to appeal the decision to Superior Court pursuant to RIGL
§ 23-18-11.1.
H. Penalty. Any person convicted of violating this section shall be subject
to a fine of not more than $250.
A. The Town Council recognizes and finds that although outdoor hydronic
heaters and outdoor wood boilers may represent an economical
alternative to conventional heating systems, such systems should not be
located or used in such a manner as to compromise the health, safety
and welfare of the citizens of the Town of Glocester. Such outdoor
§ 195-5 HAWKERS AND PEDDLERS § 197-1
190:191
§ 197-2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:
ALLOWABLE FUELS —
CLEAN WOOD — Wood that has no paint, stains, or other types of coatings,
and wood that has not been treated with, including, but not limited to,
sealants, copper chromium arsenate, creosote, or pentachlorophenol.
EXISTING UNIT or EXISTING OHH — An outdoor hydronic heater that has
been installed prior to the effective date of this chapter.
NEW OHH — An outdoor hydronic heater that is installed after the effective
date of this chapter.
NUISANCE — An activity which substantially interferes with the right to
use and enjoy property.
OPACITY — The degree to which emissions other than water reduce the
transmission of light and obscure the view of an object in the background.
OUTDOOR HYDRONIC HEATER or OUTDOOR WOOD BOILER (sometimes
referred to herein as OHH) — A freestanding accessory structure, as
defined in the Zoning Ordinance,29 housing a wood-burning furnace, with a
smoke stack, used to provide heat or hot water to a building, or accessory
structure, designed to:
furnaces can cause harmful emissions, offensive odors, smoke, soot,
fumes, ash and other conditions that may constitute a public nuisance.
B. This chapter seeks to regulate the location, use, construction and
operation of outdoor furnaces so that they do not become a public
nuisance.
A. Clean wood;
B. Wood pellets made from clean wood;
Manufacturer-approved fuels, provided they are not prohibited fuels;
and
C.
Home heating oil that complies with the applicable sulfur content limit
or natural gas may be used as starter fuel for dual-fired outdoor
hydronic heaters.
D.
A. Burn wood or other approved solid fuels;
That the manufacturer specifies for outdoor installation or installation
in structures not normally occupied by humans (e.g., garages); and
B.
Heat building space and/or water via the distribution, typically through
pipes, of a fluid heated in the device, typically water or a water/
antifreeze mixture. This includes, without limitation, any structure,
C.
29.Editor's Note: See Ch. 350, Zoning.
§ 197-1 GLOCESTER CODE § 197-2
190:192
§ 197-3. Permit requirements.
No person or entity shall construct or install an outdoor hydronic heater
or outdoor wood boiler without first obtaining a permit from the Building/
Zoning Official. Said application shall include a sketch showing the
applicable property lines, the locations and distances of all dwellings or
occupied buildings on adjoining properties within 300 feet of the property
line, the proposed location of the OHH, and the prevailing wind direction.
All newly installed units shall carry a tag certifying that the OHH complies
with the EPA Phase II Emission standard, or higher as defined by the EPA,
which standard is herein incorporated by reference.
§ 197-4. Restrictions.
equipment, device, or apparatus, or any part thereof, which is installed,
affixed, constructed or located outdoors for the primary purpose of
combustion of solid fuel, including but not limited to wood, to produce
heat or energy used as a component of a heating system.
A. OHHs that meet the requirements of this chapter may be permitted in
any zoning districts only if the subject lot contains a minimum of 20,000
square feet.
B. The OHH must be a minimum of 150 feet from any occupied building
not served by the OHH.
C. The OHH must be constructed on a concrete apron pad with a minimum
width of four feet in the front and three feet on each side of the OHH.
D. Where achievable, the height of the chimney shall exceed the height of
the roof peaks of buildings located within 200 feet of the OHH and are
not served by the OHH, provided further that in no event shall the
height of the chimney be less than 16 feet nor more than 35 feet from
ground level.
E. The OHH must be a minimum of 30 feet from any structure that it
services, or such greater distance as shall be advised by the
manufacturer.
F. The OHH shall be located in a rear or side yard only as defined in the
Glocester Zoning Ordinance.30 The location of any OHH in any front
yard as defined in the Glocester Zoning Ordinance is expressly
prohibited.
G. No person or entity operating an OHH shall cause, suffer, allow or
permit the use of a fuel other than allowable fuels as herein defined.
H. Manufacturers standards. All OHHs shall, as a minimum standard,
operate in compliance with the operating manual and standards of the
30.Editor's Note: See Ch. 350, Zoning.
§ 197-2 HAWKERS AND PEDDLERS § 197-4
190:193
§ 197-5. Existing units.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any existing unit(s) installed
prior to the effective date of this chapter with the exception that only
allowable fuel shall be used by existing units.
§ 197-6. Applicability of other regulations and laws.
Compliance with law. All newly installed OHHs shall be manufactured,
constructed, installed, operated and located in conformance with any other
applicable state or federal laws or regulations, including but not limited
to those of the US EPA and RIDEM. In the event of any conflict among
state, federal and local ordinances, the more restrictive law or regulation
shall apply. All other provisions of the building code, electrical code or any
other applicable codes shall also apply, as well as applicable subdivision and
zoning regulations.
§ 197-7. Suspension of operation.
§ 197-8. Violations and penalties; enforcement; costs of
remediation.
manufacturer of the unit, including, but not limited to, the
manufacturer-recommended loading times and amounts.
I. Particulate emission standards for new units.
(1) All new units, as defined in this chapter, shall comply, as of the
effective date of this chapter, with the EPA Phase II Emission
standard, as defined by the EPA, which standard is incorporated
herein by reference.
(2) No person or entity shall purchase, install or allow installation of an
OHH for use in the Town of Glocester unless it has been certified to
meet a particulate matter emission limit of 0.32 lb/MMBtu heat
output and satisfies the 2010 US EPA standard for same (the
commonly called "Phase II Emission standard").
A. The Building/Zoning Official, or his designee, may issue an order
requiring the immediate suspension of operation of an OHH should he
determine that the requirements of this chapter are not being complied
with.
B. The use of an OHH may be reinstated by the Building/Zoning Official, or
his designee, once he determines that compliance has been established.
A. Failure to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be a violation,
and a first offense shall be punishable by a written warning. Each
offense thereafter shall be punishable by a fine of $50 per day. Each day
of each offense shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 197-4 GLOCESTER CODE § 197-8
190:194
Chapter 199
LICENSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 247.
B. The Building/Zoning Official, or his designee, shall be responsible for
the enforcement of this chapter. The Building/Zoning Official shall have
the discretion to forego a warning for a first violation, if, in his
reasonable discretion, he is of the belief that the violation is
unintentional and can be corrected in less than 10 days. Should the
owner abate the violation within the time established by the Building/
Zoning Official, it shall not constitute a first offense.
C. Any person or entity in violation of the terms of this chapter shall, in
addition to the above sanctions, be liable to the Town of Glocester for all
costs of remediation actions necessitated by the actions of the violator,
and for the costs (including reasonable attorney fees) of any action
brought for equitable or legal relief against the violator, which costs
and fees shall constitute a lien against the property on which the OHH
is located.
§ 197-8 LICENSING § 197-8
199:195

ARTICLE I
Licensing Procedure
[Adopted 1-20-1994 (Ch. II, § 12, 2-12-01, of the 1991 Code)]
§ 199-1. Public hearing required for certain licenses.
The Town Council shall conduct a public hearing to consider each
application for any license(s) (or renewals of any existing license) that:
§ 199-2. Licenses issued or denied by Town Clerk; appeals.
A. Require legal advertising; and/or
B. Require the issuance of a variance or a special exception by the Zoning
Board of Review.
A. The Town Clerk shall consider each application for any license(s) (or
renewals of any existing license) which does not require Town Council
consideration pursuant to § 199-1 above. Notwithstanding any other
additional grounds for denial of any application for any license(s) (or
renewals of any existing license), the Town Clerk shall, in any event,
deny any such application in which any one or more of the following
apply:
(1) Applicable law, rule or ordinance requires that such application be
advertised; or
(2) Such application and/or prepared license(s) (or prepared renewals
of any existing license) are prohibited by applicable Rhode Island
or Town of Glocester law, rule or ordinance; or
(3) All necessary documentation relating to such application has not
been fully and correctly filed in a timely fashion by the applicant;
or
(4) The applicant has failed to fully pay any and all fees and taxes due
from such applicant to the Town of Glocester (or no satisfactory
schedule of payment of any outstanding fees and/or taxes due from
such applicant has been approved by the Tax Collector).
B. Any applicant may appeal to the Town Council within 30 days of the
date of any denial by the Town Clerk of any such application. In order to
be considered by the Town Council, any such appeal must be properly
delivered in writing by the applicant no later than the close of business
on the Monday immediately preceding the next Town Council agenda
meeting. Upon the proper filing of any such appeal, the Town Clerk
shall submit to the Town Council a written report stating the reasons for
the denial of the license.
§ 199-1 LICENSING § 199-2
199:197

ARTICLE II
Payment of Taxes Prior to Issuance or Transfer of Business Licenses
[Adopted 4-20-1995 (Ch. II, § 12, 2-12-02, of the 1991 Code)]
§ 199-3. Proof of payment required.
Commencing on the next renewable license date, all licensed businesses in
the Town of Glocester requiring a Town business license to operate shall,
at the time of the renewal or transfer of such license, show proof that all
business-related taxes due to the Town of Glocester have been paid to the
satisfaction of the Town Council before obtaining a business license.
§ 199-4. Applicable taxes.
These taxes shall include but not be limited to all tangible personal taxes;
and real estate taxes, where applicable; and all other local taxes relating to
that particular business.
§ 199-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person or business violating any of the provisions hereof shall be
subject to a fine not exceeding $100 for each offense and/or the immediate
revocation of any existing business licenses and denial of any application for
such business license.
§ 199-3 LICENSING § 199-5
199:199
Chapter 203
LIGHTING, OUTDOOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Mobile homes and house trailers — See Ch.
208.
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
§ 203-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate outdoor lighting on private
property in order to reduce or prevent light pollution; this means, to the
extent reasonably possible, the reduction or prevention of glare and light
trespass and the promotion of safety and security.
§ 203-2. Restrictions on lighting.
A. No person or entity shall have, keep, maintain or cause or permit to be
kept or maintained any floodlight, spotlight, other reflector-type light or
lighting for illumination (hereinafter "lighting") on any property in such
a manner that its light is unnecessarily directed or reflected into any
residential building in the immediate vicinity of the property containing
the floodlight, spotlight, reflector-type lighting or lighting so as to
constitute a continuous annoyance, harassment or compromise of
privacy (hereinafter "nuisance") of the person(s) occupying such
residential building.
B. All exterior lighting shall be designed, located, installed and directed in
such a manner as to prevent objectionable lighting at and glare across
the property lines and glare at any location on or off the property and
particularly on residential properties in the vicinity. “Glare,” as used
herein, is defined as light emitting from a source with an intensity great
enough to reduce a viewer's ability to see, creates a potentially
hazardous situations or creates a nuisance.
C. All exterior lighting shall be of such type and location and shall have
such shading or shielding as will prevent the source of light from
directly illuminating any adjacent property or road such as to cause a
nuisance or to compromise the ability of persons to safely enter upon or
travel over such roads.
D. Security lights controlled by motion sensors should be designed,
located and remain on for as short a duration as necessary so as to
reduce creating a potentially hazardous situation or nuisance.
§ 199-5 GLOCESTER CODE § 203-3
203:200
§ 203-3. Applicability.
This chapter applies to lighting fixtures installed after the effective date of
this chapter and to those installed prior to it which are determined to create
a nuisance or potentially hazardous situation.
§ 203-4. Abatement; expenses; fines.
Violations of this chapter shall be abated by the property owner, lessor,
lessee or other person in possession of or responsible ("responsible
individual") for the property on which the lighting is located and, if not so
done, may be abated by the Town at the expense of any one or more of the
responsible individuals after the Town has furnished not less than 10 days'
written notice to abate such violation. The fine for failure to abate such
violation within seven days after such notice has been provided shall be $25
for such first failure, $50 for failure to abate following a second such notice,
and $10 per day for each day of such failure to abate thereafter. Such
expenses and fines and the Town's legal expenses may be collected by the
Town in a civil action against one or more of the above-named responsible
individuals. In the case of an emergency, the Town may abate such violation
without giving the 10 days' notice.
Chapter 208
MOBILE HOMES AND HOUSE TRAILERS
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Building permits — See Ch. 145.
Camping and travel trailer parks — See Ch.
151.
Outdoor lighting — See Ch. 203.
Noise — See Ch. 221.
Parking and storage of vehicles — See Ch.
263.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 300.
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
§ 208-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COLLECTOR — The Tax Collector of the Town of Glocester, Rhode Island.
HEALTH OFFICER — The duly appointed health officer of the Town of
Glocester, Rhode Island, or his deputy.
LICENSEE — Any person or persons, firm or corporation receiving a license
to conduct, operate or maintain a mobile home park or trailer park or
individual mobile home or trailer, as the case may be.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — The Town Council of the Town of Glocester,
Rhode Island.
§ 203-3 MOBILE HOMES AND HOUSE TRAILERS § 208-1
208:201
MOBILE HOME — Any type of vehicle used for sleeping or living quarters,
permanent or temporary, which may or may not be equipped with running
water, bath facilities, flush toilet and/or other appropriate sanitary
conditions, and to which wheels are or could be attached.
MOBILE HOME PARK or TRAILER PARK — Privately owned land upon
which two or more mobile homes or trailers are or are intended to be
used and occupied as sleeping or living quarters, permanent or temporary,
and in this chapter, the use of the word "park" alone, or the use of the
words "mobile home park" by themselves, or the words "trailer park" by
themselves, in the singular or plural, shall be construed to include both
mobile home parks and trailer parks.
PERSON — Includes individuals, partnerships, corporations, owners,
lessees, licensees, and the agents of each of them.
TRAILER — Any house, car, or automobile trailer, other than a mobile
home, used for or adaptable for the use as living quarters, permanent or
temporary, and either with or without wheels attached thereto.
§ 208-2. License for mobile home park or trailer park.
No person shall maintain or operate a mobile home park or trailer park
without having first obtained a license from the licensing authority. These
regulations shall apply forthwith to all existing mobile home or trailer parks;
provided, however, that the licensing authority shall, upon application,
grant such extension of time or waive such requirements (other than the
sanitary requirements) as may in its judgment be appropriate.
§ 208-3. Application for mobile home park or trailer park license.
A. Any person desiring to establish or operate a mobile home park or
trailer park shall, prior to placing mobile homes or trailers on any
proposed site, or doing any other or manner of thing with respect to the
construction of any facilities in connection with the operation of any
such park, first file an application, signed by the applicant, with the
Town Clerk of the Town of Glocester, setting forth the hereinafter
required information and accompanied by such other materials as shall
satisfy such requirements:
(1) Name and address of the applicant.
(2) A plot plan made by a licensed surveyor under seal, showing the
site of the mobile home park or trailer park, roads, location, size,
shape and identification number of the mobile home or trailer lots
or spaces, locations of sanitary provisions and the name of abutting
property owners according to the Land Records of the Town of
Glocester, Rhode Island.
(3) Proof of ownership, option or valid lease of the premises to be used
as a mobile home park or trailer park.
§ 208-1 GLOCESTER CODE § 208-3
208:202
B. At the time of the filing of said application, a filing as set from time to
time by the Town Council shall be paid to the Town Clerk of the Town of
Glocester, Rhode Island.31
C. Upon the filing with the Town Clerk of the application for a license,
accompanied by such other information as herein required, and after
payment of the herein prescribed fee, the Town Clerk shall, within 10
days thereafter, transmit to the Planning Board the application and
accompanying information for study and recommendation to the Town
Council.
D. The Planning Board of the Town of Glocester, Rhode Island, shall, within
60 days after receipt of the application and accompanying information
from the Town Clerk, return to the Town Clerk for action thereon by the
Town Council, the application and accompanying information, together
with the recommendation of said Planning Board. The Town Clerk shall
thereupon publish notice of said application at least once each week for
three successive weeks in a public newspaper published in the County
of Providence, for public hearing thereon at the next convenient regular
meeting of the Town Council.
E. After public hearing by the Town Council of the Town of Glocester, as
aforesaid, the Town Council shall either approve or deny said
application, and said Town Council may impose such conditions or
restrictions limiting the number of mobile home sites or trailer sites, or
any other conditions or restrictions, as in its discretion shall seem
advisable under the circumstances.
F. In the event that the Town Council shall approve said application, with
or without conditions or restrictions, said applicant shall forthwith
construct and prepare said mobile home park or trailer park in
accordance with the plans submitted by it and in accordance with any
such conditions or restrictions as the Town Council may impose. Said
applicant shall commence said construction within 60 days and shall
complete the same in compliance with the application as approved by
the Town Council within six months after said Town Council shall have
approved the application.
G. Upon the completion of the park as aforesaid (but in no event not more
than six months from the date of the approval by the Town Council,
otherwise such approval of said Town Council and all the rights of the
applicant hereunder shall expire), the applicant shall file the following
with the Town Clerk:
(1) A certification signed by the applicant that he has complied with
the decision of the Town Council and the requirements of this
chapter.
(2) A certificate of the Health Officer of the Town of Glocester
certifying that he has examined the site and that the applicant has
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 208-3 MOBILE HOMES AND HOUSE TRAILERS § 208-3
208:203
§ 208-4. General requirements for operation of mobile home park
or trailer park.
complied with the decision of the Town Council and all of the
requirements of this chapter.
(3) A certificate of the Department of Health of the State of Rhode
Island, or such other department or agency of the State of Rhode
Island having jurisdiction over matters of health and sanitation,
certifying that the site has been examined by said department and
that the applicant has complied with the laws of the State of Rhode
Island and the regulations of all agencies having jurisdiction over
matters of health, sanitation and such parks.
(4) Pay to the Town Clerk a license fee as set from time to time by the
Town Council, which fee shall cover the period from the time of
issuance of the license to December 31 next after the issuance of
the license. All such licenses shall be renewed between December
15 and December 31 of each year, and the renewal fee for such
license shall be as set from time to time by the Town Council.32
(5) In addition to the payments of the fee hereinabove prescribed for
the original license and for each renewal thereof, the licensee shall
pay a sum as set from time to time by the Town Council for every
trailer stationed, erected or maintained in said park.33
H. Upon filing of the certifications and the payment of the license fees
pursuant to Subsection G hereinabove, the Town Clerk shall issue a
license to the applicant (or the annually renewed license as the case
may be).
A. A mobile home park or trailer park shall be located on a site graded to
insure drainage of surface and subsurface water, sewerage, and
freedom from stagnant pools.
B. A minimum lot size of 10,000 square feet shall be provided for each
mobile home or trailer lot of space, but in no event shall there be more
than four mobile home or trailer lots per acre of land of the licensee.
C. There shall be a minimum of 20 feet of clearance between each mobile
home or trailer.
D. All mobile home or trailer lots shall abut on a roadway of not less than
30 feet in width where off-road parking is provided or 40 feet where no
off-road parking is provided.
E. All roads within any park shall be well drained, provided with gravel or
hard surface, and shall be maintained in good condition by the owner or
licensee of the park.
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 208-3 GLOCESTER CODE § 208-4
208:204
F. No mobile home or trailer shall be located closer than 40 feet to the
traveled portion of any public highway.
G. Street lights of not less than 1,000 lumens each shall be installed at
intervals of not more than 300 feet apart in any park.
H. Each licensee shall keep, or cause to be kept, a register in which the
following information shall be recorded forthwith upon letting of each
mobile home or trailer lot:
(1) The full name of the mobile home or trailer owner.
(2) The number of persons occupying each trailer and the names
thereof.
(3) The make, model, size, serial and license numbers and year of
manufacture of each mobile home or trailer stationed, maintained,
or registered on the premises of the licensee.
(4) The state of registration and registration number of each trailer
and auto used to transport or pull each such trailer.
I. At the time each licensee shall apply for a renewal of any license issued
pursuant to this chapter, all of the information required by Subsection
H hereinabove shall be furnished to the Town Clerk, and the Town Clerk
shall not issue any renewed license until and unless such information
shall be furnished to him, and said Town Clerk shall thereupon forward
to the Board of Tax Assessors of the Town of Glocester a duplicate copy
of said information.
J. No license for a mobile home park or trailer park shall be transferable
by sale or otherwise by the holder thereof to the licensing authority, and
the Town Council may, in its discretion, permit such license to be
transferred to another person, but in all cases, said licensing authority
shall, before permitting such transfer, give notice of and conduct a
public hearing on the application for such transfer. Said notice shall be
published at least once in a newspaper published in the County of
Providence and at least seven days in advance of said public hearing,
and said notice shall give the name of the licensee, the name under
which the park is operated and its address, the local Tax Assessor's
identification by plat and lot number, and the name and address of the
prospective transferee. The application for a transfer shall be
accompanied by the payment of a fee as set from time to time by the
Town Council. The licensing authority may deny the application for
transfer if, in its sole discretion, said transfer shall not be in the best
interest of the Town of Glocester.34
K. No mobile home park or trailer park heretofore located in the Town of
Glocester, Rhode Island, or hereafter established in the Town of
Glocester, Rhode Island, shall be expanded at any time, or in any
34.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 208-4 MOBILE HOMES AND HOUSE TRAILERS § 208-4
208:205
§ 208-5. Sanitary requirements for mobile home parks or trailer
parks.
An adequate supply of potable water with a minimum of 25 pounds per
square inch pressure at all times shall be provided for each mobile home
or trailer space or lot. The water source shall be capable of producing 300
gallons of potable water per mobile home or trailer lot per day from a source
approved by the Health Officer of the Town of Glocester, Rhode Island.
§ 208-6. Individual mobile homes or trailers.
manner whatsoever, to accommodate any additional mobile homes or
trailers than shall be presently occupying the premises (in the case of
a mobile home park or trailer park in existence at the time of adoption
of this chapter), or upon the original plot plan as submitted with the
original application and as acted upon by the Town Council (in the case
of such mobile home parks or trailer parks as may subsequently be
established in accordance with this chapter), except upon application to
the Town Clerk for expansion thereof by the licensee for action thereon
by the Town Council, and such application shall be accompanied by
a new plot plan, showing the extent of the proposed expansion. The
Town Clerk shall, within 10 days thereafter, transmit to the Planning
Board said application and accompanying information for study and
recommendation to the Town Council. The Planning Board of the Town
of Glocester, Rhode Island, shall, within 60 days after receipt of the
application and accompanying information from the Town Clerk, return
to the Town Clerk for action thereon by the Town Council, the
application and accompanying information together with the
recommendation of said Planning Board.
A. No part of the sewerage disposal leaching field system shall be located
within 80 feet of any mobile home or trailer park well water supply.
B. Where the sewer lines of a mobile home park or trailer park are not
connected to a public sewer, the means of disposal of all sewerage shall
be approved by the State Board of Health.
C. Each mobile home or trailer lot shall be provided with an electrical
connection approved by the Building Inspector of the Town of Glocester.
D. Licensees shall furnish at least one suitable refuse can with tight-fitting
cover for each occupied mobile home or trailer lot, or use any approved
collection method in accordance with the state health sanitation laws.
Refuse shall be collected and removed regularly and in such manner
that no nuisance shall be maintained, and it shall be the responsibility
of each licensee to maintain proper sanitary conditions with respect to
waste and refuse disposal.
A. No person, under any circumstances, shall maintain, establish, station
or park a mobile home or trailer for dwelling or other purposes on any
§ 208-4 GLOCESTER CODE § 208-6
208:206
§ 208-7. Denial of applications.
After a public hearing upon an application for an original license, a transfer
of any license, or expansion of any park, the licensing authority may deny
any such application if, in its sole and uncontrollable discretion, the
approval of such application would not be in the best interest of the use of
the land, the neighboring land, or the community as a whole.
property within the Town of Glocester, Rhode Island, except in a duly
established mobile home park or trailer park as herein constituted.
B. Any individual mobile home or trailer park maintained or established
and duly licensed at the time of the adoption of this chapter shall be
permitted to be maintained on its present site until the same shall be
removed, and thereafter no mobile home or trailer may be
reestablished on said site, or any other site except as provided in this
chapter; provided, however, that any licensee maintaining an individual
mobile home or trailer within the Town of Glocester, Rhode Island, at
the time of the adoption of this chapter, shall annually renew his license
between December 15 and December 30 of each year, and shall pay to
the Town Clerk a sum as set from time to time by the Town Council for
each such renewal; and provided, further, however, that no such license
for any individual mobile home or trailer as may have been previously
issued shall be transferable to any other person for any reason.35
C. Flood hazard areas. The following requirements shall apply to any
mobile home or house trailer park; any expansion to an existing mobile
home or house trailer park; or any existing mobile home or house trailer
park where the repair, reconstruction, or improvement of the streets,
utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50% of the value of the streets,
utilities and pads before the repair or reconstruction has commenced;
and which is located wholly or in part within Zone A and Zones A1-30 as
identified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map as part of the Flood
Insurance Study which also includes the Flood Boundary and Floodway
Map. Said maps and any amendments thereto are hereby made part of
this section of these regulations:
(1) Stands on lots must be elevated on compacted fill or pilings so that
the lowest floor of the mobile home or house trailer will be at or
above the base flood level;
(2) Adequate surface drainage and access for a hauler must be
provided; and
(3) In the instance of elevation on pilings, lots must be large enough to
permit steps, piling foundations must be placed in stable soil no
more than 10 feet apart, and re-enforcement must by provided for
pilings more than six feet above ground level.
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 208-6 MOBILE HOMES AND HOUSE TRAILERS § 208-8
208:207
§ 208-8. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
§ 208-9. Existing licenses.
All provisions of this chapter shall apply to existing mobile home parks or
trailer parks, and all licenses in existence at the time of the adoption of this
chapter shall continue in effect until December 31 next after the adoption
of this chapter, at which time all such licenses will expire and shall be
renewable only in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 208-10. Trailer permits.36
No trailer shall be permitted until the licensee obtains a trailer placement
permit from the Building Inspector. The cost of said permit will be as set
from time to time by the Town Council.
Chapter 212
MOTOR BOATS AND WATER CRAFT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 221.
§ 212-1. Operation in bathing areas prohibited.
From and after the effective date of this chapter, no motorboat or other
water craft, while being operated upon waters within the boundaries of the
Town of Glocester, shall be operated within a clearly marked public bathing
area on the shores of the waters of said Town.
A. Any license issued by the licensing authority may be revoked by said
licensing authority for violation by the licensee of any provisions of this
chapter or for other cause shown, and any person who shall violate any
provision of this chapter shall also be subject to prosecution and, upon
conviction, shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense. Each day
any violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct
offense.
B. The provisions of this chapter may be enforced in the same manner as
Chapter 350, Zoning. All actions brought on behalf of the Town shall be
brought in the name of the Town by the Zoning Inspector, the police, or
any other authorized Town official. The provisions of this chapter may
also be enforced by criminal prosecution, injunctive relief, or any other
legal or equitable relief in a court of proper jurisdiction. All fines
collected as a result of any such action shall be paid to and become part
of the general funds of the Town.
36.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 208-8 GLOCESTER CODE § 212-2
212:208
§ 212-2. Speed limit; restrictions on operation.
No motorboat or other water craft upon the waters within the boundaries
of the Town of Glocester shall be operated at a speed of more than 35 miles
per hour or in a reckless or negligent fashion upon the waters within the
boundaries of the Town of Glocester.
§ 212-3. Interference with other crafts prohibited.
No person shall operate any motorboat, vessel, or seaplane in a manner
which shall unreasonably or unnecessarily interfere with any other
motorboat, vessel, or seaplane, or with the free and proper navigation of
the waterways of the state. Anchoring under bridges or in heavily traveled
channels shall constitute such interference if unreasonable under the
prevailing circumstances.
§ 212-4. Compliance with law enforcement.
Motor boat operators shall obey lawful directions given to them by any
police officer of the Town of Glocester or authorized employee of the
Department of Environmental Management in enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter and shall immediately, upon being so instructed,
comply with said lawful directions.
§ 212-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOTORBOAT — Includes any vessels propelled in whole or in part by
mechanical means, either inboard or outboard, and using a motor powered
by gasoline, diesel fuel, naphtha, kerosene, steam or fuel oil.
WATER — Includes all lakes, rivers, streams, ponds or other bodies of water
located within or partly within the boundaries of the Town of Glocester.
§ 212-6. Violations and penalties.37
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined
in accordance with R.I.G.L. Title 46, Chapter 22.
37.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 212-2 MOTOR BOATS AND WATER CRAFT § 212-6
212:209
Chapter 217
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise from dogs — See Ch. 139, § 139-11.
Disorderly conduct and indecency — See Ch.
157.
Hawkers and peddlers — See Ch. 190.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 221.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 258.
§ 212-6 GLOCESTER CODE § 212-6
217:210
ARTICLE I
Offensive Noise
[Adopted 7-8-1982 (Ch. II, § 3, 2-03-02, of the 1991 Code)]
§ 217-1. Loud and unreasonable noise prohibited.38
It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and it shall be unlawful for
any person to make, cause, or suffer or permit to be made or caused
upon any premises owned, occupied or controlled by him/her, or upon any
public property, public roadway or thoroughfare in the Town, loud and
unreasonable noise by means of the human voice, or by any other means or
methods which, under the circumstances, would disturb a person of average
sensibilities, or which are so harsh, or so prolonged or unnatural, or unusual
in their use, time and place as to disturb a person of average sensibilities or
which are injurious to the lives, health, peace and comfort of the inhabitants
of the Town.
§ 217-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this article shall be fined as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Penalties. Each day of the existence of a
violation shall be deemed a separate offense. All prosecutions on behalf of
the Town shall be brought in the name of the Town by the Town Solicitor,
any police officer or other duly authorized officer of the Town.
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 217-1 NOISE § 217-2
217:211

ARTICLE II
Squealing of Automobile Tires
[Adopted 10-9-1970, amended 2-9-1973 (Ch. II, § 3, 2-03-03, of the
1991 Code). Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 217-3. Squealing of tires prohibited; violations and penalties.
Every person who shall cause to be made upon a public highway of this
Town, an unnecessary noise and sound, to wit: the squealing of automobile
tires by the use of excessive acceleration of an automobile, said noise and
sound being physically annoying to other persons, harsh, unnatural, and
unusual in its use and place, and comfort of the good and orderly people of
the Town of Glocester, in violation of this article of said Town, shall be fined
in an amount not to exceed $100.
§ 217-3 NOISE § 217-3
217:213
Chapter 221
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 134.
Dog control — See Ch. 139, Art. I.
Disorderly conduct and indecency — See Ch.
157.
Hawkers and peddlers — See Ch. 190.
Outdoor lighting — See Ch. 203.
Motor boats and water craft — See Ch. 212.
Pascoag Reservoir/Echo Lake Dam
Management District — See Ch. 223.
Trees — See Ch. 251.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 258.
§ 217-3 GLOCESTER CODE § 217-3
217:214
ARTICLE I
Recreation Areas
[Adopted 7-9-1971, as amended 2-9-1973, 8-13-1976, and 6-11-1987
(Ch. II, § 15, 2-15-01, of the 1991 Code). Subsequent amendments
noted where applicable.]
§ 221-1. Operation of motor vehicles restricted.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle, motorcycle, snowmobile or socalled
“mini-bike” within any recreation area except in the designated
parking areas.
§ 221-2. Hours of operation.
No person or automobile shall be allowed within the limits of a Town
recreation or beach area between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
except by permission from the Glocester Town Council.
§ 221-3. Animals.
No person shall bring onto any Town beach any animal during the bathing
season from May 15 through September 30, nor shall any person leave an
animal unattended in any automobile.
§ 221-4. Alcoholic beverages.
No person shall possess, drink, sell or offer for sale any intoxicating
beverages within the limits of any Town beach or recreation area without
the permission of the Town Council.
§ 221-5. Firearms. [Amended 9-3-2009, effective 9-3-2009]
The use of any firearms or bows and arrows is prohibited in all recreation
areas, excepting Assessors Plat 2, Lot 13, known as Williams Mills
Conservation Area. Hunting will be subject to any rules and regulations
adopted by the managing authority.
§ 221-6. Bathing.
No person shall bathe in the waters of a Town recreation area except when
and at a place where bathing is officially permitted, nor shall any person
disrobe other than in properly designated buildings.
§ 221-7. Profanity; disorderly conduct.
No person shall use profane or indecent language, or in any manner annoy
another person or commit any disorderly or indecent act within the limits of
a Town beach or recreation area.
§ 221-1 NOISE § 221-8
217:215
§ 221-8. Distribution of printed materials.
No person shall distribute or exhibit at any Town park or other recreation
area any printed or written material of a commercial nature without
permission from the Town Council.
§ 221-9. Commercial sales.
No person shall offer for sale at any Town park or other recreational area
any goods or services of a commercial nature without the permission of the
Town Council.
§ 221-10. Baths in ponds and waterways prohibited.
Taking baths in all ponds and waterways situated in all recreation areas is
hereby prohibited.
§ 221-11. Open fires.
No open fires shall be allowed without a fire permit.
§ 221-12. Solid waste disposal.
§ 221-13. Maintenance of vegetation; defacing of property
prohibited.
No person shall cut, remove or damage any tree or shrub or vegetation
except with official written permission, nor shall any person deface any
structure, sign or other public property or improvements.
§ 221-14. Access restricted to residents; permit sticker.
A. No person shall bring into any recreation area any refuse, garbage or
other materials for the purpose of disposal.
B. All refuse and waste material shall be deposited in receptacles provided
for that purpose and shall not be left on the grounds or waters.
A. No person shall be allowed within the limits of a Town beach area, or
the Town parking lot pertinent thereto, unless such person is either a
resident of the Town of Glocester, a nonresident paying property taxes
to the Town of Glocester or the guest of such resident or property
taxpayer. Under no circumstances shall a business invitee be
considered a guest of a resident of the Town or a nonresident taxpayer.
B. Residents of the Town of Glocester and nonresidents paying property
taxes to the Town of Glocester shall obtain an official Town sticker in
the office of the Town Clerk or the Director of Public Works, and shall
display such sticker on any vehicle parked in the Town parking lot
pertinent to the Town beach area.
§ 221-8 GLOCESTER CODE § 221-15
217:216
§ 221-15. Tobacco use limited to designated areas. [Added
7-7-2005, effective 8-4-200539]
§ 221-16. Violations and penalties.
A. Smoking and other uses of tobacco products shall be limited to
designated areas within any athletic or public recreation facility owned
or operated by the Town of Glocester.
B. Designated smoking areas shall be determined by the Town Council or
its designee and shall provide reasonable accommodation for those
using tobacco.
C. Signs to be posted. The Public Works Department is hereby directed to
cause conspicuous signs to be erected giving notice of the above
prohibition.
A. Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $20 for each
violation, or imprisonment not to exceed 10 days.
B. Penalties for violations of § 221-15. Any person who violates the
provisions of § 221-15 shall be deemed to have committed a petty
misdemeanor and shall be given a warning to stop the use of tobacco,
and in the event that the person or persons do not stop the use of
tobacco or commence use of tobacco again, they shall be asked to leave
the premises and shall be subject to a fine of $20 per violation. [Added
7-7-2005, effective 8-4-2005]
39.Editor's Note: This ordinance added this new material as § 221-14.1. The section was
renumbered as § 221-15 and §§ 221-15 and 221-16 were renumbered as §§ 221-16 and
221-17, respectively, at the request of the Town.
§ 221-15 NOISE § 221-16
217:217

ARTICLE II
Glocester Memorial Park
[Adopted 10-19-1995 (Ch. III, § 2, 3-02-06, of the 1991 Code)]
§ 221-17. Regulations.
The following regulations shall be observed in Glocester Memorial Park:
A. The park is open between sunrise and sunset.
B. Posted speed limits shall be strictly enforced.
C. The possession of any alcoholic beverages is prohibited.
D. All animals shall be on a leash and under the control of the owner.
E. Camping, fishing, hunting and trapping are prohibited.
F. The possession of any type of weapon is prohibited.
G. All fires and grills are prohibited.
H. All litter shall be deposited in the marked receptacles.
I. Disturbance of any natural materials, whether animal, vegetable or
mineral, is prohibited.
J. No snowmobiles or off-road vehicles are permitted.
K. No person shall deface any structure, sign, or other public property.
L. No person shall use profane or indecent language, or in any manner
annoy another person or neighbor, or commit any disorderly or indecent
act within the limits of the park.
§ 221-17 NOISE § 221-17
217:219

ARTICLE III
The Pavilion at Kent Field
[Adopted 6-15-2017, effective 6-15-2017]
§ 221-18. Regulations.
The following regulations shall be observed at The Pavilion at Kent Field:
A. The park is open between sunrise and sunset.
B. The possession of alcoholic beverages on the property is prohibited.
C. All animals shall be on a leash and under the control of the owner.
Owners are responsible to clean up after their animals.
D. The possession of any type of weapon is prohibited.
E. All fires and/or grills are prohibited.
F. All litter shall be deposited in the marked receptacles or removed from
the property.
G. No motorized vehicles are allowed on any grassy surfaces. No
skateboards are allowed on any solid surfaces.
H. No person shall deface any structure, sign, gardens, planted areas
(including grass) or other public property.
I. No materials, including signage, shall be posted, attached to or adhered
to, in any way, on any structures or on the grounds of the property
unless previously approved by the Recreation Director.
J. No person shall use profane or indecent language, or commit any
disorderly or indecent act within the limits of the property.
K. No person or Town-sanctioned group shall expect sole use of the
property whether or not it is an approved event.
L. All events held by Town-sanctioned groups shall be approved, prior to
the advertising of said event, by the Recreation Director. Any group that
advertises an event which draws public participation without prior
approval may lose the privilege for future events.
M. Smoking of any kind is prohibited.
N. No person shall distribute or exhibit any printed or written material of a
commercial nature without permission from the Town Council.
O. No person shall offer for sale any goods or services of a commercial
nature without the permission of the Town Council.
P. Commuter parking will not be allowed.
§ 221-18 NOISE § 221-18
217:221
Chapter 223
PASCOAG RESERVOIR/ECHO LAKE DAM MANAGEMENT
DISTRICT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 221.
§ 223-1. Authority.
Pursuant to the authority granted to the Town Councils of the Towns of
Burrillville and Glocester by the provisions of RI Gen Laws § 45-62-3, the
respective Town Councils for the Towns of Burrillville and Glocester do
hereby establish a multijurisdictional Dam Management District to be
known as the Pascoag Reservoir/Echo Lake Dam Management District
(hereinafter the Management District.)
§ 223-2. Purpose.
The purpose of the Management District is to prevent threats to the general
public welfare, public safety and public and private property caused by
the failure or breach of the Pascoag Dam (consisting of the main dam
and the west dike) ("the dam") and to protect the values associated with
the dam through the implementation of dam repairs, maintenance and
management by apportioning among and collecting from the owners of
property within the district the costs of maintaining and repairing the dam
and the access routes to the dam, and to pay the costs of utilities servicing,
taxes, and other financial assessments, assessed against properties of the
Management District, the costs of administering the Management District
and the costs to acquire, hold, use, sell, transfer or lease real or personal
property as provided in § 223-4F.
§ 223-3. Area.
The area described in this section shall be known as the Pascoag Reservoir
Echo Lake Dam Management District. The intent in formulating the area of
the District is to include all those properties which adjoin and abut Pascoag
Reservoir/Echo Lake or have direct access to the lake, as well as those
properties which may not abut or adjoin Pascoag Reservoir Echo Lake but
enjoy access to the reservoir by deed or some other recorded instrument.
The district shall consist of the following:
A. In the Town of Burrillville, Assessor's Maps and Lots as presently
identified as follows, or as the designation may be amended by the
Town of Burrillville from time to time:
(1) Map 191: Lots 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58,
60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 80, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110.
§ 221-18 GLOCESTER CODE § 223-3
217:222
(2) Map 209: Lots 06, 07, 08, 09, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22,
23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45,
46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63,
64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 135, 139, 140, 141, 142, 143.
(3) Map 210: Lot 28.
(4) Map 226: Lots 05, 06, 07, 08, 09, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
(5) Map 227: Lots 01, 02, 03, 04, 05, 06, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21,
23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34; 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40,
41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 52, 53, 54, 72, 73.
(6) Map 244: Lot 08.
(7) Map 245: Lots 02, 03, 04, 05, 06, 07, 08, 09, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15,
16, 20, 21, 22, 23, 26.
(8) Map 262: Lots 13, 14.
(9) Map 263: Lot 01.
(10) Map 264: Lot 05.
B. In the Town of Glocester, Assessor's Maps and Lots as presently
identified as follows, or as designation may be amended by the Town of
Glocester from time to time:
(1) Map 7: Lots 001, 002, 003, 028, 028-C, 033, 035, 036, 038, 039,
110, 111, 112, 113, 124, 124-A, 141, 145, 146, RF-7. [Amended
2-16-2012, effective 9-26-2012]
(2) Map 7, Echo Lake Shores Plat: Lots EL-055, EL-190, EL-403,
EL-408, EL-409, EL-411, EL-414, EL-416, EL-418, EL-424, EL-426,
EL-428, EL-430, EL-432, EL-439.
(3) Map 7, Pascoag Lake Plat: Lots PL-001, PL-004, PL-006, PL-007,
PL-009, PL-010, PL-024, PL 025, PL-026, PL-027, PL-028, PL-029,
PL-030; PL-032, PL-035, PL 038, PL-040, PL-044, PL-046, PL-048,
PL-050, PL-052, PL-055, PL 057, PL-058, PL-BEA-LOT.
(4) Map 7, Pascoag Lake Plat: PLB-001, PLB-004, PLB-007, PLB-009,
PLB-C, PLB-D, PLB-E, PLB-010, PLB-011, PLB-012, PLB-013,
PLB-014, PLB-015, PLB-016, PLB-017.
C. In the case where a property included in the Management District is
subdivided, all parcels that are created by the subdivision and continue
to adjoin, abut, have direct access to, or enjoy access by deed or some
other recorded instrument, to Pascoag Reservoir/Echo Lake shall
remain a part of the Management District.
D. All other properties in the towns of Burrillville and Glocester that enjoy
access to the reservoir/lake by deed or some other recorded
instrument.
§ 223-3 NOISE § 223-3
217:223
§ 223-4. Powers and duties.
The Management District shall have the power to:
E. Nothing herein shall prohibit the Management District from providing
in the bylaws for voluntary membership in the Management District by
owners of property outside the defined area of the Management
District.
A. Provide for entry of city, Town, state or Management District officials in
a manner equivalent to the provisions of § 23-27.3-112.0, onto private
property within the Management District when necessary for the
periodic inspection, maintenance and/or repair of the dam and
appurtenant facilities necessary to prevent threats to the general public
welfare, public safety and public and private property;
B. Provide for the supervision, control, maintenance, repair and/or
reconstruction of the dam, including activities relating to dam removal
necessary to prevent threats to the general public welfare, public safety
and public and private property;
C. Establish a public education program to educate residents and update
members of the Management District on new information or procedures
for proper maintenance and operation of the dam and the implications
for failing to operate and maintain the dam in a manner that meets
generally accepted dam safety practices;
D. Raise and expend funds for the administration, operation, contractual
obligations, and services of the district, and fix and collect rates, fees,
and charges within the Management District for the provision of dam
management services by the Management District. In connection
therewith, the Management District may raise money as provided
herein and may borrow money and repay it through the sale and
redemption of bonds or other securities;
E. Employ staff, counsel, and consultants as necessary to carry out the
functions of the Management District and purposes of this chapter;
F. Acquire, hold, use, sell, transfer and lease real or personal property
necessary for access, maintenance, repair or operation of the dam
including the lake bed of Pascoag Reservoir/Echo Lake, and to own,
operate, maintain, repair, improve any property acquired. However, in
no event shall the Management District have the power to acquire land
through eminent domain or condemnation proceedings and in no event
shall public access to the Pascoag Reservoir/Echo Lake be affected;
G. Apply for, contract for, receive, and expend grants and loans for the
maintenance, repair, removal and/or reconstruction of the dam, and for
other activities authorized by this chapter; and
H. Adopt a common seal, sue and be sued, and enjoy the powers generally
incident to corporations.
§ 223-3 GLOCESTER CODE § 223-5
217:224
§ 223-5. Exempt entities.
Any dam or property owned and furnished by any municipality, water
district, fire district or any other municipal or quasi-municipal corporation
that is regulated as a water supplier by the Rhode Island Public Utilities
Commission under chapter 1 of title 39 and subject to the provisions of
chapter 15.6 of title 46 shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
§ 223-6. Lien of district fees.
All fees and charges assessed against any property in the Management
District pursuant to this chapter shall constitute a lien upon that property
in the district for the space of three years after the assessment, and, if the
property is not alienated, then until the fees are collected.
§ 223-7. Indemnification.
Any elected or appointed district official, employee, or member of the
Management District is entitled to all the rights and benefits of
indemnification by the Management District, as provided by § 45-15-16.
§ 223-8. Voting.
A. "Eligible voter" shall mean the owner(s) of property [parcel(s) of land or
a dwelling on leased land or on land owned by a homeowner's
Association] located in the Management District and assessed by the
Burrillville and/or Glocester Assessors' office for real estate and/or
personal property tax purposes.
(1) The term "owner" or "owners" as used herein shall mean those
persons identified as the assessed owners of such property
according to the records of the Burrillville and/or Glocester
Assessor's office as of 60 days before the scheduled date of any
meeting at which votes are cast.
(2) If, however, such owners have transferred the property and the
successor(s) have not yet been identified by such records as the
assessed owners thereof, the successor(s) may file with the Board
of Directors a certified copy of the recorded deed or other official
evidence of ownership. Such documentation shall serve to establish
that such successors are the successors to the owners of record of
the property, and shall be considered owners for all purposes
hereunder.
B. If there is more than one owner of any such property; all such owners
shall jointly designate in writing one owner who shall be the eligible
voter entitled to cast the vote on behalf of all owners. Such designation
shall be filed with the Board of Directors. A vote cast by an eligible
voter shall be deemed to be the vote of all the owners in concert.
§ 223-5 NOISE § 223-8
217:225
§ 223-9. Assessment of personal or real property.
Any personal or real property owned by the Management District shall be
assessed and taxed/charged in a manner consistent with local, state and
federal law.
§ 223-10. Initial meeting.
C. Notwithstanding the above, an eligible voter shall only be entitled to
cast one vote regardless of how many properties the owner may hold
title to.
D. The term Burrillville and/or Glocester Assessor's office as used herein
shall, when the context so requires, include the Burrillville and/or
Glocester Collector's office, or other department of the Town which is
required to make and keep assessments of real and personal property
therein.
E. Each eligible voter shall have one vote on matters concerning the
Management District on which they are entitled to vote, including the
budget, as hereinafter provided.
A. Upon the passage of this chapter, the Board of Directors for the
Management District shall within six months call the initial meeting of
the Management District for the purpose of adopting by the eligible
voters the bylaws for the administration and governance of the
Management District which shall not conflict with or be inconsistent
with the provisions of this chapter. Said by bylaws shall include, but are
not limited to:
(1) Date, time and location of meetings;
(2) Quorum requirements for all meetings, with the exception of the
initial meeting;
(3) Procedure for meeting notices, including call, postponement or
cancellation of meetings;
(4) Provisions for approval of matters at special meetings;
(5) Schedule for assessments, delivery of funds from the Collector to
the treasurer, and payment of bills;
(6) Procedure for and frequency of audit;
(7) Establish the term for the Board of Directors and corporate
officers;
(8) Application procedure for appointment of corporate officers;
(9) Define authority of corporate officers;
(10) Provisions for removal of member of the Board of Directors and/or
corporate officers;
§ 223-8 GLOCESTER CODE § 223-10
217:226
§ 223-11. Annual budget meetings.
(11) Provisions for notification to the membership of any emergency
appropriations made by the Board of Directors.
B. Within six months from the approval of bylaws, the Board of Directors
for the Management District shall call the initial budget meeting of the
Management District in accordance with the duly adopted bylaws of the
Management District.
C. The Board of Directors shall provide a copy of the proposed bylaws, and
a notice of the time and place of the initial meeting via first class mail to
the owners of property located within the Management District.
Information will be sent to owners at the mailing addresses listed in the
records of the Burrillville and/or Glocester Assessors' office. If
successor(s) have been established as herein provided, information will
be sent to the address, if any, provided to the Board of Directors in
writing by such successor(s).
D. Quorum. A quorum at the initial meeting of the Management District
shall be 20 eligible voters.
E. All action, business and procedures that could take place at any annual
budget meeting may take place at the initial budget meeting, and the
assessment, collection and enforcement of any amounts approved at
such meeting shall be governed accordingly.
A. After the initial budget meeting, subsequent annual budget meetings
shall be held as specified in bylaws duly adopted by the Management
District.
B. The Board of Directors for the Management District shall prepare the
budget for the Management District each year. The proposed budget
and a notice of the date, time and place of the annual budget meeting
shall be sent to all property owners in the Management District in
accordance with the bylaws duly adopted by the Management District.
C. Quorum.
(1) A quorum at the annual budget meeting of the Management
District shall be as specified in bylaws adopted by the Management
District.
(2) In the event that, for any reason, a quorum is not present at the
time a meeting is scheduled to open, the Board of Directors is
authorized to delay the opening time or postpone said meeting for
such period of time as, in the discretion of the Board of Directors,
shall best serve the interests of the Management District. Notice of
the postponement shall be as specified in the bylaws duly adopted
by the Management District.
§ 223-10 NOISE § 223-11
217:227
(3) If any meeting has been postponed two times for lack of a quorum,
the meeting may be held with the Board of Directors, who shall be
empowered to vote upon all matters legally before the meeting.
D. In voting upon or in connection with any amendments to the proposed
budget, the eligible voters or the Board of Directors, as the case may
be, shall consider and establish plans for:
(1) The construction, maintenance, management, preservation,
support or removal of the dam and related facilities, lake and
property.
(2) The purchase or rental of all necessary equipment and generally all
things necessary and proper for managing the Management
District, and carrying into effect and attaining the purpose of this
chapter.
(3) The improvement or the payment of expenses relating to property
belonging to the Management District and used by the residents in
connection with the dam, including access routes and facilities.
(4) The creation of a reserve fund for the future management and
replacement of property and equipment.
(5) The periodic auditing of the financial records of the Management
District. Periodic audits shall be conducted as specified in the
bylaws duly adopted by the Management District, provided that
there is no longer than a three-year interval between such audits.
Copies of the audit, certified by the secretary of the Management
District, shall be filed with the Town Clerks of the Town of
Burrillville and the Town of Glocester.
(6) The times for payment of management charges and fees and the
penalties for late payments.
(7) Payment of any charges and expenses arising within the
Management District, incidental or not to the above.
(8) Borrowing funds necessary to perform the services authorized
herein.
E. Approval of the budget shall be by a majority of the votes cast.
F. The amount approved for the budget at the annual budget meeting shall
immediately, without the necessity of the recording of any document
with the Burrillville and/or Glocester Town Clerk in the land evidence
records or otherwise, become a lien upon all properties within the
Management District and shall be payable as established at the initial
or any annual budget meeting. The lien shall have priority over all other
liens, interests and encumbrances, except municipal taxes of the Town
of Burrillville and/or the Town of Glocester, Fire District taxes and
sewer and water assessments and taxes and other liens held by the
State of Rhode Island. The lien hereunder shall endure for a period of
§ 223-11 GLOCESTER CODE § 223-11
217:228
§ 223-12. Special meetings.
§ 223-13. Collection of management fees.
three years after the assessment thereof and, if the real estate is not
alienated, then until the fees are collected.
G. In addition to voting upon the budget, eligible voters or the Board of
Directors, as the case may be, shall vote upon any other matters that
shall legally come before them.
A. Special meetings of the Management District may be called in
accordance with the bylaws, duly adopted by the Management District.
B. A quorum at any special meeting of the Management District shall be as
specified in the bylaws duly adopted by the Management District. In the
event that, for any reason, a quorum is not present at the time a
meeting is scheduled to open, the Board of Directors is herewith
authorized to delay the opening time of said meeting for such period of
time, or to postpone it indefinitely, as in the discretion of the Board of
Directors shall best serve the interests of the Management District.
C. Approval of matters voted upon at any special meeting shall be in
accordance with bylaws adopted by the Management District.
A. Within 60 days after the approval of the budget at the initial or any
annual budget meeting, the Board of Directors shall cause the Collector
to mail to the owners of each property located within the Management
District bills for the collection of the amounts due with respect to any
property.
(1) Management District bills may be based on a flat rate established
by the Board of Directors to be applied uniformly on property
located within the Management District or may be based on a rate
to be established by the Board of Directors and applied against
assessed values of property in the Management District in
accordance with § 223-16C of this chapter, or may be a combination
of a flat rate and assessed value rate.
(2) Bills will be mailed via first class mail, to the owners of each
property located within the Management District, in each case
addressed to such owners at the mailing address specified in the
records of the Burrillville and/or Glocester Assessors' office for the
mailing of real estate tax bills, or to the successor(s) established as
herein provided to the address, if any, provided to the Board of
Directors in writing by such successor(s).
B. The treasurer shall upon request issue a lien certificate which shall
state any amounts of management fees that are due and owing on the
date said certificate is given. Any such certificate may be recorded
within 60 days after its date with the Burrillville and/or Glocester Town
Clerk in the land evidence records, and if so recorded shall operate to
§ 223-11 NOISE § 223-13
217:229
§ 223-14. Board of Directors.
discharge property specified from the lien of all amounts due for
management fees which do not appear by said certificate to be due
and owing, except such fees that arise after the date shown on the
certificate or which are the subject of a recorded statement of lien,
as herein provided; but a certificate issued under this section shall
not affect the obligation of any person liable for the payment of any
management fee by reason of being assessed owner of such property
at the time any such lien arose. Collection of management fees shall be
in the same manner as provided by law for the collection of taxes by
municipalities and the Collector of fees for said Management District
shall, for the purpose of collecting fees assessed by said Management
District, have the same powers and authority as are now by law
conferred on collectors of taxes for towns in the state.
A. The Board of Directors shall consist of seven individuals all of whom
must be eligible voters of the Management District. Five members of
the Board of Directors shall be owners of property in the Town of
Burrillville and two members shall be owners of property in the Town of
Glocester.
B. Upon passage of this chapter, the initial composition of the Board of
Directors shall be determined as follows: the Burrillville Town Council
shall appoint five individuals to the Board of Directors and the
Glocester Town Council shall appoint two individuals to the Board of
Directors. The initial members of the Board of Directors shall serve
until the first Annual Budget Meeting. Thereafter, the Board of
Directors shall be elected by majority vote of a quorum, for terms as
established in the Management District bylaws.
C. The Board of Directors shall elect one of its members as president, one
of its members as vice president, and one of its members as secretary.
The president, and in the president's absence, the vice president, shall
preside at all meetings of the Management District and shall conduct all
meetings in accordance with rules duly adopted by the Management
District.
D. Emergency appropriations. The Board of Directors may make
emergency appropriations to meet an emergency that threatens the
general public welfare, public safety and/or public and private property
of the Management District. As used in this section, emergency
includes extraordinary fire, flood, storm or other impending or actual
disaster endangering or threatening to endanger the physical structure
of the dam and/or appurtenant facilities.
(1) The Board of Directors dealing with any emergency or emergencies
shall adopt a resolution that contains a declaration of the existence
and extent of the emergency, and the amount of the emergency
appropriation.
§ 223-13 GLOCESTER CODE § 223-14
217:230
(2) The Board of Directors shall cause notification of the emergency
appropriation to be sent to the membership of the Management,
District, as provided in the Management District bylaws, but no
later than 60 days from the date of the resolution.
E. The Board of Directors shall appoint all officers and committees and
shall have the authority to designate individuals to act on behalf of the
Board for specific tasks and assignments, as identified by the Board.
F. The Board of Directors shall vote to fill vacancies on expired or
unexpired terms of duly appointed officers.
G. The President of the Board of Directors shall administer the oath of
office to the officers.
H. Secretary.
(1) Upon adoption, modification, or amendment of the bylaws of the
Management District, the secretary shall file certified copies of the
bylaws with the Town Clerks of the Towns of Burrillville and
Glocester.
(2) The secretary shall on behalf of the Board of Directors give notice
of every Annual Budget Meeting or special meeting of the
Management District as specified in the bylaws duly adopted by the
Management District.
(3) The secretary shall take the minutes of all meetings and shall be
held responsible for the management of same.
(4) The secretary of the Management District shall file with the Town
Clerks of the Towns of Burrillville and Glocester the unofficial
minutes of any meeting of the Management District within 35 days
of the meeting. Upon approval of the minutes, the secretary shall
provide certified copies of the approved minutes of all proceedings
to the Town Clerks.
(5) On receipt of the assessment from the Assessor, the secretary shall
deliver a copy to the treasurer, who shall issue and affix to said
copy, a warrant under his hand, directed to the Collector,
commanding him to proceed and collect said fees.
(6) The secretary shall carry out the functions of the treasurer in his or
her absence or disability and shall have authority to sign checks
and assume other duties of the treasurer.
I. The Board of Directors, at each annual budget meeting, shall make a
report to the eligible voters of the Management District of the state of
affairs of the Management District. Financial and other records of the
Management District shall be open for inspection by the owners of
properties within the Management District at reasonable times and
upon reasonable notice.
§ 223-14 NOISE § 223-14
217:231
§ 223-15. Officers; appointment.
J. Whenever a vacancy shall occur in the Board of Directors either
through death, resignation or disability or removal for cause as
provided in the bylaws of the Management District, the remaining
members of the Board of Directors shall appoint a resident who is also
an eligible voter of the Management District to serve in such capacity
until the next annual meeting, and until their respective successors are
elected.
K. The Board of Directors shall have the authority to retain legal counsel
at an annual cost to be determined by the eligible voters of the
Management District. Said legal counsel shall be available in an
advisory capacity for all committees of the Management District and
shall render legal opinions, whenever requested to do so.
L. The Board of Directors, acting on behalf of the Management District,
shall have the right to sue and be sued in the courts of this state having
jurisdiction to hear, try or determine such causes. The Management
District shall indemnify and hold harmless any elected or appointed
district official for damages, judgments, settlements, costs and
expenses incurred in connection with any action, suit or appeal
therefrom, arising out of an alleged or actual breach of duty, neglect,
error, misstatement, or omission, unless willfully and intentionally
done, or by reason of their being an officer of the Management District.
M. The Board of Directors shall prescribe an accounting system for the
Management District.
N. The Board of Directors shall cause an audit of the association's
Management District to be made by a certified public accountant in
compliance with the provisions of the bylaws duly adopted by the
Management District.
O. The Board of Directors shall have the power to set compensation if any
for its members and the officers and agents of the Management District.
P. The Board of Directors shall have the authority to establish rules,
regulations and procedures for the administration of the Management
District, within the parameters established by this chapter or by the
duly adopted bylaws of the Management District.
A. The officers of the Management District shall be appointed by majority
vote of the Board of Directors and shall be constituted of a Collector,
Assessor, and Treasurer; and any other office deemed necessary by the
Board of Directors and established in the duly adopted bylaws of the
Management District. Each shall hold office for a term as established in
the Management District bylaws.
B. In no event shall the President, Vice President or Secretary of the Board
of Directors serve as an appointed officer nor shall one person serve in
more than one appointment position concurrently.
§ 223-14 GLOCESTER CODE § 223-15
217:232
§ 223-16. Officers, duties and responsibilities.
C. Upon the passage of this chapter, the initial officers shall be appointed
by majority vote of the Board of Directors at the initial meeting and will
serve until the first annual budget meeting. Thereafter, all candidates
for appointed office must apply in the manner established by the
Management District bylaws.
A. Treasurer.
(1) The treasurer, before proceeding to discharge these duties, shall
give bond or provide insurance to the Management District in such
sum and with such surety as the Board of Directors may determine,
which will provide for the faithful discharge of the duties of office.
The premium for said bond or insurance shall be paid by the
Management District. Said bond shall be deposited with the
secretary. Copies of said bond or proof of insurance shall be filed
with the Town Clerks of the Towns of Burrillville and Glocester.
(2) The treasurer shall receive all fees, funds, monies, and receivables
by the Management District; have the responsibility for those
funds; and have custody of all investments and invested funds of
the Management District.
(3) The treasurer shall pay out and expend only those funds that are
authorized to be expended by vote of the eligible voters of the
Management District at the initial or any annual budget meeting or
special meeting, or as requested by the Board of Directors as
provided in the bylaws.
(4) The treasurer shall have the authority to borrow such sums that
may be so authorized at the initial or annual budget meeting or
special meeting, and shall have the authority to invest any surplus
funds, subject to the advice and consent of the Board of Directors.
(5) The treasurer shall maintain an accounting system for the
Management District, as prescribed by the Board of Directors, and
shall be responsible for keeping and maintaining a complete set of
financial and accounting records.
(6) Prepare as soon as possible after, and as of, the end of each fiscal
year, a complete financial statement and report, for submission to
the Board of Directors and the eligible voters at the annual
meeting.
B. Collector.
(1) The Collector, before proceeding to discharge these duties, shall
give bond or provide insurance to the Management District in such
sum and with such surety as the Board of Directors may determine,
which will provide for the faithful discharge of the duties of office.
§ 223-15 NOISE § 223-16
217:233
The premium for said bond or insurance shall be paid by the
Management District.
(2) Upon approval of the budget at the annual budget meeting, the
Collector shall, on behalf of the Board of Directors, produce
management fee bills based on the budget approved by the eligible
voters of the Management District, and in accordance with the
established apportioning method.
(3) The Collector shall maintain records of all collections and
delinquent charges and provide annual written reports thereof.
(4) The bills shall be mailed as herein provided no later than 60 days
after the initial or any annual budget meeting or any special
meeting establishing amounts due and shall be payable within 60
days after they have been mailed, unless otherwise established in
the bylaws duly adopted by the Management District, and shall
indicate when payments are due and the penalties for late
payments.
(5) The Collector shall pay over to the treasurer the total management
fees collected, at intervals established in the bylaws duly adopted
by the Management District.
(6) The Collector may, at any time while a management fee is due and
owing but unpaid, record a statement of lien with the Burrillville
and/or Glocester Town Clerk in the land evidence records
indicating the amount due. Additional amounts thereafter
becoming due shall be secured by said statement without the
necessity of recording further statements. The Collector or the
treasurer may discharge the lien by a release filed with the
Burrillville and/or Glocester Town Clerk in the land evidence
records that makes specific reference to the recorded statement.
No release shall be given by the Collector or treasurer unless all
management fees then due and owing and all charges associated
with the recording of any statement of liens or the release itself
shall be paid.
(7) The Collector shall be empowered, subject to approval by a
majority of the Board of Directors, to appoint an agent for
collection of management fees. Said agent, at the time of
appointment, shall give bond or provide insurance to the
Management District in such sum and with such surety as the
Board of Directors of the Management District shall determine,
which will provide for the faithful performance of the duties of said
agent.
C. Assessor. The Assessor shall determine and assess the value of each
parcel located within the boundaries of the Management District based
on its assessed value as made by the respective Tax Assessors for the
Towns of Burrillville and Glocester as of December 31 of each year and
§ 223-16 GLOCESTER CODE § 223-16
217:234
§ 223-17. Reporting to Town and DEM.
At least annually the Management District shall submit complete and
detailed reports to the Towns of Burrillville and Glocester and the
Department of Environmental Management.
§ 223-18. Open meetings.
All meetings of a public body to discuss or act upon a matter over which
the public body has supervision, control, jurisdiction or advisory power shall
be in conformance with Chapter 46 of Title 42 of the Rhode Island General
Laws as amended, entitled Open Meetings.
§ 223-19. Public records.
All public records shall be open to public inspection in accordance with the
State of Rhode Island Access to Public Records Act as it may be amended
from time to time.
§ 223-20. Amendments.
Chapter 226
POLES AND WIRES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Deposits in highways — See Ch. 242, Art. I. Trees — See Ch. 251.
shall provide this information to the secretary, at a time specified in the
bylaws duly adopted by the Management District.
A. In the event 15 voters at any duly called meeting of the Management
District shall deem that this chapter should be amended or revised,
then the Board of Directors shall appoint a committee, approved by the
majority of the eligible voters present, to study such proposed
amendment or revision. Said committee shall report its findings at the
next annual meeting or at a duly called special meeting at which time
the approval or disapproval of the proposed amendment or revision
shall be voted upon. If a proposed amendment is approved, then the
Board of Directors shall request that the respective Town Councils for
the Towns of Burrillville and Glocester amend the ordinance. No
amendment shall take effect unless approved by the Burrillville Town
Council and the Glocester Town Council.
B. Notwithstanding the above, subsequent to the 2010 Census, the Town
Councils of the Towns of Burrillville and Glocester may review the
composition of the Board of Directors to determine whether the
apportionment remains equitable and may make amendments to the
ordinance to maintain balance.
§ 223-16 POLES AND WIRES § 223-20
226:235
§ 226-1. Removal of cut brush and trees.
Every telephone, electric supply company, telegraph company and cable
television company authorized by this Town to erect and maintain poles and
wires in any of its public highways shall remove from and out of the traveled
portion of said highways all trees and brush cut by said companies in the
erection or maintenance of said poles and wires.
§ 226-2. Violations and penalties.
Every telephone, electric supply company, telegraph company and cable
television company violating the provisions of this chapter shall be fined as
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Penalties.
Chapter 230
PRIVATE DETECTIVES, LICENSING OF
§ 230-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PRIVATE DETECTIVE — Includes any person who engages in business
or who accepts employment for hire, fee or reward to furnish or supply
information as to the personal character or actions or identity or business
activities of any person; to inquire into unsolved crimes; to engage in
clandestine surveillance; to search for missing persons; or to search for
lost or stolen property; provided that "private detective" shall not include
within its meaning a detective or officer belonging to the law enforcement
agencies of the United States or of any state, county or city, nor someone
employed and performing services exclusively for a single employer.
§ 230-2. License required; compliance.
§ 230-3. Application.
A. Every person shall be and is required by this chapter to have a valid
detective's license as a condition precedent to the operation as a
private detective; provided that licenses heretofore issued and in effect
shall continue in effect until the expiration of the period for which such
license was granted. Upon expiration of any such presently existent
valid detective licenses, application for renewal shall be made in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. It shall be unlawful after the effective date of this chapter for any
person to operate or continue to operate any business as a private
detective without first complying with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 223-20 GLOCESTER CODE § 230-3
230:236
§ 230-4. Investigation of applicant; investigation fee.
A. All applications for a license under the provisions of this chapter shall
be made in writing to the Town Council upon forms provided by the
Town Clerk in his/her office.
B. Every application for a license shall state the following:
(1) The full name, date of birth, residence, present and previous
occupations, including part-time occupations, and the name and
address of present and previous employers.
(2) That each person signing the application as hereinafter required is
a citizen of the United States or, if an alien, has permanent resident
status in the United States.
(3) The location of the principal place of business of the applicant.
(4) A full set of fingerprints and a photograph taken within one year of
the application date.
(5) That the applicant has been a bona fide resident of the state for a
period of not less than 30 days immediately preceding the filing of
the application.
(6) Such other information as to the identity of the applicant as may
facilitate investigation of the applicant's character.
C. The application shall be signed and sworn to by the individual applying
before a person authorized to administer oaths.
D. The application shall be accompanied by three letters of reference, two
of which shall be from residents of the Town attesting to the character
and ability of the applicant, and at least one of whom shall be from
someone from a criminal justice agency.
A. After the applicant has properly executed the form provided in § 230-3
and paid the cost of investigation as provided in Subsection B, the Town
Clerk shall submit the application, together with all other information
related thereto, to the Chief of Police, who shall conduct an
investigation of the character of the applicant and, upon completion of
his/her investigation, shall endorse upon the application his/her
recommendation of approval or disapproval thereof and his/her opinion
of the ability of the applicant to perform the services usually required of
a private detective. For this purpose the Chief of Police may require the
applicant to appear in person for an interview.
B. Every applicant for a license under this chapter shall, upon properly
executing the application in conformity with § 230-3, submit to the
Town Clerk a fee as set from time to time by the Town Council to cover
the costs of investigation of the applicant.40
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 230-3 PRIVATE DETECTIVES, LICENSING OF § 230-5
230:237
§ 230-5. Conditions of issuance.
The Town Council, upon being satisfied that the applicant's licensing will
not be detrimental to the public safety or welfare, may grant the
application; and the Town Clerk shall thereupon issue the license upon
payment of fees required by this chapter and filing of a bond as hereinafter
required; provided that no license shall be issued to any person who:
§ 230-6. Term of license; annual renewal.
Any license issued in accordance with the provision of this chapter shall be
for a term of one year and may be renewed annually, subject to the payment
of the appropriate fee as established by this chapter and subject to § 230-11
hereof. At the time of such renewal the Chief of Police shall conduct such
investigation and make such recommendation as provided in § 230-4 hereof.
§ 230-7. Fee.
No license under this chapter shall be issued or renewed until the applicant
pays to the Town Clerk a license fee as provided in Chapter 368, Fees.
A. Has been convicted in any jurisdiction of a felony; or
B. Has been convicted of two or more misdemeanors involving moral
turpitude (unless the Council determines that the applicant has been
rehabilitated); or
C. Has been denied a private investigator's license or registration, or had
such license or registration revoked, by the valid action of any local
licensing authority; or
D. Has been declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be
incompetent by reason of mental defect or disease, unless said court
has subsequently determined that his or her competency has been
restored; or
E. Suffers from habitual drunkenness or narcotics addiction or
dependency; or
F. Does not have:
(1) At least five years' experience as an investigator or as a police
officer with a state, county or municipal police department or with
an investigative agency of the United States of America or of any
state, county or municipality; or
(2) A degree in criminal justice from an accredited college or
university; or
(3) At least five years' experience as an investigator working for a
licensed private detective; or
(4) Substantially equivalent training or experience.
§ 230-5 GLOCESTER CODE § 230-8
230:238
§ 230-8. Bonds.
§ 230-9. Identification card.
Every person licensed hereunder shall be given a permanent license
number and shall be issued an identification card which shall be
approximately 2 1/2 inches wide and 3 1/2 inches long and shall bear
thereupon the number assigned to the licensee, the full name, date of birth,
residence address, brief description of the licensee, his fingerprints and
photograph, a space upon which the licensee shall write his usual signature
with pen and ink, or a facsimile of such signature and the expiration date of
such license.
§ 230-10. Transfer of license prohibited.
The transfer or assignment of any license issued hereunder is hereby
expressly prohibited.
§ 230-11. Revocation of license; denial of license renewal;
violations.
A. No license shall be issued under this chapter until the applicant files
with the Town a surety bond executed by a surety company authorized
to do business in this state, in the sum of $5,000 conditioned for the
faithful and honest conduct of the business of private detectives. Such
bond, as to its form, execution and sufficiency of the sureties, shall be
approved by the Town Council.
B. The bond required shall be taken in the name of the people of the state,
and every person injured by the willful, malicious and wrongful act of
the principal may bring an action on the bond in his own name to
recover damages suffered by reason of such willful, malicious or
wrongful act.
C. Every licensee shall at all times maintain on file the surety bond
required by this chapter in full force and effect, and upon failure to do
so the license shall be forthwith suspended until such a bond is
furnished.
A. The Town Council shall have the power to revoke, suspend or deny
renewal of any license issued under the provisions of this chapter for
cause, which may include but shall not be limited to violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter or any laws of the state or other
ordinances of the Town in the conduct of the business, in which case the
Town Council by a majority vote may revoke the license for such
business after first giving written notice to the licensee and after a
hearing thereon.
B. It shall be a violation of this chapter for which the license may be
revoked or other penalties imposed if any licensee:
§ 230-8 PRIVATE DETECTIVES, LICENSING OF § 230-11
230:239
§ 230-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not less than $200 nor more
than $500, or by imprisonment in the adult correctional institutions for not
more than six months, or by both such fine and such imprisonment; but
nothing herein contained shall apply to a detective of another state coming
within this state in the performance of his or her duties for a temporary
period and on a specific matter.
Chapter 232
PUBLIC NUISANCES ON FORECLOSED ABANDONED,
VACANT PROPERTIES
§ 232-1. Findings and purpose.
(1) Performs any services usually performed by a private detective,
upon speculation and with a view towards selling the information
so gathered to a customer by whom the licensee was not employed
when the service was performed;
(2) Misrepresents the scope of such license, or holds himself or herself
out as a public official or as having any power beyond that of a
private detective.
(3) Makes a material misstatement in the application for granting or
renewal of the license.
A. The Town Council of the Town of Glocester does hereby find that it is
necessary to provide for the abatement of conditions with regard to
foreclosed properties which are abandoned or vacant and which are
offensive or annoying to the senses, detrimental to property values and
community appearance, an obstruction to or interference with the
comfortable enjoyment of adjacent property or premises, or hazardous
or injurious to the health, safety or welfare of the general public in such
ways to constitute a public nuisance; and to provide standards to
safeguard life, health and public welfare in keeping with the character
of the Town by allowing for the maintenance of abandoned or vacant
property for each of the following purposes:
(1) To safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the people by
maintaining foreclosed abandoned or vacant properties or
premises in good and appropriate condition;
(2) To promote a sound and attractive community appearance; and
(3) To enhance the economic value of the community, and each area in
it, through the regulation of the maintenance of foreclosed
abandoned or vacant properties.
§ 230-11 GLOCESTER CODE § 232-1
230:240
§ 232-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Zoning and Code Enforcement Officer, or
his or her designee, and any police officer of the Town of Glocester.
FORECLOSED ABANDONED OR VACANT PROPERTY — Any property
which has been foreclosed on and on which there exists a structure, be it
residential or commercial, which is not occupied or used on a routine basis.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Whatever is injurious to health, indecent, or
unreasonably offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to free use of
property so as essentially to interfere unreasonably with the comfortable
enjoyment of life, any condition or use of premises or of building exteriors
which is detrimental to the property of others or which causes or tends to
cause substantial diminution in value of other property in the neighborhood
in which such premises are located, or a building that is a menace to
the public health, welfare, or safety by reason of inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment, as implied in § 232-1 hereof.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON(S) — The individual(s) or entity responsible for
abating nuisances pursuant to this chapter. Any owner is responsible for the
nuisance and is therefore a responsible person pursuant to this chapter.
§ 232-3. Property maintenance.
No owner of foreclosed vacant or abandoned property shall allow the
property to be or become dilapidated by reason of inadequate maintenance,
as further defined herein, which may cause substantial diminution in value
of other property in the neighborhood in which such premises are located.
B. Accordingly, the Town Council finds and declares that the purpose of
this chapter is to:
(1) Reduce the threat to health, safety, welfare, appearance and
economic value due to the decline in property condition(s) by
lawfully delineating the circumstances under which such
condition(s) on foreclosed abandoned or vacant properties may be
considered illegal and/or abated; and, further, finds that
(2) Abatement of such condition(s) is in the best interest of the health,
safety and welfare of the residents of the Town because maximum
use and enjoyment of property or premises in proximity to one
another depends upon maintenance of those properties or premises
at or above the minimum standard.
A. Maintenance of buildings and structures. Maintenance of buildings,
structures, or others as enumerated herein shall not be allowed to
deteriorate, or be left in a state of disrepair as to be decaying or
§ 232-1 PRIVATE DETECTIVES, LICENSING OF § 232-3
230:241
§ 232-4. Enforcement authority.
§ 232-5. Notice of violation.
Upon a finding by a duly authorized enforcement officer that any foreclosed
vacant or abandoned property within the Town is in such condition as to
be in violation of the requirements of this chapter, he or she, or his or her
agent or designee, shall give notice thereof to the owner or owners of such
property to comply with the requirements of this chapter within 14 days
after service and notice to correct.
§ 232-6. Notice to correct.
Such notice shall contain a statement of the findings as to violations and
a description of the property condition thereof found to be violating this
chapter. Such notice may be given personally or by certified mail, police
officer or duly authorized enforcement officer to the owner or owners,
or responsible person(s), of the property described as their names and
addresses are shown upon the records of the Tax Assessors of the Town
or their last-known address, and service of such notice shall be deemed
complete and sufficient when so addressed and deposited in the United
States mail with postage prepaid, and/or by posting a certificated copy on
the premises, or by advertising in one or more newspapers, or by issuing a
citation.
§ 232-7. Failure to comply.
Upon failure of the owner or owners, or responsible person, of such
premises to remedy the conditions existing in violation of the requirements
hereof within 10 days after service of notice to do so as provided herein,
then the Zoning and Code Enforcement Officer, or his or her agent or
designee, may proceed to have such conditions remedied either by the
Town of Glocester or through a private contractor so retained by said
Town. Abatement costs incurred shall become a lien against such property
containing dry rot, have missing doors or windows, or any other
disrepair as to render the structure unsightly and unsafe.
B. Trash, garbage, debris, etc., shall not be allowed to accumulate on site.
A. Pursuant to R.I.G.L. 23-19.2-7 and 45-24.2, as the case may be,
designated enforcement authorities as described herein may provide
for the citation and abatement of any public nuisance.
B. Any designated enforcement officer is authorized to:
(1) Investigate any public nuisance.
(2) Issue a notice of violation and order the abatement of said
nuisance.
(3) Issue a written citation or a summons to municipal court.
§ 232-3 GLOCESTER CODE § 232-7
230:242
to the same extent and character as the lien for real estate taxes and
with the same penalty and interest and with the same rights of collection,
foreclosure sale and forfeiture as obtained for tax liens. The Zoning and
Code Enforcement Officer may issue a notice of violation setting forth the
details of the violation(s) cited, to be recorded in the land evidence records
of the Town of Glocester in such form as the Zoning and Code Enforcement
Officer may prescribe.
§ 232-8. Notice of completion.
Upon completion of the required work by the Town as provided in the
sections hereof, notice thereof and of the cost assessed therefor shall be
given to the owner in the same manner as prescribed for notice of violations
in § 235-5 of this chapter, and the sum assessed shall be due and payable
within 30 days after notice.
§ 232-9. Notice to Town Clerk.
Upon the making of a finding of violation, the Zoning and Code Enforcement
Officer, or his or her agent or designee, shall deliver a certified copy thereof,
and of the notice, to the Town Clerk; and the Town Clerk shall place the
same on record as a lien against the property described therein. It shall also
be the duty of the Zoning and Code Enforcement Officer to file such other
and further certification as to work done and amounts due or paid as the
circumstances may require.
§ 232-10. Violation deemed public nuisance.
Any violation of the requirements described herein shall be deemed a public
nuisance and subject to the procedures and penalties prescribed herein.
Chapter 234
RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Camping and travel trailer parks — See Ch.
151.
Mobile homes and house trailers — See Ch.
208.
§ 234-1. Authority to establish program.
A mandatory recycling program is hereby implemented in the Town of
Glocester pursuant to Chapters 23-18.8, 23-18.9, and 23-19 of the Rhode
Island General Laws and the Rhode Island Department of Environmental
Management Municipal Recycling Regulations, as amended.
§ 232-7 RECYCLING § 234-2
234:243
§ 234-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MIXED RECYCLABLES — Those materials required to be removed from
the municipal solid waste at the source and delivered directly to the Town
recycling facility or placed in or on top of the set-out container provided for
collection by a privately contracted hauler.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those separated from municipal solid waste
for processing for reuse as specified by the Director of DEM and listed in
Section 4 of the Municipal Recycling Regulations and within this chapter.
The materials to be included may change from time to time depending
upon new technologies, economic conditions, waste stream characteristics,
environmental effects or mutual agreement between the state and
municipalities.
RESIDENT — Anyone residing in the Town of Glocester for any period
of time who generates solid waste for which the Town accepts disposal
responsibility.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse and other discarded solid materials
generated by residential sources.
SOURCE SEPARATION — The removal by the generator of recyclable
materials, including mixed recyclables from all other solid waste generated
by the household and conveyance of the recyclable materials to the Town
recycling facilities or for collection by a private hauler.
§ 234-3. Residential recycling.
A. All residents are required to separate recyclable materials from
residential solid waste and to deliver those materials directly to the
Town recycling facility by a private hauler. This chapter does not,
however, bar any residents from giving recyclable materials to a
nonprofit organization.
B. The following materials are required to be separated from residential
solid waste and delivered to a Town or state recycling facility:
(1) Newspapers.
(2) Aluminum.
(3) Steel/Tin cans.
(4) Glass containers.
(5) PET plastic soda bottles.
(6) HDPE plastic dairy jugs.
§ 234-2 GLOCESTER CODE § 234-3
234:244
§ 234-4. Haulers.
§ 234-5. Public events.
The separation of recyclables from solid waste shall be a condition of
licensing or authorization of any public event the conduct of which
generates solid waste for which the Town of Glocester accepts disposal
responsibility.
§ 234-6. Authorized recycling collectors.
No person shall solicit the commercial collection of any recyclable material
as defined in this chapter within the Town of Glocester for personal gain
(7) Other materials determined by the Department of Environmental
Management to be recyclable in its Municipal Recycling
Regulations, Section 4.
C. All separated materials are to be delivered to a Town, state or statedesignated
recycling facility in a processable condition; i.e., at a
minimum, all glass, plastic, steel/tin and aluminum containers shall be
empty and rinsed, aluminum foil shall be clean, webbing shall be
removed from aluminum furniture, no noncontainer glass shall be
mixed with the recyclables, newspaper shall be placed in a brown paper
bag or tied in bundles with a string and other requirements in DEM's
Municipal Recycling Regulations, Appendix A.
A. All qualified persons engaged in the business of collecting and hauling
refuse generated within the boundaries of the Town of Glocester shall
be licensed by the Town of Glocester, pursuant to R.I.G.L.
§ 23-18.9-1(b)(1).
B. Licensed haulers shall collect only that residential solid waste that is
source separated by the resident into the recyclable and nonrecyclable
components.
C. Licensed haulers shall keep recyclable materials separate from
nonrecyclable resident solid waste.
D. Licensed haulers shall maintain any separated recyclable materials that
are delivered to either a Town or state recycling facility in processable
condition.
E. Licensed haulers shall keep residential recyclable materials separate
from recyclables collected from commercial accounts.
F. Licensed haulers who deliver recyclables to a Town or state recycling
facility shall deliver to said facility only recyclables generated by the
Town of Glocester.
G. Licensed haulers shall deliver all recyclables designated to go to a Town
or state recycling facility, to said facility.
§ 234-3 RECYCLING § 234-6
234:245
except as specifically authorized by the Town. The Town may issue permits
to charitable organizations to collect recyclable materials on the condition
that a report is filed by said organization detailing the weights of each
material collected in compliance with the Rhode Island Department of
Environmental Management reporting requirements and provided that the
Town determines that said collection does not conflict with the Town's
recycling program.
§ 234-7. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Police Department of the Town of Glocester to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
Chapter 242
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Earth removal — See Ch. 166. Excavations, holes and wells — See Ch. 181.
§ 234-6 GLOCESTER CODE § 234-7
234:246
ARTICLE I
Deposits on Highways
[Adopted 6-30-1883, as amended 2-9-1973 (Ch. II, § 7, 2-07-02, of
the 1991 Code). Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 242-1. Fine for depositing materials without permission.
[Amended 2-17-2005, effective 3-16-2005]
Every person who shall deposit or place, or suffer to be deposited or placed,
any stone, gravel, ashes or refuse in any of the streets or highways of this
Town, except by permission of the Director of Public Works for the district
where such stone, gravel, ashes, or refuse shall be deposited or placed, shall
be fined in the amount not to exceed $100.
§ 242-1 RECYCLING § 242-1
234:247

ARTICLE II
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 4-18-2013, effective 4-18-2013]
§ 242-2. Deposit of snow and ice.
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any snow, ice or other
substance upon the surface of any Town maintained road in the Town of
Glocester.
A. The property owner will be cited for the first offense with a warning.
B. The property owner will be cited for any additional occurrences with a
progressive fine of $25, $50, up to $100 per occurrence.
C. The enforcement will be through the Glocester Police Department after
notice by the Director of the Glocester Public Works Department.
§ 242-2 RECYCLING § 242-2
234:249
Chapter 243
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Drainage — See Ch. 162.
Earth removal — See Ch. 166.
Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 177.
Excavations and wells — See Ch. 181.
Wastewater Management District — See Chs.
272 and A420.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 300.
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
§ 242-2 GLOCESTER CODE § 242-2
234:250
ARTICLE I
Prohibition of Illicit Discharges
§ 243-1. Definitions.
The following words and terms shall have the following meanings for the
purposes of this chapter.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge
to the municipal stormwater drainage system, except as exempted in
§ 243-2A of this chapter.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS — An illicit connection is defined as either of the
following: Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface,
which allows an illegal discharge to enter the municipal stormwater
drainage system, including but not limited to any conveyances which allow
any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and
wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the
storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said
drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by
an authorized enforcement agency or, any drain or conveyance connected
from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which
has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and
approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
MUNICIPAL STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Publicly-owned
facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but
not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters,
curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention
basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs,
and other drainage structures.
NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the municipal
stormwater drainage system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
STORMWATER — Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely
of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
§ 243-2. Illicit discharges and connections; exceptions.
A. Prohibition of illicit discharges. Non-stormwater discharge is expressly
prohibited from entering the municipal stormwater drainage system,
unless the discharge has received all required federal, state and local
permits including the Rhode Island Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (RIPDES) or is included in one of the following categories of
discharges: discharges which result from the wash down of vehicles at
retail dealers selling new and used automobiles where no detergents
are used and individual residential car washing; external building wash
down where no detergents are used; the use of water to control dust;
fire-fighting activities; fire hydrant flushing; natural springs;
uncontaminated groundwater; dechlorinated pool discharges; airconditioning
condensate; lawn watering; potable water sources
§ 243-1 RECYCLING § 243-2
234:251
§ 243-3. Responsibility for administration.
The Director of the Department of Public Works shall administer,
implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted
or duties imposed upon the Director of the Department of Public Works
may be delegated in writing by the Director of the Department of Public
Works to persons or entities acting in the interest of or in the employ of the
Department of Public Works.
§ 243-4. Right of entry.
To the extent permitted by state law, or if authorized by the owner or other
party in control of the property, the Director of the Department of Public
Works and/or his/her designated representative may enter upon privately
owned property for the purpose of performing his/her duties under this
chapter and may make or cause to be made such examinations, surveys or
sampling as the Town deems reasonably necessary.
§ 243-5. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
including waterline flushing; irrigation drainage; pavement wash
waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous materials have not
occurred (unless all spilled materials have been removed) and where
detergents are not used; discharges from foundation or footing drains
where flows are not contaminated with process materials such as
solvents, or contaminated by contact with soils where spills or leaks
of toxic or hazardous materials have occurred; uncontaminated utility
vault dewatering; dechlorinated waterline testing water; hydrostatic
test water that does not contain any treatment chemicals and is not
contaminated with process chemicals.
B. Prohibition of illicit connections.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the municipal stormwater drainage system is
prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at
the time of connection. A person is considered to be in violation of
this chapter if the person connects a line conveying nonstormwater
to the municipal stormwater drainage system or allows
such a connection to continue.
(3) A person is in violation of this chapter if he connects a line
conveying non-stormwater to the municipal stormwater drainage
system, or allows such a connection to continue.
§ 243-2 GLOCESTER CODE § 243-5
234:252
response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in
unauthorized discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the
municipal stormwater drainage system, or waters of the state from said
facility, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery,
containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release
of a hazardous material, said person shall immediately notify emergency
response officials of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services (911).
In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall
notify the Department of Public Works no later than the next business
day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written
notice addressed and mailed to the Department of Public Works within five
working days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials
emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or
operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of
the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records
shall be retained for at least three years. Nothing in this section shall
preclude any owner/lessee from compliance with relevant provisions of the
Rhode Island Clean Water Act, R.I.G.L. § 46-12-1 et seq. or other applicable
laws or regulations.
§ 243-6. Enforcement.
A. If an illicit discharge to the municipal stormwater drainage system is
detected, the owner shall cease the discharge. If the discharge does not
cease within seven calendar days, the owner may be fined in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 368 of the Glocester Code of
Ordinances, and the Town of Glocester shall have the right to take the
available appropriate remedies it deems necessary to correct the
violations and to place a lien on the subject property in an amount equal
to the cost of the remedial actions. The lien shall be enforced in the
manner provided or authorized by law for the enforcement of liens on
real or personal property. The lien shall be recorded in the land
evidence records of the Town of Glocester and the amount thereof shall
accrue legal interest from the date of the recording. The imposition of
any penalty shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, including revocation of the performance
bond or assessment of a lien on the property.
B. Any individual or other party is prohibited from discharging waste,
including construction waste, building material, truck washout,
chemicals, litter, sanitary wastes or other waste into the municipal
stormwater drainage/system. If such a violation occurs, the individual
or other party may be fined in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 368 of the Glocester Code of Ordinances, and the Town may
also require removal of the waste within 10 calendar days at the
violator's expense. The Town may charge the violator any costs
associated with removal or repair of damage resulting from the
violation.
§ 243-5 RECYCLING § 243-6
234:253
Chapter 247
TAXATION
§ 243-6 GLOCESTER CODE § 243-6
234:254
ARTICLE I
Tax Cancellation
[Adopted 8-11-1988 (Ch. II, § 8, 2-08-02, of the 1991 Code)]
§ 247-1. Authority; findings; purpose.
§ 247-2. Conditions for cancellation.
The Town Council may cancel, in whole or in part, any taxes, interest, and
penalties assessed upon personal, mixed, or real property when it finds that
said cancellation may tend to encourage the renovation, rehabilitation or
construction of tax delinquent properties.
§ 247-3. Redemption and transfer of title of land or property.
In addition, or in the alternative, the Town Council may cause to be paid
to the Town a sum not less or more than the amount necessary for the
redemption of any land or property purchased or taken by the Town for
nonpayment of taxes, may direct the Treasurer of the Town to assign and
transfer the tax title to such land to any person, including the previous
owner of said property, and may request the Treasurer to execute and
deliver on behalf of the Town any instrument necessary therefor. In so
doing, the Council shall first make a finding that any such payment by the
Town or an assignment of land to the previous owner or other party may
tend to encourage the renovation, rehabilitation, or construction of taxdelinquent
property within the Town.
§ 247-4. Consideration of costs.
In particular, the Town Council is empowered to act under this article
whenever, in its judgment, the cancellation of payment of taxes, the
payment of other amounts necessary to redeem any land purchased or
taken by the Town for nonpayment of taxes, and/or the assignment of a
tax title to a property may tend to cause the original owner or other party
(rather than the Town) to bear any portion of the costs of any renovation,
A. Pursuant to R.I.G.L. § 44-7-14(4), Town Councils are empowered to
cancel, in whole or in part, taxes assessed upon personal, mixed, or real
property pursuant to an ordinance intended to encourage the
renovation, rehabilitation or construction of tax delinquent properties;
and
B. Pursuant to R.I.G.L. § 44-9-18, towns are empowered to make
regulations for the possession, management, and sale of land
purchased or taken for taxes, not inconsistent with law or with the right
of redemption; and
C. The Town of Glocester wishes to regulate such land and to enact a Town
ordinance intended to encourage the renovation, rehabilitation, and/or
construction of properties which have become tax delinquent and which
the Town has purchased or taken for nonpayment of taxes.
§ 247-1 RECYCLING § 247-4
234:255
rehabilitation, cleanup, repair, or construction on or with respect to taxdelinquent
properties.
§ 247-4 GLOCESTER CODE § 247-4
234:256
ARTICLE II
Exemption for Wheelchair Lift Equipped Motor Vehicles
[Adopted 9-16-1993, effective 10-18-1993 (Ch. II, § 8, 2-08-03, of
the 1991 Code)]
§ 247-5. Authority. [Amended 2-17-2005, effective 3-16-2005]
This article is enacted pursuant to R.I.G.L. § 44-34-13.
§ 247-6. Amount of exemption.
Fifty percent of the value of any motor vehicle that has been specifically
adapted with a wheelchair lift for use by an individual with a disability shall
be exempt from taxation.
§ 247-7. Limitation on number of exempt vehicles.
This article shall apply to not more than one motor vehicle owned and
registered for the personal, noncommercial use of any person who has
sustained a loss, or permanent loss, of use of both legs or both arms.
§ 247-8. Applicability to registered vehicles.
In the event the person suffering said loss is unable to register said motor
vehicle, then the exemption shall apply where the motor vehicle is
registered to an immediate family member.
§ 247-5 RECYCLING § 247-8
234:257

ARTICLE III
Exemption for Elderly and Disabled Persons
[Adopted 6-14-1990, as amended 12-18-1997 and 5-16-2002 (Ch. II,
§ 8, 2-08-04, of the 1991 Code); amended in its entirety 8-17-2017]
As of August 17, 2017, the Town Council hereby adopts an exemption
schedule as outlined herein. All taxpayers receiving senior, variable, and/or
disability exemptions as of August 17, 2017, will continue to receive their
exemption, after required annual qualification, in an amount not to exceed
the exemption allowed as of December 31, 2016.
§ 247-9. Exemption granted; amount.
A. Elderly and disability exemptions. The Town Council does hereby grant
an exemption from the tax assessed on the real property situated in said
Town which is owned and occupied by owners 65 years of age or over or
under 65 years of age who are permanently disabled in an amount as
follows:
(1) Qualified owners who are 65 years of age or older, or qualified
owners that are permanently disabled: an exemption in the amount
of $2,070.
(2) Owners who are 80 years of age or older, and have owner-occupied
property for 20 years prior, shall receive an additional exemption of
$1,000.
(3) Qualified owner-occupants after August 17, 2017, regardless of
exemptions allowed on real estate, shall pay a minimum tax of $600
annually.
B. Variable income exemption: For qualified owner-occupants receiving
the variable income exemption prior to August 18, 2017: The Town
Council also exempts from taxation the real property situated in said
Town which is owned and occupied by owners with a combined adjusted
gross taxable annual household income not to exceed $27,681,
exclusive of social security benefits, at the rate applied to the qualified
owner-occupant as of December 31, 2016. The variable income
exemption does not apply to owner-occupants August 18, 2017,
forward.
C. A schedule specifying said exemptions, as may be approved annually by
the Council, shall be maintained by the Tax Assessor. The exemptions
provided for herein may be decreased or increased at the discretion of
the Town Council.
D. Said exemptions shall be prorated among the owners of said real
property and shall be in addition to any and all other exemptions from
taxation to which said owner may be otherwise entitled. Said exemption
§ 247-9 RECYCLING § 247-9
234:259
§ 247-10. Filing of application; proof of right to exemption.
shall be applied uniformly, and shall be granted upon proof of the
following:
(1) Age.
(2) Ownership and occupancy: For owner-occupants prior to August
18, 2017, they shall have resided at said property for a period of
five continuous years of the prior seven years, next to the filing of
an application for the exemption. For owner-occupants, as of
August 18, 2018, they shall have resided at said property for a
period of 10 continuous years, of the prior 12, next to the filing of
an application for the exemption.
(3) Legal domicile in said Town.
(4) Disability, which shall mean a permanent physical or mental illness
rendering the person afflicted incapable of gainful employment and
so certified by a licensed physician.
(5) Annual validation of the household income eligibility level for
owners receiving an exemption prior to August 18, 2017, with such
proof thereof as is required by the Tax Assessor to be submitted by
March 15.
E. The taxable annual income eligibility level, for owners receiving an
exemption prior to August 18, 2017, shall be adjusted annually,
beginning with taxes assessed as of December 31, 2016, in accordance
with the average percentage change calculated during the 12 months
next preceding December in the US Bureau of Labor Statistics
Northeast Consumer Price Index for all Urban Consumers (CPI-UC).
A. No person shall be entitled to any exemption herein authorized in any
year without first filing an application with the Tax Assessor on forms
furnished by the Assessor. Each application shall be sworn to by the
applicant or applicants under penalty of perjury. Proof of age,
ownership, occupancy, legal domicile, or disability shall be furnished in
the following manner:
(1) Proof of age: Age may be proved by furnishing to the Assessor
either a birth certificate, certificate of citizenship, baptismal
certificate, sworn affidavit of a third party or by such other means
as may be approved by the Assessor.
(2) Ownership: Ownership may be established by furnishing the Tax
Assessor with the date of purchase and land record citation of same
by the applicant of the residential property involved.
(3) Occupancy: Occupancy of the residential property may be proven
by incorporating such fact in the sworn application for exemption.
§ 247-9 GLOCESTER CODE § 247-10
234:260
§ 247-11. Termination of exemptions.
All exemptions shall terminate upon the conveyance of the subject property,
death of the person or persons exempted or the moving of such person or
persons from the Town of Glocester, or in the case of a disability exemption
when the physical or mental illness is terminated, or when said exempted
person(s) otherwise fail to qualify. However, notwithstanding any other
provision contained herein to the contrary, any owner of real property who
at one time was a resident of the Town but has since transferred ownership
of said property shall, after reacquiring ownership of real property, be
granted a tax exemption upon proof, in addition to that required as set
forth above, of the following: for owner-occupants prior to August 18,
2017, ownership and occupancy of said residential property, following
nonownership for a period not to exceed two years, provided said
nonownership period followed five years of continuous ownership and
occupancy in order to qualify for the tax exemption. For owner-occupants
who purchase their property as of August 18, 2017, proof of ownership and
occupancy of said residential property, following nonownership for a period
not to exceed two years, provided said nonownership period followed 10
years of continuous ownership and occupancy in order to qualify for said tax
exemptions. (If the nonownership period exceeds two years, the exemption
(4) Legal domicile: Legal domicile may be established by the
production of voter's registration certificate, or by the production
of a license to operate a motor vehicle, or a registration certificate
or by such other means as the Assessor may reasonably require.
(5) Disability: Disability may be established by providing the Tax
Assessor with a signed and notarized statement by a licensed
physician declaring the applicant disabled as defined herein.
(6) Other forms of proof: An applicant may provide proof of right of
exemption if the above specified methods are not available to him
or her by furnishing military records, passports, certificates of
citizenship, or by such other evidence of proof as may be required
by the Assessor.
(7) Proof of income eligibility, for owners receiving an exemption prior
to August 18, 2017, shall include federal and state income tax
returns and/or such other documentation as may be required by the
Assessor.
(8) Household income, for owners receiving an exemption prior to
August 18, 2017, shall include the annual gross taxable income of
any person who occupies and maintains said residence as his/her
legal domicile.
B. In the event that the applicants for exemption are co-tenants, joint
tenants or tenants by the entirety, the proof enumerated above by any
one of the applicants shall be sufficient to be entitled to the exemption.
§ 247-10 RECYCLING § 247-11
234:261
will terminate.) No exceptions shall be made regarding the time frame set
forth above.
§ 247-11 GLOCESTER CODE § 247-11
234:262
ARTICLE IV
Adjustment of Exemption Upon Reevaluation of Real Property
[Adopted 7-16-1992, effective 8-17-1992, as amended 5-16-2002
(Ch. II, § 8, 2-08-05, of the 1991 Code). Subsequent amendments
noted where applicable.]
§ 247-12. Adjustment upon reevaluation or statistical update.
The Town Council, acting through the Tax Assessor, is hereby authorized to
adjust the tax exemption for all persons entitled thereto in any year that the
Town has a real property reevaluation or statistical update.
§ 247-13. Amount of adjustment.
Any adjustment of the tax exemption for persons entitled thereto shall be
made to reflect at least the same monetary savings that appeared on the
property tax bill that existed for the year prior to reevaluation or statistical
update of such real property. Any adjustment of the tax exemption for
persons entitled thereto hereunder shall be in increments of $1,000 and
shall be rounded up to the nearest thousand dollars.
§ 247-14. Certification of adjustment.
After any adjustment of exemption upon reevaluation or statistical update
pursuant to the authorization conferred by §§ 247-12 and 247-13 of this
article, the Town Council shall have a certificate setting forth the amount of
such adjustments prepared by the Tax Assessor and presented to it.
§ 247-15. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Town Council through
the Tax Assessor.
§ 247-16. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately prior to the issuance of tax bills by
the Tax Assessor in 1992.
§ 247-12 RECYCLING § 247-16
234:263

ARTICLE V
Exemption for Retail Inventory
[Adopted 8-21-1997, effective 9-18-1997 (Ch. II, § 8, 2-08-06, of the
1991 Code)]
§ 247-17. Authority; exemption granted.
Pursuant to authority granted to the Town of Glocester by R.I.G.L. § 44-3-40,
the Town hereby exempts the stock-in-trade or inventory of retailers located
within the Town, subject to the following terms and conditions.
§ 247-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INVENTORY or STOCK-IN-TRADE — Includes the merchandise kept on
hand for sale in the normal and regular course of retail business.
RETAILER — Includes a person, partnership, corporation, or other business
entity engaged in the business of selling goods at retail.
§ 247-19. Application.
§ 247-20. Notification of grant of exemption.
Upon receipt of a signed application, in accordance with § 247-19,
accompanied by a copy of a paid tax bill, or a certification from the Tax
Collector that all taxes due on the tangible personal property and on the
real estate where the inventory is located are current, the Tax Assessor shall
notify the applicant that the exemption has been granted.
A. An applicant seeking a tax exemption on inventory shall file an
application with the Tax Assessor of the Town of Glocester. The
application shall be on a form furnished by the Tax Assessor.
B. The form shall contain as a minimum the following information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant;
(2) The location where the inventory is located within the Town of
Glocester, including the lot and plat;
(3) The value of the inventory as of December 31 in the year
immediately preceding the year in which the exemption is
requested;
(4) The nature of the inventory for which the exemption is being
requested; and
(5) The application shall be signed by the applicant.
§ 247-17 RECYCLING § 247-21
234:265
§ 247-21. Duration of exemption; renewal.
Initial grants of exemption from taxation shall be for a period of 10 years.
An applicant may apply for subsequent grants of exemption from taxation in
accordance with the procedure set forth in the initial application.
§ 247-22. Annual report.
Taxpayers receiving an exemption shall annually, prior to March 15, file a
report with the Tax Assessor listing the value of all inventory and tangible
personal property located within the Town of Glocester as of the previous
December 31. Contemporaneously with filing the annual report, the
taxpayer shall file either a copy of a paid tax bill for the tangible personal
property and real estate where the inventory is located or a certificate
from the Tax Collector that all taxes are current. Failure to file a timely
report, or proof that tangible and real estate taxes are current, may result
in revocation of the exemption.
§ 247-23. Effect of delinquent taxes on real property.
Delinquency in the payment of taxes on the real estate where the inventory
is located shall not necessarily deprive a retailer, who is not responsible for
the payment of real estate tax, of the exemption provided herein.
§ 247-24. Revocation of exemption.
Upon notification to the Town Council by the Tax Assessor that a taxpayer
previously granted an exemption has failed to comply with the terms of this
article, the Town Council may, upon notice to the taxpayer, hold a showcause
hearing and terminate the exemption.
§ 247-25. Annual report by Tax Assessor.
The Tax Assessor shall annually, in the month of August, report to the Town
Council the amount of property exempted pursuant to the terms of this
article.
§ 247-21 GLOCESTER CODE § 247-25
234:266
ARTICLE VI
Exemption for Wholesale Inventory
[Adopted 8-18-1994, effective 9-5-1994 (Ch. II, § 8, 2-08-07, of the
1991 Code)]
§ 247-26. Exemption granted; term; authority.
The Council of the Town of Glocester, County of Providence, State of Rhode
Island, hereby exempts from taxation and/or freezes the valuation of stockin-
trade or inventory of wholesalers for a period of 25 years pursuant to the
limitations and restrictions of R.I.G.L. § 44-3-29.
§ 247-26 RECYCLING § 247-26
234:267

ARTICLE VII
Wholesale and Retail Inventory Tax Phase Out
[Adopted 6-10-1999, effective 6-10-1999 (Ch. II, § 8, 2-08-08, of the
1991 Code)]
§ 247-27. Authority to implement.
The Tax Assessor is hereby authorized to phase out, over a ten-year period,
the stock-in-trade or inventory tax of wholesalers and retailers. The rate
schedule to be implemented by the Tax Assessor is set forth in § 247-29 of
this article.
§ 247-28. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INVENTORY —
RETAILER — Shall have the same meaning as defined in R.I.G.L. § 44-3-40.
STOCK-IN-TRADE —
WHOLESALER — Shall have the same meaning as defined in R.I.G.L.
§ 44-3-29.
§ 247-29. Phase-out rate schedule.
The rate schedule for the ten-year phase out of the wholesale and retail
inventory tax shall be as follows:
Year Maximum Tax Rate
FY 1999 Present tax rate
FY 2000 Ninety percent (90%) of FY 1999 rate
FY 2001 80% of FY 1999 rate
FY 2002 70% of FY 1999 rate
FY 2003 60% of FY 1999 rate
FY 2004 50% of FY 1999 rate
FY 2005 40% of FY 1999 rate
As it refers to wholesalers, shall have the same meaning as defined in
R.I.G.L. § 44-3-29.
A.
As it refers to retailers, shall have the same meaning as defined in
R.I.G.L. § 44-3-40.
B.
As it refers to wholesalers, shall have the same meaning as defined in
R.I.G.L. § 44-3-29.
A.
As it refers to retailers, shall have the same meaning as defined in
R.I.G.L. § 44-3-40.
B.
§ 247-27 RECYCLING § 247-29
234:269
Year Maximum Tax Rate
FY 2006 30% of FY 1999 rate
FY 2007 20% of FY 1999 rate
FY 2008 10% of FY 1999 rate
FY 2009 No tax
§ 247-30. Sales both at retail and wholesale.
In the event that a wholesaler sold inventory or stock-in-trade both at
wholesale and retail in the preceding calendar year, the Tax Assessor shall
assess on the same basis as a retailer's inventory or stock-in-trade as
of December 31 of that year, to the extent permitted by applicable law,
notwithstanding any freeze of assessed valuation or exemption permitted
pursuant to R.I.G.L. § 44-5-12(c), that proportion of inventory or stock-intrade
of the wholesaler which shall be equal to the percentage of the
wholesaler's total sales during the preceding calendar year that were at
retail. For the purposes of this section, sales at retail shall not include sales
to employees of the wholesaler or to employees of its affiliates. If retail sales
are less than 1% of total sales during the year, it shall be deemed that no
sales were made at retail during the year. All sales of a wholesaler to a
customer which is an affiliated entity shall be deemed to be retail sales for
the purposes of this section if more than half the dollar volume of the sales
of the affiliated entity is made within the Town of Glocester. For purposes of
this section, a wholesaler shall be considered affiliated with customers if it
controls, or is under common control with, the customers.
§ 247-31. Sellers commencing operation after 1999.
In the event that a wholesaler or retailer subject to the inventory tax
commences operations within the Town of Glocester after fiscal year 1999,
the Tax Assessor shall determine what would have been the value of the
inventory as of December 1998, adjusting the inventory value to fiscal year
1999 using the changes in the Consumer Price Index - All Urban Consumers
(CPI-UC) published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States
Department of Labor.
§ 247-32. Applicability to automobile dealers.
This article shall also apply to automobile dealers as defined in R.I.G.L.
§ 31-5-5.
§ 247-29 GLOCESTER CODE § 247-32
234:270
ARTICLE VIII
Waiver of Interest on Overdue Tax Payments
[Adopted 6-20-2002, effective 7-16-2002 (Ch. II, § 8, 2-08-09, of the
1991 Code)]
§ 247-33. Authority.
R.I.G.L. § 44-5-8.1 authorizes towns to adopt an ordinance waiving the
interest on overdue quarterly tax payments.
§ 247-34. Conditions for waiver; limitation on waiver.
§ 247-35. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon passage by the Town Council and shall
be applicable to taxes assessed as of December 31, 2001, and to each
December 31st thereafter.
A. The Tax Collector is hereby authorized to waive the interest on one
quarter's overdue property tax payment and to allow the remaining
balance to be paid on a quarterly basis, provided the taxpayer can
demonstrate with such evidence as may be required by the Town that
the failure to make such payment in a timely fashion was prevented by
circumstances, other than financial incapacity, beyond the control of
the taxpayer such as illness or death and if all of the following
conditions are satisfied by the taxpayer:
(1) The property subject to the overdue payment is the residence of the
taxpayer and has been for the five years immediately preceding the
tax payment which is overdue.
(2) The request for a waiver of interest is in writing, signed and dated
by the taxpayer.
(3) The taxpayer has made timely tax payments to the Town for five
years immediately preceding the tax payment which is overdue.
The burden of proof of timely payments shall be on the taxpayer.
(4) The bill for which the payment was overdue was issued less than
two years prior to the date of the request for a waiver of interest.
B. In no event shall the waiver of interest on a tax bill exceed $500.
Decisions of the Tax Collector shall be in writing and contain a notice to
the Town Council. If the taxpayer receives an adverse ruling from the
Tax Collector, the taxpayer must pay the interest and may file a claim
for reimbursement with the Town Council within 10 days of the
decision.
C. Acceptable evidence shall include, but is not limited to the following:
obituary (death of a family member), doctor's note or proof of
hospitalization.
§ 247-33 RECYCLING § 247-35
234:271

ARTICLE IX
Classification Plan for Taxable Property
[Adopted 6-20-2002, effective 7-16-2002 (Ch. II, § 8, 2-08-10, of the
1991 Code)]
§ 247-36. Authority.
R.I.G.L. § 44-5-11.8 authorizes towns to adopt a tax classification plan by
ordinance; and the Town Council desires to adopt a tax classification plan in
accordance with R.I.G.L. § 44-5-11.8.
§ 247-37. Classes of property.
All ratable property in the Town of Glocester shall be classified by the
Assessor as follows:
§ 247-38. Tax rates.
§ 247-39. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon passage by the Town Council and shall
be applicable to taxes assessed as of December 31, 2001, and to each
December 31st thereafter.
A. Class 1: Residential real estate consisting of no more than five dwelling
units, land classified as open space, and dwellings on leased land,
including mobile homes.
B. Class 2: Commercial and industrial real estate, residential properties
containing partial commercial or business uses and residential real
estate of more than five dwelling units.
C. Class 3: All ratable tangible personal property.
D. Class 4: Motor vehicles and trailers subject to the excise tax created by
Chapter 34 of Title 44 of the General Laws.
A. The tax rates applicable to wholesale and retail inventory within Class 3
shall be governed by R.I.G.L. § 44-3-29.1. The tax rates applicable to
motor vehicles within Class 4 shall be governed by R.I.G.L. § 44-34.1-1.
B. The Assessor shall, on or about June 1 of each year, make a full and fair
cash valuation of all ratable property and determine the assessed
valuation of each property class. The Assessor shall apply a rate of
taxation against Class 3 property, as approved by the Town Council,
which differs from the rate of taxation applied against property in
Classes 1 and 2.
C. The tax rate applied against Class 3 property assessed as of December
31, 2001, shall be $27 per thousand, and said rate shall thereafter be
set annually in accordance with R.I.G.L. § 44-5-11.8 and this article.
§ 247-36 RECYCLING § 247-39
234:273

ARTICLE X
Prisoner of War Tax Exemption
[Adopted 1-5-2006, effective 1-5-2006]
§ 247-40. Authority.
Pursuant to R.I.G.L. § 44-3-4(e), the Town of Glocester hereby provides an
exemption from local taxation on real and personal property for any veteran
of military or naval service of the United States or the unmarried widow or
widower of a person who has been or shall be classified as, or determined
to be, a prisoner of war by the Veterans' Administration of the United States
as follows.
§ 247-41. Amount of exemption; eligibility dates; status.
There may be an ordinance passed in the city or town where the person's
property is assessed as follows:
§ 247-42. When effective; applicability.
This article shall take effect upon passage by the Town Council and shall
be applicable to taxes assessed as of December 31, 2005, and to each
December 31st thereafter.
A. This exemption shall be in the amount of an exemption of $15,000.
B. The eligibility dates shall be as stated in R.I.G.L. § 44-3-4(a)(1).
C. Documentation of prisoner of war status shall be filed in the office of the
Tax Assessor.
§ 247-40 RECYCLING § 247-42
234:275

ARTICLE XI
Renewable Energy Tax and Exemption
[Adopted 8-6-2015, effective 8-6-2015; amended in its entirety
12-7-2017, effective 12-7-2017]
§ 247-43. Taxation and exemption for renewable energy systems.
A. Findings.
(1) Pursuant to R.I.G.L. § 44-3-3(a)(48) and (49), certain residential
and manufacturing properties that install renewable energy
systems are exempt from local taxation.
(2) Pursuant to R.I.G.L. § 44-5-3(c) through (e), commercial renewable
energy systems shall be subject to a tangible tax payment to the
municipality through rules and regulations that have been adopted
by the Rhode Island Office of Energy Resources for all commercial
renewable energy systems.
(3) Pursuant to R.I.G.L. § 44-3-21, city or town councils of the various
cities and towns may, by ordinance, exempt from taxation any
renewable energy system located in the city or town.
B. Action.
(1) In accordance with R.I.G.L. § 44-5-3(c), the Town of Glocester
hereby authorizes its assessor to levy a tax on renewable energy
tangible property as defined in R.I.G.L. § 39-26-5 in accordance
with the rules and regulations executed by the Rhode Island Office
of Energy Resources.
(2) In accordance with R.I.G.L. § 44-3-21, the Town of Glocester hereby
exempts from taxation commercial net-metered renewable energy
systems whose sole purpose is to offset electricity bills and not to
sell power back to the electric distribution system.
(3) Property owners installing renewable energy systems shall be
required to provide the interconnection application between the
renewable energy developer and the electric distribution company
(National Grid or Pascoag Utility) and any documentation of
program enrollment (e.g., renewable energy growth or net
metering enrollment forms) to the Town, indicating if the
renewable energy system is net-metered or if the system is selling a
portion or all of the energy produced back to National Grid under
the Renewable Energy Growth Program.
(4) A copy of the final interconnection service agreement executed
between the renewable energy developer and electric distribution
company shall be provided to the Town prior to construction of the
renewable energy system.
§ 247-43 RECYCLING § 247-43
234:277
C. Effective. This article shall take effect upon passage by the Town
Council.
§ 247-43 GLOCESTER CODE § 247-43
234:278
Chapter 251
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Earth removal — See Ch. 166.
Excavations, holes and wells — See Ch. 181.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 221.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 300.
§ 251-1. Purpose.
§ 251-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Glocester Tree
Ordinance."
§ 251-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivatives shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
A. This chapter regulates the protection, maintenance, removal and
planting of trees in the public right-of-way, parks, and all public
property within the Town of Glocester and on private property
endangering the public and/or public property, establishing the
Glocester Tree Board which, together with the Town Tree Warden, shall
recommend for Town Council approval the establishment of regulations
relating to the protection, maintenance, removal, and planting of trees
in the above-mentioned public and private places, providing for the
maintenance or removal of trees on private property when the public
safety is endangered and prescribing penalties for violations of its
provisions, as amended. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all
property within the Town of Glocester.
B. This chapter will serve to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of Glocester by regulating tree management activities.
C. The protection of this valuable natural resource will serve to enhance
the community in the following ways:
(1) Aid in the prevention of air, noise and visual pollution.
(2) Aid in the stabilization of soil.
(3) Enhance property values.
(4) Provide glare and heat protection.
(5) Enhance the aesthetics and general quality of life of the Town.
§ 247-43 TREES § 251-3
251:279
future and words in singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
APPLICANT — A person who is applying for a license or permits required
by this chapter.
APPROVAL — Written assent from the Glocester Town Tree Warden
pursuant to a duly executed application for approval made on a form
promulgated by the Town of Glocester.
DBH — Diameter at breast height, at 4.5 feet (1.37 m) from the ground
level.
PARKS — Includes any Town public spaces designated for recreation and/or
conservation.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or organization of any kind, including public utilities and Town
departments.
PROPERTY LINE — The boundary between private and Town-owned land.
PROPERTY OWNER — The person owning such property as shown by the
records of the Recorded Deeds of the Town of Glocester.
PUBLIC PLACE — Includes any other ground owned by the Town.
PUBLIC TREES — Includes all trees now or hereafter growing on any street,
park, or any other public place.
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width of every public way or right-ofway
when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of
right, for purposes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
TOWN TREE WARDEN — The Municipal Arborist, Town Tree Warden,
Landscape Architect, Director, Division of Grounds Maintenance Services,
Supervisor, Community Forestry Operations, or other qualified designated
official of the Town assigned to carry out the enforcement of this chapter.
TREE — Any living, self-supporting woody plant that has a well-defined
stem(s) with a caliper of at least 1 1/2 inches (3.81 cm) at DBH at 4.5 feet
(1.37 m) from the ground level and capable of reaching a height greater
than 16 feet.
TREE LAWN — That part of a street or highway not covered by sidewalk or
other paving, lying between the property line and that portion of the street
or highway usually used for vehicular traffic.
TREE REMOVAL — Includes any act that will cause a tree to die within a
three-year period.
TREE WELL — Opening in the ground area surrounding the base of the tree
trunk not covered by sidewalk and paving.
§ 251-4. Tree Board.
A. The Glocester Tree Board, hereinafter referenced to as the "Board,"
shall be the Glocester Conservation Commission and shall act in an
§ 251-3 GLOCESTER CODE § 251-4
251:280
§ 251-5. Tree Warden.
advisory role to the Tree Warden over all forestry functions, including
the planting, care and removal of trees, shrubs and other plants on
the properties for which it is responsible. It shall do all acts necessary
and develop tree planting specifications and tree care guidelines to
insure the proper care, management, improvement, maintenance and
protection of the public parks and street trees under its jurisdiction.
B. The duties of said Board shall be interpreted to include, but not be
limited to, an advisory role to the Tree Warden on the protection,
maintenance, removal, and planting of trees on public property, and to
make such recommendations from time to time to the Town Tree
Warden to desirable regulations concerning the tree program and
activities for the Town.
A. Appointment and qualifications of the Town Tree Warden. The Town
Tree Warden shall be appointed by the Glocester Town Council. Said
person shall have training and experience in arboriculture, and shall
have passed the Rhode Island Arborist exam.41
B. Duties of the Town Tree Warden.
(1) The Town Tree Warden shall affirm and endorse the purpose and
intent of this chapter and shall cause the provisions of this chapter
to be enforced.
(2) The Town Tree Warden may, with the advice of the Glocester Tree
Board and the approval of the Glocester Town Council, prepare and
enact a Systematized Tree Management and Annual Tree Planting
Program for the Town of Glocester, which may be prepared as an
integral part of a Master Systematized Tree Management and Tree
Planting Plan.
(3) The Town Tree Warden is further charged with keeping informed of
environmental and technical changes that could affect the Town's
public and protected trees.
(4) It shall also be the duty of the Tree Warden, with the assistance of
the Tree Board, to implement such rules, regulations, and permit
and penalty procedures as are deemed necessary to carry out the
intent and enforcement of this chapter.
(5) The Town Tree Warden shall communicate and work with all civic
and public interest groups interested in or devoted to tree care,
preservation or planting.
C. Authority of the Town Tree Warden.
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 251-4 TREES § 251-5
251:281
§ 251-6. Standards for pruning trees.
It shall be the duty of person(s) owning or occupying real property
bordering on any public street or thoroughfare, upon which property there
may be trees, to prune in such manner that they will not obstruct or shade
street lights, obstruct the passage of pedestrians on sidewalks, obstruct
vision of traffic signs or obstruct the view of any street or intersection
so as to pose a threat to pedestrian or vehicular safety. The minimum
clearance of any overhanging portion thereof shall be eight feet (2.44 m)
over sidewalks, and 12 feet (3.65 m) over all streets and thoroughfares and/
or at the discretion of the Town Tree Warden;
§ 251-7. Protection of public trees.
(1) The Town Tree Warden shall have the authority and jurisdiction of
regulating and enacting the maintenance, removal, and planting of
public and protected trees to insure public safety, preserving the
aesthetics of public sites with regard to trees, and protecting the
value and health of Glocester's community forest as a whole.
(2) The Town Tree Warden shall consider the existing and future utility
and environmental factors when recommending a specific species
for each of the streets and other public sites and when issuing
permits for tree work, removal, or planting.
(3) The Town Tree Warden shall have the responsibility of regularly
updating the Master Systematized Tree Management and Planting
Program.
(4) The Town Tree Warden shall have the authority to review all
requests for permits for any planting, removal, pruning, and/or
trimming or cutting of trees in any public area, with the exception
of an historic or protected tree. He shall also have the authority to
grant or deny and to attach reasonable conditions to all permits
with the exception of those specifically exempted herein.
(5) The Town Tree Warden shall enforce such rules, regulations and
permit and penalty procedures as are deemed necessary to enforce
the intent of this chapter.
D. Authority of the Town Tree Warden to remove and trim trees
endangering the public and/or public property. The authority of the
Tree Warden to enter upon private property to deal with trees
endangering the public and/or public property is set forth generally in
R.I.G.L. § 2-14, Tree Wardens, and in particular in R.I.G.L. §§ 2-14-5,
2-14-8, 2-14-9, and 2-14-10.
A. During development, redevelopment, razing or renovating, no trees
shall be cut, damaged or removed except by specified permit. All trees
removed, destroyed, or severely damaged shall be replaced as specified
in the permit at the expense of the permittee. The total caliper of all
§ 251-5 GLOCESTER CODE § 251-7
251:282
§ 251-8. Planting of trees upon public property.
trees planted in the course of restoration shall in no event be less than
the total DBH of all trees removed. Replacement shall be made with
two-and-one-half- to four-inch-caliper trees and/or as directed by the
Town Tree Warden. If sufficient tree planting locations are unavailable
within the contract area, the replacement trees shall be planted within
the Town as determined by the Town Tree Board.
B. All trees within 30 feet (9.1 m) of any excavation or construction of any
building, structure, or street work shall be guarded through the length
of the project with a good substantial fence, frame, or box not less than
four feet (1.2 m) high and eight feet (2.4 m) square, or equivalent. All
equipment, building materials, chemicals, dirt, or other debris shall be
kept outside the barrier at all times. Road maintenance, reconstruction,
and resurfacing done by or under the direction of the Glocester
Department of Public Works are excluded.
C. No person shall intentionally damage, cut, carve or transplant any tree;
attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters, or other contrivance to
any tree; allow any gaseous, liquid, chemical, or solid substance that is
harmful to such trees to come in contact with them; or set fire or permit
any fire to burn when such fire or the heat thereof will injure any
portion of any tree without first obtaining a written permit from the
Town Tree Warden.
D. No person shall deposit, place, store, or maintain any stone, brick, sand,
fill dirt, concrete, or other materials that may impede the free passage
of water, air, and fertilizer to the roots of any tree growing therein,
except by written permit of the Town Tree Board. Road maintenance,
reconstruction, and resurfacing done by or under the direction of the
Glocester Department of Public Works are excluded.
E. No person shall preclude the percolation of water or nutrients and
gaseous exchange vital to a tree's survival by the placing any
impervious materials (asphalt, macadam, and concrete) within the
confines of the tree well opening. Road maintenance, reconstruction,
and resurfacing done by or under the direction of the Glocester
Department of Public Works are excluded.
A. Any person desiring to plant a tree upon any public street or public
place must first obtain a permit from the Town Tree Board. Any permit
shall be granted to a date certain and shall include consideration of
appropriateness of species, location, size, and public safety.
B. Should the planting(s) be performed by persons other than the Town
Tree Warden or his agents, the proposed method and workmanship for
planting as prescribed by the Town Tree Warden shall be adhered to.
C. A planting plan is required where more than six trees are to be planted.
§ 251-7 TREES § 251-8
251:283
§ 251-9. Emergencies.
The requirements of this chapter may be waived by the Town in the case
of emergencies as declared by the Town Council, Public Works Director or
Safety Committee, such as windstorms, ice storms, or other disasters, so
that they, in no way, shall hinder private or public work to restore order in
the Town. This work shall follow maintenance standards as outlined by the
Town Tree Board.
§ 251-10. Moving large objects.
No person shall move any building or any other large object that may injure
public or protected trees or parts thereof, without first obtaining the written
approval of the Town Tree Board and abiding by its requirements.
§ 251-11. Permits required.
(1) Any person desiring to plant more than six trees on public streets
or on public places shall, in addition to applying for a permit,
submit a plan or written statement in duplicate to the Town Tree
Board, which shall return one copy to the applicant and keep one
copy on file with the Town. The Town Tree Warden shall consult
with the Glocester Tree Board prior to issuing a permit to plant.
(2) All planting plans shall show accurately:
(a) The proposed park or public place site, or proposed street
width, with any curbs, parking strips, driveways, sidewalks and
adjacent structures defined to scale;
(b) The proposed location of each proposed tree, together with the
location of each existing tree within the proposed site in scaled
relation to the other features of the plan;
(c) The species of each and every tree proposed to be planted and
of these already existing within the proposed site, either
indicated on the plans or referenced with a number with a key
list.
A. A permit shall be a written document that authorizes the bearer thereof
to perform the proposed work as outlined on such permit. The permit
shall be issued only by the Town Tree Warden or his/her representative.
B. A permit shall be obtained by filling out an application. Upon approving
the application, the Town Tree Warden or his/her representative shall
issue said permit.
C. A permit shall be required for planting, spraying, pruning, cutting
above ground, removing, or otherwise disturbing any public tree on any
street, park or other public place. Road maintenance, reconstruction,
and resurfacing done by or under the direction of the Glocester
Department of Public Works are excluded.
§ 251-8 GLOCESTER CODE § 251-11
251:284
D. The Town Tree Warden shall issue any permit provided for herein if the
proposed method and workmanship shall be of a satisfactory nature and
the project shall be consistent with this chapter. Any permit granted
shall contain a definite date of expiration and the work shall be
completed in the time allowed in the permit and in the manner as
therein described. Any permit shall be void if its terms are violated.
E. The Town Tree Board shall be notified by the bearer of said permit upon
satisfactory completion of designated work.
F. Plantings.
(1) The application required herein shall state the number of trees to
be set out or planted on public places, the location, grade, species,
cultivar or variety of each tree, the method of planting, and such
other information as the Town Tree Warden shall find reasonably
necessary to a fair determination of whether a permit should be
issued.
(2) The Town Tree Warden shall have the right to make the final
determination as to location, species, cultivar or variety of each
tree and the method of planting before issuing said permit.
G. Maintenance. The application required herein shall state the number
and kinds of trees to be sprayed, fertilized, pruned, or otherwise
preserved; the kind of treatment to be administered; the composition of
the spray material to be applied; and such other information as the
Town Tree Warden shall find reasonably necessary to a fair
determination of whether a permit should be issued.
H. Removal, replanting and replacement.
(1) Wherever it is necessary to remove a tree in connection with the
paving of a sidewalk, or the widening of the portion of a street or
highway, the Town shall require the party responsible for the
paving or widening to replant the tree or replace it as deemed
necessary by the Town Tree Board. This requirement will be
satisfied if an equivalent number of trees of the same size and
species as provided in the Arboricultural Specifications and
Standards of Practice are planted within the Town.
(2) No person shall remove a public tree for the purpose of
construction or any other reason, without first filing an application
and procuring a permit from the Town Tree Warden. The Town Tree
Warden may require replacement of a removed tree as a condition
to the issuance of a permit. Such replacement shall meet the
standards of size, species and placement as provided for in a permit
issued by the Town Tree Warden. The person or property owner
shall bear the cost of removal and replacement of all trees
removed.
§ 251-11 TREES § 251-12
251:285
§ 251-12. Registration of tree experts.
To protect the public, the Town shall require any person who removes or
maintains trees on public property as a business to be:
§ 251-13. Interference with Tree Warden.
No person shall hinder, prevent, delay or interfere with the Town Tree
Warden or any of his assistants while engaged in carrying out the
implementation of this chapter; provided, however, that nothing herein shall
be construed as an attempt to prohibit the pursuit of any remedy, legal
or equitable, in any court of competent jurisdiction for the protection of
property rights by the owner of any property within the Town.
§ 251-14. Appeals.
A. Properly licensed to perform such work.
B. Certified by State of Rhode Island or any other agency that regulates
arboricultural practices.
C. Covered by Workers' Compensation to the extent required by Rhode
Island law and Public liability and personal property insurance in
minimum amounts hereinafter mentioned adequate to cover and save
harmless the Town of Glocester and its agents from all suits, claims, or
actions of every class and nature for or on persons, or property damage
caused or claimed to be caused, directly or indirectly, by the conduct of
the work contemplated, or by acts of strangers, or any conditions due to
the elements or any defects or insufficiencies in any method, material,
ways, machinery, equipment or apparatus used in connection with the
work. Public liability insurance with limits of not less than $500,000
shall be carried.
D. Bonded.
E. Insured (medical).
A. Appeals of the Tree Board's findings may be appealed to the Town Tree
Warden.
B. Any adjustment of the standards required by this chapter or an appeal
of a decision of the Town Tree Board shall be taken to the Town Tree
Warden. The Tree Warden, upon receipt of such request, on forms
provided by the Town Tree Warden, shall have the authority and duty to
consider an act upon the request. This application shall clearly and in
detail state what adjustments or requirements are being requested,
reasons such adjustments or requirements are being requested,
reasons such adjustments are warranted, and shall be accompanied by
such supplementary data as is deemed necessary to substantiate the
adjustment. The Town Tree Warden may approve, modify, or deny the
requested adjustment, based upon protection of public interest,
§ 251-12 GLOCESTER CODE § 251-14
251:286
§ 251-15. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 258
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Camping and travel trailer parks — See Ch.
151.
Hawkers and peddlers — See Ch. 190.
Mobile homes and house trailers — See Ch.
212.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 221.
Parking and storage of vehicles — See Ch.
263.
preservation of the intent of this chapter, and possible unreasonable
and unnecessary hardships involved in the case.
C. The Board shall act on the application as expeditiously as possible and
shall notify the applicant in writing within five days of the action taken.
A. Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be subject to court action and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be subject to a fine of up to $1,000 and/or the value of the
trees removed or damaged. In addition, the person shall replace the
tree and/or repair damage with a size and species permitted by the
Town Tree Warden.
B. Each tree affected by noncompliance with this chapter shall constitute
a separate violation.
C. Violation of the chapter shall be the basis of withholding a final
inspection permit until such violation is corrected to the satisfaction of
the Town Tree Warden and/or Tree Board.
§ 251-14 TREES § 251-15
251:287

ARTICLE I
Stop Intersections
[Adopted 1-10-1975, as amended 2-18-1993 (Ch. II, § 7, 2-07-01, of
the 1991 Code). Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 258-1. Obedience to stop signs.
The driver of a vehicle shall stop in obedience to a stop sign at the
intersections set forth below, where a stop sign is erected at one or more
entrances thereto although not a part of a through highway and shall
proceed cautiously, yielding to vehicles not so obliged to stop, which are
within the intersection or approaching so as to constitute an immediate
hazard, but may then proceed.
§ 258-2. Designation of stop intersections.
The intersections set forth herein are hereby designated as stop
intersections, and vehicles traveling in the direction specified on the road
specified shall come to a full stop before proceeding:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel At Intersection Of
Absalona Hill Road East Cooper Road
Birch Road North Spring Grove Road
Chestnut Oak Road South Tourtellot Hill Road
Dexter Saunders
Road
— First entrance road to
Ponaganset High School and
second entrance road to
Ponaganset High School at the
intersection with Anan Wade
Road
Farnum Road North and south Cooper Road
Farnum Road North Evans Road
Francis Road North and south Jeffrey Drive
Glen Drive North Spring Grove Road
Jackson Schoolhouse
Road [Added
10-21-2010,
effective
12-22-2010]
North and south Salisbury Road
Long Entry Road South Cooper Road
Salisbury Road
[Added 10-21-2010,
effective
12-22-2010]
West Jackson Schoolhouse Road
§ 258-1 TREES § 258-2
251:289
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel At Intersection Of
Wilmarth Road North Chestnut Hill Road
§ 258-3. Violations and penalties.
Every person convicted of a violation of this article, either § 258-1 or
258-2 hereof, may be punished by fine not exceeding in amount $500
or imprisonment not exceeding one year, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
§ 258-2 GLOCESTER CODE § 258-3
251:290
ARTICLE II
Parking
[Adopted 6-27-1938, as amended 9-10-1976, 10-9-1980, 12-15-1983
and 7-17-1997 (Ch. II, § 7, 2-07-03, of the 1991 Code). Subsequent
amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 258-4. Parking restrictions.
§ 258-5. Overnight parking on Town-owned property. [Added
10-15-2015, effective 10-15-201542]
A. No person shall park or cause to be parked any motor vehicle or other
vehicle on the following portions of the following locations:
Name of Street Side Location
Chestnut Hill
Road
South Between Wilmarth Road and the Sand
Dam
George Allen
Road
— Within 600 feet in either direction from
the water gate at the Ponaganset Dam
Spring Grove
Road
— 500 feet in either direction from the
water gate at the dame of Spring Grove
Pond
Winsor Road East Within 300 feet of the entrance to Winsor
Park
B. Any vehicle parked in violation of this section shall be towed upon the
order of the Police Department and will be released to its owner only
upon payment of the applicable towing charges.
A. There shall be no overnight parking on Town-owned property unless
permission is obtained from the Town Council.
B. Any vehicle parked in violation of this section may be towed and/or shall
incur a fine of $50 for the first offense, $100 for the second offense,
$500 for the third offense and daily for each day thereafter.
C. Any vehicle parked in violation of this section may be towed upon the
order of the Police Department and will be released to its owner only
upon payment of the applicable towing charges.
42.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former § 258-5.
Violations and penalties, as § 258-4B.
§ 258-4 TREES § 258-5
251:291

ARTICLE III
Speed Limits
[Adopted 1-10-1975, as amended 2-11-1988 (Ch. II, § 7, 2-07-06, of
the 1991 Code). Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 258-6. Reasonable and prudent speeds.
No person shall drive a vehicle on the herein designated highways, roads,
lanes, drives, terraces, and streets at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential
hazards then existing. In any event, speed shall be so controlled as may be
necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle, or other conveyance,
on or entering the highway in compliance with legal requirements and the
duty of all persons to use due care.
§ 258-7. Speed limits established.
Where no special hazard exists that require lower speed for compliance
with § 258-6 hereof, the speed of any vehicle not in excess of the limits
specified in this section (on highways, roads, lanes, drives, terraces and
streets designated below) shall be lawful, but any speed in excess of the
limits specified in this section shall be prima facie evidence that the speed
is not reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful on the highways, roads,
lanes, drives, terraces and streets designated below:
Name of Street Speed Limit
(mph)
Absalona Hill Road 25
Aldrich Road 25
Blackinton Road 20
Briarwood Road 20
Brook Hill Road 20
Bungy Road 25
Chestnut Hill Road 25
Chestnut Oak Road 25
Colwell Road 25
Cooper Road 25
Cranberry Ridge Road 25
Curry Road 15
Dexter Saunders Road 25
Dickson Lane 15
Dorr Drive 15
Douglas Hook Road 25
§ 258-6 TREES § 258-7
251:293
Name of Street Speed Limit
(mph)
Durfee Hill Road 25
Echo Road 20
Eddy Road 15
Edgewood Drive 15
Elbow Rock Road 15
Eleanor Street 15
Elmdale Road 25
Elmwood Terrace 15
Ernest Street 15
Evans Road 25
Farnum Road 25
First Street 15
Francis Road 20
Gazza Road 20
George Allen Road 25
Glen Drive 15
Grist Mill Road 15
Hazelwood Drive 20
Highland Road 15
Huntinghouse Road 25
Jackson Schoolhouse Road 25
Jeffrey Road 20
Joe Sarle Road 25
Joe Sweet Road 20
Keach Dam Road 25
Killingly Road 20
Lake Drive 20
Lake Shore Drive 20
Lee Street 15
Long Entry Road 25
Loop Road 20
Maplewoods Drive 20
Middle Road 15
Oakview Terrace 20
§ 258-7 GLOCESTER CODE § 258-7
251:294
Name of Street Speed Limit
(mph)
Oil Mill Lane 15
Olney Keach Terrace 20
Paris Irons Road 25
Pinecrest Drive 20
Pine Orchard Road 25
Pine Road 15
Potter's Lane 15
Pound Road 25
Pray Hill Road 25
Pulaski Road 25
Putnam Heights Road 25
Quarry Road 25
Ramble Road 20
Robin Vale Drive 20
Rosewood Drive 20
Rube Keach Road 20
Salisbury Road 15
Sand Dam Road 15
Sandy Brook Road 25
Second Street 15
Shore Drive 15
Sidney Winsor Road 25
Snake Hill Road 25
Sprague Hill Road 15
Spring Grove Road 25
Spruce Ridge Drive 25
Steere Road 15
Sterling Drive 20
Stone Dam Road 20
Tanyard Lane 15
Tarklin Road 15
Tourtellot Hill Road 25
Valley Road 15
Whipple Road 20
§ 258-7 TREES § 258-7
251:295
Name of Street Speed Limit
(mph)
Widow Smith Road 15
Willie Woodhead Road 15
Will Sherman Road 15
Wilmarth Road 15
§ 258-8. Violations and penalties.
Every person convicted of a violation of this article, either § 258-6 or
258-7 hereof, may be punished by fine not exceeding in amount $500
or imprisonment not exceeding one year, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
§ 258-7 GLOCESTER CODE § 258-8
251:296
ARTICLE IV
Snow Emergencies
[Adopted 11-12-1976 (Ch. II, § 7, 2-07-05, of the 1991 Code)]
§ 258-9. Purpose.
It is hereby declared to be in the public welfare, interest and safety that
in order to insure the delivery of food and fuel to enable fire apparatus to
reach all areas of the Town, it is necessary that during and after a snow
storm all Town roads in the Town be made passable. In order to facilitate
the plowing of such roads, it may be necessary for the Police Department
or Highway Department of the Town remove vehicles interfering with the
plowing of such roads.
§ 258-10. Snow routes.
All Town roads shall be considered snow routes for the purposes of this
article during the period from November 30 through April 1, inclusive.
§ 258-11. Towing of vehicles in snow routes.
A. The Chief of Police shall have the authority to appoint such agents as he
deems necessary to tow away parked, disabled or abandoned vehicles
on snow routes during snow storms. Such vehicles shall be towed to the
nearest area cleared by the Town for such purposes, if such area exists
at the time of such towing. In the event that such area does not exist at
the time of such towing, the vehicles shall be towed to any off-street
area for storage until the vehicle is claimed by the owner thereof.
B. A list of such vehicles shall be kept at the police headquarters, by which
the owner of such vehicle so towed may learn the location of his vehicle.
Failure to include any vehicle upon the list shall not, however, create
any liability upon the Town on account of towing. The Town shall not be
liable for damage or loss to the contents thereof.
C. The agents appointed by the Chief of Police shall submit evidence of a
bond in a sum satisfactory to the Town Treasurer, to hold the Town
harmless from any and all claims for damage to personal property
arising out of towing.
D. Charges.
(1) The charges for such towing of vehicles shall be the reasonable
charge of the private party who performs the service of towing the
vehicle in question.
(2) The charges shall be collected by the towing agent as its fee for
towing services, and shall be in lieu of any other fee or payment by
the Town for such service. The payment of such towing and storage
charges shall not release the operator or owner of the vehicle from
any penalty imposed for violation of a traffic regulation.
§ 258-9 TREES § 258-12
251:297
§ 258-12. Towing of improperly equipped vehicles.
Anyone whose car is found without chains, snow tires, or other heavyweather
driving appliance, and is unable to move of itself on the Town
roads, may be towed by the Police Department in accordance with the
provisions of § 258-11 of this article, and in addition shall pay a fine of $10.
§ 258-12 GLOCESTER CODE § 258-12
251:298
ARTICLE V
Use of Richardson Clearing Trail
[Adopted 3-11-1977 (Ch. II, § 7, 2-07-04, of the 1991 Code)]
§ 258-13. Use restricted; violations and penalties.
It is unlawful to use Richardson Clearing Trail (also known as Cold Spring
Trail), extending northward from Putnam Pike (Route 44), for vehicle access
to and from the Bowdish Lake Camping Area, and each such user shall be
subject to a fine of $20, payable by the driver of any type of vehicle using
the road for such purpose.
§ 258-14. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Glocester Police Department. The
Department may allow fines to be paid by mail in lieu of court appearance
for first-time violators; and it shall post a sign at each end of the road so
described, setting forth the following warning, followed by a copy of this
article:
WARNING--ACCESS LIMITED--$20 FINE
THIS ROAD MAY NOT BE USED FOR ACCESS TO AND FROM THE
BOWDISH LAKE CAMPING AREA.
§ 258-13 TREES § 258-14
251:299
Chapter 263
VEHICLES, PARKING AND STORAGE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Camping and travel trailer parks — See Ch.
151.
Mobile homes and house trailers — See Ch.
208.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 258.
§ 263-1. Restriction on storage of unserviceable vehicles.
No more than one unregistered, unserviceable, discarded, worn-out or
junked automobile, truck or trailer of any kind or type, or bodies, engines,
tires, parts or accessories thereof, shall be parked or stored on any property
other than in a completely enclosed building; on a farm; or at a licensed
dealership. For the purpose of this chapter, an unserviceable vehicle shall
mean any vehicle not maintaining a current/valid Rhode Island certificate of
inspection pursuant to R.I.G.L. § 31-38-4.
§ 263-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates the provision of this chapter shall be fined upon
conviction for the first offense not less than $50 nor more than $100 or by
imprisonment for not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days, or both fine
and imprisonment, and shall for a second or subsequent conviction be fined
not less than $100 nor more than $500 or by imprisonment for not less than
30 days, nor more than six months, or by both fine and imprisonment.
§ 263-3. Notice.
Notice to remove such vehicle(s), as hereafter set forth, shall be provided in
accordance with § 263-4.
You are requested to remove such prohibited articles from your property.
Your property is to be cleared within seven days. If after seven days your
property is inspected and you are still in violation, a warrant for your
arrest will issue, you will be subject to the fines and penalties as outlined
above, and the vehicles or parts thereof may be removed by the police and
impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with the
above-mentioned ordinance.
Served:
Officer:
Date:
Time:
§ 258-14 GLOCESTER CODE § 263-4
263:300
§ 263-4. Removal and impoundment.
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to remove or have removed any
vehicle or parts thereof left at any place within the Town which reasonably
appear to be in violation of this chapter or to be lost, stolen, or unclaimed.
Such vehicle or parts thereof shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or
disposed of in accordance with § 263-5 of this chapter; provided, however,
that any vehicle or parts thereof left at any place shall not be removed
and impounded as provided herein until the Chief of Police shall have given
written notice to remove such vehicle or parts thereof within seven days of
the mailing or delivery of such notice and said vehicle or parts thereof have
not been removed at the end of such time.
§ 263-5. Sale of impounded vehicles or parts.
A. Such notice as provided in § 263-3 hereof shall be given by:
(1) Affixing notice on such vehicle or parts thereof (if appropriate);
(2) Sending notice by mail or delivering notice by hand to the owner of
such vehicle at his last known address if the owner is reasonably
ascertainable; and
(3) Sending notice by mail or delivering notice by hand to the person
owning or controlling the property on which such vehicle or parts
thereof are located.
B. The Chief of Police may enter upon private property at all reasonable
hours for the purpose of inspecting such vehicle or parts thereof,
posting notice thereon, and removing and impounding such vehicle or
parts thereof, and it shall be unlawful for any person to prevent the
Chief of Police from entering on private property for purposes of
carrying out his duties under the provisions of this chapter.
A. The Chief of Police is authorized to store in an appropriate location any
vehicle or parts thereof impounded as provided herein. The Chief of
Police shall set a date, no sooner than 30 days after the vehicle or parts
thereof have been impounded, upon which he shall conduct at a public
auction sale of all vehicle(s) and/or parts impounded and stored. At
least one week before the proposed auction sale, he shall cause to be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town of
Glocester a notice of such sale, which notice may contain such
information as the make, model and serial number of any vehicle or
parts and a general description thereof. At least one week before the
proposed auction sale, he shall also mail a notice of the sale by certified
mail to the owner of the vehicle, as known, advising him of the date of
the sale and notifying him of his right of redemption of the vehicle or
parts thereof upon payment of all accumulated costs.
B. At the sale, the vehicle or parts thereof shall be sold at public auction to
the highest bidder; provided that the Chief of Police shall have the right
to reject any bids deemed insufficient. Any vehicles or parts remaining
§ 263-4 VEHICLES, PARKING AND STORAGE OF § 263-5
263:301
§ 263-6. Continuing offenses.
Each day any violation of this chapter is committed or permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense and be punishable as such.
Chapter 266
VICTUALING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult entertainment — See Ch. 130. Entertainment licenses — See Ch. 162.
§ 266-1. License required.
No person or persons shall keep a victualing house in the Town of Glocester
without first having obtained a license therefor from the Town Council of
said Town of Glocester.
§ 266-2. Fee.43
The fee for such license for a victualing house shall be as set from time to
time by the Town Council.
§ 266-3. Applicability.
A victualing license shall apply to shops, houses or places where victuals
and foods are sold or furnished, whether the same is the principal business
of the licensee or not.
§ 266-4. Games of chance prohibited.
The licensee shall allow no punch boards, gambling machines, or any
apparatus or any gambling of any kind upon his premises, and each license
shall be held strictly accountable for the observance of this section.
Chapter 272
unsold at the conclusion of the auction sale may be sold by the Town to
a junk dealer or other similar business offering the best price therefor.
C. If the owner of the vehicle or parts is not known, all money realized
from the auction sale shall be deposited to the general fund of the Town.
If such owner is known, he shall receive the proceeds realized from the
sale after deducting all costs of seizure, removal, impounding and
storage, costs of the sale and all other reasonable costs.
43.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 263-5 GLOCESTER CODE § 266-4
266:302
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 272, Wastewater Management District, adopted
11-18-2010, effective 11-18-2010, was repealed 12-15-2011, effective
12-15-2011.]
Chapter 279
YARD SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hawkers and peddlers — See Ch. 190.
§ 279-1. License required; definition; restrictions on operation.
Any Town resident desiring to conduct a yard sale, so-called, shall apply
to the Town Clerk for a license for same, during normal business hours
prior to such yard sale. For the purposes of this chapter, a yard sale shall
include so-called yard sales, garage sales, lawn sales, or similar sales, and,
in addition to other provisions herein, shall be defined as the conduct of a
sale of typically secondhand personal, household and/or garden property or
items, which are in the possession of the resident applicant. A resident to
whom a license for a yard sale has been issued shall not invite or permit
merchants or other vendors to sell or offer to sell merchandise or other
items at said yard sale, nor shall food be sold on the premises of said yard
sale.
§ 279-2. Application.
The license applicant shall state his name and residence, together with the
date and location of the intended yard sale, so-called.
§ 279-3. Issuance of license; fee; number of licenses.44
The Town Clerk shall issue a license to a resident so applying, and said
resident shall pay to the Town Clerk a fee as set from time to time by the
Town Council; provided, however, that no more than three such licenses
shall be issued in one calendar year to any one resident or for each unit in
a multifamily dwelling.
§ 279-4. Signs.
Anyone to whom a license is issued in accordance with this chapter shall be
allowed to place a sign advertising said yard sale, so-called, on the premises
in question no larger than 12 square feet, and said sign shall not be placed
on the premises earlier than seven days prior to the date scheduled for the
44.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 266-4 YARD SALES § 279-4
279:303
yard sale, so-called, and must be removed at the conclusion thereof. Such
signs shall be nonilluminated and nonelectric.
§ 279-5. Hours of operation.
The yard sale, so-called, for which a license is issued, shall be limited to the
hours between 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on the date for which said license is
issued.
§ 279-6. Exemption for nonprofit organizations.
Nonprofit organizations, which file an application with the Town Clerk at
least seven days before such sale, signed by at least one officer thereof,
shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
§ 279-7. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $100
for each offense.
Part 4: Land Use
Chapter 286
AFFORDABLE HOUSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Board — See Ch. 106.
Building permits — See Ch. 145.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 300.
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
Fair housing policy — See Ch. 364.
§ 286-1. Declaration of policy.
The Rhode Island Low and Moderate Income Housing Act was established
pursuant to Tide 45, Chapter 53, of the General Laws of Rhode Island to
provide opportunities for the establishment of low- and moderate-income
housing within every city and town throughout the state. It is the policy
of the Town of Glocester to facilitate the development of all types of lowand
moderate-income housing in accordance with the Rhode Island Low
and Moderate Income Housing Act and in conformance with the Glocester
Comprehensive Community Plan.
§ 286-2. Findings of fact.
The Town Council finds that the Rhode Island Low and Moderate Income
Housing Act requires every city or town throughout the state to provide
low- and moderate-income housing in excess of 10% of the housing units
§ 279-4 GLOCESTER CODE § 286-2
279:304
reported in that city or town in the census. The Town Council further finds
that the Rhode Island Low and Moderate Income Housing Act authorizes
every city or town to provide opportunities for housing that qualifies as
low- and moderate-income housing through the adoption of a municipal
government subsidy program. The Town Council finds that the housing and
affordable housing component of the Comprehensive Community Plan for
the Town of Glocester states that there are no local programs to assist
low- and moderate-income households in accessing affordable housing. The
Town Council further finds that the housing and affordable housing
component of the Comprehensive Community Plan for the Town of
Glocester establishes as one of its goals that the Town should provide
opportunities for new housing that is geared to the needs of all segments
of the population. The Town Council further finds that it is in the interest
of the residents of the Town of Glocester to adopt a municipal government
subsidy program for all residential developments.
§ 286-3. Definitions.
The following words, whenever used in this chapter, unless a different
meaning clearly appears from the context, have the following meanings:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING — Residential housing that has a sales price or
rental amount that is within the means of a household that is of moderate
income or less. In the case of dwelling units for sale, housing that is
affordable means housing in which principal, interest, taxes, which may be
adjusted by state and local programs for property tax relief, and insurance
constitute no more than 30% of the gross household income for a moderateincome
household. In the case of dwelling units for rent, housing that
is affordable means housing for which the rent, heat, and utilities other
than telephone constitute no more than 30%of the gross annual household
income for household with 80% or less of area median income, adjusted for
family size. Affordable housing shall include all types of year-round housing,
including, but not limited to, manufactured housing, housing originally
constructed for workers and their families, accessory dwelling units,
housing accepting rental vouchers and/or tenant based certificates under
Article 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937, as amended, and
assisted living housing, where the sale or rental amount of such housing,
adjusted for any federal, state, or municipal government subsidy, is less
than or equal to 30% of the gross household income of the low- and/
or moderate-income occupants of the housing, or as defined by R.I.G.L.
§ 42-128-8.1(d)(1).
AFFORDABLE HOUSING FUND — An interest-bearing fund that is
subsidized by developments that wish to pay a fee in lieu of constructing
the required affordable housing unit. The fee shall be at least $200,000 per
unit or donation of a buildable lot (i.e., with all necessary permits in place to
receive a building permit) with the number of lots/units being equal to the
required affordable set aside percentage. The custodian of said funds shall
be the Director of Finance for the Town of Glocester.
§ 286-2 YARD SALES § 286-3
279:305
AMI (AREA MEDIAN INCOME) — The midpoint in the income distribution
within a specific geographic area. By definition, 50% of households earn less
than the median income, and 50% earn more. HUD calculates AMI levels
for different communities annually, with adjustments for family size. AMI is
used to determine the eligibility of applicants for both federally and locally
funded housing programs.
LOW- OR MODERATE-INCOME HOUSING — Any housing, whether built
or operated by any public agency or any nonprofit organization or by
any limited equity housing cooperative or any private developer, that is
subsidized by the federal, state, or municipal government under any
program to assist the construction or rehabilitation housing affordable to
low- or moderate-income households, as defined in the applicable federal
or state statute, or local ordinance that will remain affordable through a
land lease and/or deed restriction for 99 years or such other period that is
either agreed to by the applicant and Town or prescribed by the federal or
state or municipal subsidy program but is not less than 30 years from initial
occupancy, or as defined by R.I.G.L. § 45-53-3(5).
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A single person, family, or unrelated
persons living together whose adjusted gross income is more than 80% but
less than 120% of the area median income, adjusted for family size.
MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT SUBSIDY — Assistance that is made available
through a city or town program sufficient to make housing affordable, as
"affordable" is defined in this chapter; such assistance may include, but is
not limited to, direct financial support, abatement of taxes, waiver of fees
and charges, and approval of density bonuses and/or internal subsidies, and
any combination of forms of assistance.
§ 286-4. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter are applicable to all subdivisions and
residential land developments according to Rhode Island General Laws,
Title 45, Chapter 53, titled "Low and Moderate Income Housing," in the
Town of Glocester.
§ 286-5. Number of units required.
There shall be a minimum of 10% of the total number of units in the land
development project dedicated to affordable housing. This 10% can be a
combination of low- and moderate-income housing.
§ 286-6. Selection of municipal government subsidy.
A. The municipal government subsidy shall be one or more of the
following:
(1) A density bonus, where granted in accordance with the provisions
of the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Glocester; and/or
(2) A waiver of the building permit fee; and/or
§ 286-3 GLOCESTER CODE § 286-6
279:306
§ 286-7. Options for development of housing.
§ 286-8. Length of affordability.
Low- and moderate-income housing must be designated as such for a period
of 99 years or such other period that is either agreed to by the applicant
and Town but shall not be for a period of less than 30 years from initial
occupancy through a land lease or deed restriction. The affordability deed
restriction must be renewed with each sale of the property. The right of
first refusal shall lie with the Town of Glocester, and should the monitoring
agent forego this right, it would be offered to Rhode Island Housing as a
secondary right of refusal.
§ 286-9. Low-income housing.
The Planning Board of the Town of Glocester may require the inclusion
of low-income housing units and/or provide a greater municipal subsidy
when a development provides for low-income housing. When considering
(3) A waiver or reduction of any municipal fees, guarantees, and
charges; and/or
(4) A waiver of the impact fee on the affordable units.
B. The Planning Board or applicant may wish to apply a subsidy in order to
allow certain units to qualify as affordable housing. One or more
subsidies may be utilized by the development to qualify as affordable
housing under the state definition. Selection of the subsidy shall be
made by the Planning Board, which may be based on the
recommendation of the Town Planner and/or the Glocester Affordable
Housing Board. When considering the amount and type of subsidy, the
Board may consider, but not be limited to, the project size, site
constraints, location, and other issues.
A. The applicant shall have the following options for construction of
housing. The options are ranked in order of the Town's preference:
(1) To construct market rate housing together with the affordable
housing; or
(2) To construct market rate housing and provide the Town with
buildable lot(s) equivalent to the required affordable set aside; or
(3) To construct market rate housing and pay the fee in lieu of
affordable housing. (The Town would prefer the provision of a
buildable lot for affordable housing which in turn could be given to
a nonprofit affordable housing developer to develop.) All funds will
be placed in an affordable housing fund.
B. It is the preference of the Town to have affordable housing constructed
as part of any development rather than to have land set aside, collecting
a fee in lieu or any other option.
§ 286-6 YARD SALES § 286-9
279:307
the amount and/or type of subsidies granted by the Planning Board, it
may consider, but not be limited to, the following factors: any unique
development constraints, including, but not limited to, project size, project
location, and site size; economic feasibility and the amount of low-income
housing being proposed. The Town Planner may provide a recommendation
regarding the municipal subsidy based upon the above considerations.
§ 286-10. Monitoring and compliance.
Rhode Island Housing or an approved monitoring agent as approved by
Rhode Island Housing, its successors or assigns shall monitor the units
designated as low- and moderate-income housing units to insure compliance
with the affordability requirements of the land lease and/or deed restriction.
§ 286-11. Housing quality.
The units created under the Glocester municipal subsidy program must
be physically consistent with the overall character of housing already
established in the development and the community. Every effort will be
made to integrate affordable units into the surrounding community.
§ 286-12. Applicability to both rental and ownership units.
This chapter shall apply to both rental and ownership units, with rental
units not to exceed eighty-percent AMI (area median income).
§ 286-13. Timing of construction.
Within a project, low- and moderate-income units must be built
simultaneously with or prior to construction of the market-rate units.
§ 286-14. Allowed income limits.
For the purpose of creating ownership units, a tiering of incomes is to be
applied. One-half of the affordable units in a project must be at eightypercent
AMI or lower, and the other half can be negotiated with the
Planning Board up to one-hundred-percent AMI.
§ 286-15. Occupancy of units.
The affordable units created under this chapter must be the owner's/
renter's primary residence.
§ 286-16. Tax assessments.
The Town of Glocester will assess low- and moderate-income units based on
the deed restricted price, not the comparable value of a non-deed-restricted
property for the life of the affordable deed restriction unless some other
arrangement has been made with the Town of Glocester.
§ 286-9 GLOCESTER CODE § 286-17
279:308
§ 286-17. Qualified program.
The municipal government subsidy program adopted by this chapter
qualifies for the establishment of low- and moderate-income housing under
the Rhode Island Low and Moderate Income Housing Act established
pursuant to Title 45, Chapter 53, of the General Laws of Rhode Island.
Chapter 300
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning and zoning — See Charter, Art. XII.
Planning Board — See Ch. 106.
Building permits — See Ch. 145.
Drainage — See Ch. 162.
Earth removal — See Ch. 166.
Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 177.
Trees — See Ch. 251.
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
Subdivision fees — See Ch. 368.
§ 286-17 YARD SALES § 286-17
279:309

ARTICLE I
Authority and Intent
§ 300-1. Title.
These regulations shall be known as the "Glocester Land Development
and Subdivision Regulations," hereinafter referred to as "Subdivision
Regulations” or “regulations."
§ 300-2. Authority to create and administer regulations.
§ 300-3. Adoption; when effective.
§ 300-4. Applicability; plats required.
A. The Glocester Home Rule Charter, Article XII, § C12-1, authorizes the
Planning Board "to administer the Subdivision Regulations of the Town
of Glocester as required by that ordinance and perform such other
duties as may be prescribed by law."
B. The Town of Glocester, acting by authority of its Town Council in
accordance with the Glocester Home Rule Charter, and under the
authority of § 45-23-51 of the State Land Development and Subdivision
Review Enabling Act of 1992, as may be amended, hereinafter referred
to as the “Act,” hereby authorizes the Glocester Planning Board to
adopt, administer, and maintain rules and regulations for Land
development and subdivision review consistent with the provisions of
the authorizing ordinance and the Act, and consistent with the adopted
Comprehensive Community Plan for the Town of Glocester.
A. The Planning Board hereby adopts these Subdivision and Land
Development Regulations pursuant to the authority contained in Title
45, Chapter 23, §§ 25 through 74 of the Rhode Island General Laws,
known as the “Rhode Island Land Development and Subdivision Review
Enabling Act of 1992.”
B. The Planning Board hereby establishes the standard review procedures
for local land development and subdivision review and approval as
specified in this chapter.
C. The effective date of these rules and regulations adopted under
authority of the Act and ordinance shall be the date of their adoption
and/or amendment by the Glocester Planning Board: December 18,
1995, as amended on November 15, 2007. [Amended 11-15-2007,
effective 12-20-2007]
A. These rules and regulations and R.I.G.L. §§ 45-23-25 through 45-23-74
shall be applicable in all of the following instances:
(1) In all cases of subdivision of land, including resubdivision, as
defined in R.I.G.L. § 45-23-32;
§ 300-1 YARD SALES § 300-4
279:311
§ 300-5. Continuance of ordinances; supersession; relation to other
statutes.
(2) In all cases of land development projects, as provided for in R.I.G.L.
§ 45-24-47, where Glocester may allow for such land development
projects in Chapter 350, Zoning; and/or
(3) In all cases of development plan review, as provided for in R.I.G.L.
§ 45-24-49, where Glocester has established, within Chapter 350,
Zoning, such procedures for Planning Board review of applications.
B. Plats required.
(1) All activity defined as “subdivision” shall require a new plat, drawn
to the specifications of these regulations, and shall be reviewed and
approved by the Planning Board or its agents as provided in this
chapter; and
(2) Prior to recording, the approved plat shall be submitted for
signature and recording as specified in § 300-45.
A. This chapter, as amended, adopted by the Town of Glocester under prior
authority of R.I.G.L. §§ 45-23-1 through 45-23-24, shall remain in full
force and effect through and until the effective date of rules and
regulations adopted by the Town of Glocester Planning Board under the
Act (R.I.G.L. § 45-23-51).
B. On the effective date, these rules and regulations shall supersede all
other subdivision ordinances and rules and regulations in effect at the
time of such adoption. Except as otherwise provided in these
regulations, any application for subdivision or land development review
and approval as may be pending as of the effective date of adoption of
these regulations, or any amendments thereto, shall be subject to the
requirements and provisions of these regulations or any amendment
thereto.
C. Any plat legally recorded prior to the effective date of these regulations
shall remain valid.
D. The adoption of these rules and regulations are not intended to
supersede or interfere with any other ordinance provision of the Town
of Glocester, except the Glocester Subdivision Regulations as adopted
May 1972, as may be amended.
E. Final approvals. [Added 11-15-2007, effective 12-20-2007]
(1) Any subdivision or land development project which, at the time of
adoption of these amendments, has received final approval, or final
approval with conditions, from the Planning Board may initiate or
construct any part of the development, or record said plans in
accordance with the Subdivision Regulations in effect at the time
final approval was granted. The Planning Board, may, in its
§ 300-4 GLOCESTER CODE § 300-5
279:312
discretion, grant extensions to any such final approval in
accordance with the procedure for such extensions as set forth in
the Regulations in effect at the time of final approval.
(2) In the event that a subdivision granted final approval under prior
Regulations is not recorded and construction initiated within one
year from the effective date of these Regulations, a one-year
extension, with one additional extension, may be granted by the
Planning Board, upon request by the applicant.
(3) Appeals from a decision regarding the application status and
vested rights of any subdivision shall be made to the Platting Board
of Appeal as herein provided.
F. Preliminary approvals. Any subdivision or land development project
which, at the time of adoption of these amendments, has received
preliminary approval, or preliminary approval with conditions, from the
Planning Board may continue to be reviewed by the Planning Board in
accordance with the Subdivision Regulations in effect at the time
preliminary approval was granted, provided any one of the following
conditions have been met: [Added 11-15-2007, effective
12-20-2007]
(1) The final plat, including all material required in the applicable final
plat checklist, is filed with and has been certified as complete by
the Administrative Officer within one year from the date of
preliminary approval; or within one year from any such other time
period granted as an extension by the Planning Board; or
(2) The subdivision is located within an area and is of a nature to be
within the jurisdiction of the Rhode Island Department of
Environmental Management (RIDEM); and the preliminary plans as
approved by the Planning Board have been filed with RIDEM for
approval as required by the Freshwater Wetlands Act.45
G. Master Plan approvals. Any major subdivision or land development
project which, at the time of adoption of these amendments, has
received master plan approval, or master plan approval with conditions,
from the Planning Board may continue to be reviewed by the Planning
Board in accordance with the Subdivision Regulations in effect at the
time master plan approval was granted, provided any one of the
following conditions have been met: [Added 11-15-2007, effective
12-20-2007]
(1) The preliminary plat, including all the material required in the
applicable preliminary plat checklist, is filed with, and has been
certified as complete by the Administrative Officer within one year
from the date of master plan approval or within one year from any
such other time period granted as an extension by the Planning
Board; or
45.Editor's Note: See R.I.G.L. § 2-1-18 et seq.
§ 300-5 YARD SALES § 300-5
279:313
§ 300-6. Consistency with other land use regulations.
In the instance of uncertainty in the construction or application of any
section of these rules and regulation, it shall be construed in a manner
that will further the implementation of, and not be contrary to, the goals
and policies and applicable elements of the Glocester Comprehensive Plan
and Chapter 350, Zoning. Furthermore, these rules and regulations shall
be construed in a manner which is consistent with the legislative findings,
intents, and purposes of R.I.G.L. §§ 45-23-25 through 45-23-74.
§ 300-7. General purposes.
The general purposes of these regulations are to:
(2) The subdivision or land development project is located within an
area and is of a nature to be within the jurisdiction of the Rhode
Island Department of Environmental Management (RIDEM) and
the master plans as approved by the Planning Board have been
filed with RIDEM for approval as required by the Freshwater
Wetlands Act.
H. Other status. [Added 11-15-2007, effective 12-20-2007]
(1) Any subdivisions or land development project which, at the time of
adoption of these Regulations, has not received final, preliminary
or master plan approval; or which has been submitted to the
Planning Board for either preliminary or master plan review but no
certificate of completeness therefor has been issued; or which has
received preliminary or master plan approval more than one year
prior to the date of adoption of these regulations and no extension
or reinstatement of approval has been granted by the Planning
Board; or for which only preapplication conference(s) has (have)
been conducted, shall be required to be reviewed under the
revisions to the Land Development and Subdivision Regulations
adopted on November 15, 2007, pursuant to the Rhode Island Land
Development and Subdivision Reviewing Enabling Act of 1992, as
amended thereafter.
(2) Appeals from a decision regarding the application status and
vested rights of any subdivision shall be made to the Board of
Appeal as provided in Article IX.
A. Provide for the orderly, thorough, and expeditious review and approval
of land development projects and subdivisions.
B. Promote high-quality and appropriate design and construction of land
development projects and subdivisions.
C. Promote the protection of the existing natural and built environment
and the mitigation of all significant negative impacts of any proposed
development on the existing environment.
§ 300-5 GLOCESTER CODE § 300-7
279:314
§ 300-8. Required findings.
It is required that for all administrative, minor and major development
applications, the approving authorities responsible for land development
subdivision review and approval shall address each of the general purposes
stated above in § 300-7 and shall make positive findings on the following
standard provisions, as part of the proposed project's record prior to
approval:
D. Encourage design of land development projects and subdivisions which
are well-integrated with the surrounding neighborhoods with regard to
natural and built features, and which concentrate development in areas
which can best support intensive use by reason of natural
characteristics and existing infrastructure.
E. Encourage local design and improvement standards to reflect the intent
of the community comprehensive plan with regard to the physical
character of the various neighborhoods and districts of Glocester.
F. Promote thorough technical review of all proposed land development
projects and subdivisions by appropriate local officials.
G. Encourage local requirements for dedications of public land, impact
mitigation, and payment-in-lieu thereof, to be based on clear
documentation of needs and to be fairly applied and administered.
H. Encourage the establishment and consistent application of procedures
for local recordkeeping on all matters of land development and
subdivision review, approval, and construction.
A. That the proposed development is consistent with the Glocester
Comprehensive Plan and/or has satisfactorily addressed the issues
where there may be inconsistencies;
B. That the proposed development is in compliance with the standards and
provisions of Chapter 350, Zoning;
C. That there will be no significant negative environmental impacts from
the proposed development as shown on the final plan, with all required
conditions for approval;
D. That the subdivision, as proposed, will not result in the creation of
individual lots with such physical constraints to development that
building on those lots according to pertinent regulations and building
standards would be impracticable (see definition of "buildable lot").
Lots with such physical constraints to development may be created only
if identified as permanent open space or permanently reserved for a
public purpose on the approved, recorded plans; and
E. That all proposed land developments and all subdivision lots shall have
adequate and permanent physical access to a public street. Lot
§ 300-7 YARD SALES § 300-8
279:315
frontage on a public street without physical access shall not be
considered compliance with this requirement.
§ 300-8 GLOCESTER CODE § 300-8
279:316
ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 300-9. Application for development.
§ 300-10. Certificate of completeness.
A. An application shall be signed by the owner or owners of the property
and by any authorized agent. The administrative officer shall advise the
applicant as to which approvals are required and the appropriate board
for hearing an application for a land development or subdivision
project. A subdivision is as defined as the division or redivision of a lot,
tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, tracts or parcels. Any
adjustment to existing lot lines of a recorded lot by any means shall be
considered a subdivision.
B. The following types of applications may be filed:
(1) Administrative subdivision: a resubdivision of existing lots which
yields no additional lots for development, and involves no creation
or extension of streets. Such resubdivision shall only involve
divisions, mergers, mergers and division, or adjustments of
boundaries of existing lots.
(2) Minor subdivision: a plan for residential development consisting of
five or fewer units or lots, provided that such subdivision does not
require waivers or modifications as specified in this chapter.
(3) Major subdivision: any subdivision not classified as either an
administrative or minor subdivision.
(4) All nonresidential subdivisions shall be considered as major
subdivisions. [Added 11-15-2007, effective 12-20-2007]
A. An application shall be complete for purposes of commencing the
applicable time period for action when so certified by the administrative
officer, with input from the Technical Review Committee. In the event
such certification of the application is not made within the time
specified in these regulations for the type of plan, the application shall
be deemed complete for purposes of commencing the review period
unless the application lacks information required for such applications
as specified in these regulations and the administrative officer has
notified the applicant, in writing, of the deficiencies in the application.
B. The Planning Board may subsequently require correction of any
information found to be in error and submission of additional
information specified in the regulations but not required by the
administrative officer prior to certification, as is necessary to make an
informed decision.
C. Where the review is postponed with the consent of the applicant,
pending further information or revision of information, the time period
§ 300-9 YARD SALES § 300-10
279:317
§ 300-11. Preapplication meeting and concept review.
for review shall be stayed and shall resume when the Planning Board
determines that the required application information is complete.
A. One or more preapplication meetings, at least one of which shall be
held before the Planning Board, shall be held for all major land
development or subdivision applications, for all minor subdivisions and
land development projects which involve creation or extension of
streets, and for all conservation developments. Preapplication meetings
shall also be held to determine if a subdivision may be submitted for
review and approval as a conventional subdivision. Preapplication
meetings may be held for administrative or other minor subdivision
applications, upon request of either the Town of Glocester or the
applicant. Preapplication meetings shall allow the applicant to meet
with appropriate officials, boards and/or commissions, planning staff,
and, where appropriate, state agencies, for advice as to the steps in the
approvals process, the pertinent local plans, ordinances, regulations,
rules and procedures and standards which may bear upon the proposed
development project. [Amended 11-15-2007, effective 12-20-2007]
B. At the preapplication stage the applicant may request the Planning
Board and/or the Technical Review Committee for an informal concept
plan review for a development. The purpose of the concept plan review
is also to provide Planning Board and/or Technical Review Committee
input in the formative stages of major subdivision and land
development concept design.
C. Applicants shall submit materials 10 days in advance of the
preapplication meeting or of an informal concept plan review as
requested by the Town of Glocester officials. Applicants seeking a
preapplication review, or if requested by the Planning Board, shall
submit the information and materials as provided in Checklist C,
Checklist for Preapplication Meetings, in Appendix A, Checklists.46
[Amended 11-15-2007, effective 12-20-2007]
D. Preapplication meetings shall aim to encourage information sharing
and discussion of project concepts among the participants. Discussions
which are held at preapplication meetings are intended for the advice
or guidance of the applicant and shall not be considered approval or
commitment of approval of a project or any of its elements.
E. Provided that at least one preapplication meeting has been held for a
major land development or subdivision application, or 60 days have
elapsed from the filing of the submission and no preapplication meeting
has been scheduled to occur within those 60 days, nothing shall be
deemed to preclude an applicant from thereafter filing and proceeding
with a master plan application for a land development or subdivision
46.Editor’s Note: The checklists are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 300-10 GLOCESTER CODE § 300-11
279:318
§ 300-12. Informal concept review (minor only). [Added
11-15-2007,47 effective 12-20-2007]
project in accordance with R.I.G.L. § 45-23-36 of the Enabling Act.
[Added 11-15-2007, effective 12-20-2007]
F. At the preapplication meeting, the Planning Board may also determine
whether a project review fee will be required, as provided in § 300-37B.
[Added 11-15-2007, effective 12-20-2007]
A. Upon request of either the Planning Board or the applicant, an informal
concept review meeting may be held. This procedure is restricted only
to minor land development projects or minor subdivisions for which
there is no creation or extension of streets. Applicants seeking an
informal concept review, or if requested by the Planning Board, shall
submit the information and materials as provided in Checklist B,
Checklist for Informal Concept Review, in Appendix A, Checklists.48
After the Planning Board has conducted the informal concept review,
the Board shall provide the applicant with direction regarding the
necessary steps required to submit a full application for further review
and approval.
B. Informal concept review meetings shall be held to determine if a minor
subdivision may be submitted for review and approval as a conservation
development.
C. At the informal concept review meeting, the Planning Board may also
determine whether a project review fee will be required, as provided in
§ 300-37B.
D. The Administrative Officer shall have 15 days to certify that an informal
concept review submission is complete or incomplete. Within 45 days
after the submission has been certified as complete, the concept review
meeting shall be held.
E. Provided that at least one informal concept review meeting has been
held for a minor land development project or minor subdivision
application, or 60 days have elapsed from the filing of the submission
and no informal concept review meeting has been scheduled to occur
within those 60 days, nothing shall be deemed to preclude an applicant
from thereafter filing and proceeding with a preliminary application for
a land development or subdivision project in accordance with R.I.G.L. §
45-23-36 of the Enabling Act.
47.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former §§ 300-12
through 300-53 as §§ 300-13 through 300-54, respectively.
48.Editor’s Note: The checklists are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 300-11 YARD SALES § 300-12
279:319

ARTICLE III
Administrative Subdivisions
§ 300-13. Definition of administrative subdivision.
An administrative subdivision is resubdivision of existing lots which yields
no additional lots for development, and involves no creation or extension of
streets. Such resubdivision shall only involve divisions, mergers, mergers
and division, or adjustments of boundaries of existing lots.
§ 300-14. Submission requirements. [Amended 11-15-2007,
effective 12-20-2007]
Any applicant seeking approval of a proposed administrative subdivision,
as defined in § 300-13, shall submit to the administrative officer the items
required by Checklist A, Administrative Subdivisions.
§ 300-15. Certification of completeness.
The application shall be certified as complete or incomplete by the
administrative officer within 15 days of its submission according to the
provisions of § 300-10.
§ 300-16. Review process.
§ 300-17. Referral to Planning Board.
A. Within 15 days of certification of completeness, the Technical Review
Committee shall review the application and approve, deny, or refer the
application to the Planning Board with recommendations. The
Technical Review Committee shall report its actions to the Planning
Board at its next regular meeting, to be made part of the record.
B. If no action is taken by the Technical Review Committee within the 15
days, the application shall be placed on the agenda of the next regular
Planning Board meeting.
C. In the event that variance from Chapter 350, Zoning, is requested or
needed, the appropriate procedure set forth in § 300-42A shall be
followed.
A. The application shall be referred to the Planning Board if any waiver or
modification to this chapter is required as set forth in § 300-43.
B. If referred to the Planning Board, the Board shall consider the
application and the recommendations of the Technical Review
Committee and shall either approve, approve with conditions, or deny
the application within 65 days of certification of completeness.
§ 300-13 YARD SALES § 300-18
279:321
§ 300-18. Failure of Planning Board to act.
Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall
constitute approval of the administrative subdivision plan, and a certificate
of the administrative officer as to the failure of the Planning Board to act
within the required time and the resulting approval shall be issued on
request of the applicant.
§ 300-19. Appeals.
Denial of the application by the Technical Review Committee or the
Planning Board shall not be appealable and shall require the plan to be
submitted as a minor subdivision application.
§ 300-20. Expiration of approval; vesting.
Approval of an administrative subdivision shall expire 90 days from the
date of approval unless within such period a plat in conformity with such
approval is submitted for signature and recording as specified in § 300-45.
§ 300-18 GLOCESTER CODE § 300-20
279:322
ARTICLE IV
Minor Subdivisions
§ 300-21. Definition of minor subdivision. [Amended 11-15-2007,
effective 12-20-2007]
A minor subdivision is a plan for a residential subdivision of land consisting
of five or fewer dwelling units or lots, provided that such subdivision does
not require waivers or modifications as specified in these regulations. All
nonresidential subdivisions shall be considered as major subdivisions.
§ 300-22. Review stages. [Amended 11-15-2007, effective
12-20-2007]
Minor plan review shall consist of three stages: a preapplication meeting
or informal concept review meeting, as specified in § 300-11 or 300-12, a
preliminary plan approval, including a site visit, and a final plan approval. A
public hearing is also required at or before preliminary plan approval where
creation or extension of a street is necessary. A preapplication meeting shall
be held with the administrative officer for a minor subdivision not requiring
a street extension, and before the Planning Board where a street creation
or extension is required.
§ 300-23. Preliminary plan. [Amended 11-15-2007, effective
12-20-2007]
A. Submission requirements. Any applicant seeking preliminary approval
of a proposed minor subdivision or minor land development, as defined
in these regulations, shall submit to the administrative officer the items
required by Checklist D: Preliminary Plat Checklist for Minor Land
Development Projects and Minor Subdivisions/Minor Conservation
Developments/(No Street Creation or Extension).49 If the creation or
extension of a street is involved, the applicant shall use Checklist E:
Preliminary Plat Checklist for Minor Land Development Projects and
Minor Subdivisions/(Creation or Extension of a Public or Private
Street).50
B. Certification of completeness. The application shall be certified
complete or incomplete by the administrative officer within 25 days, or
within 15 days if no street creation or extension is required, according
to the provisions of § 300-10. The running of the time period set forth in
this section will be deemed stopped upon the issuance of a certificate of
incompleteness of the application by the administrative officer and will
recommence upon the resubmission of a corrected application by the
applicant. However, in no event will the administrative officer be
required to certify a corrected submission as complete or incomplete
less than 14 days after its resubmission.
49.Editor’s Note: Checklist D is included at the end of this chapter.
50.Editor’s Note: Checklist E is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 300-21 YARD SALES § 300-23
279:323
C. Site visit.
(1) After the applicant has prepared the Existing Resources and Site
Analysis Map (as required in the appropriate checklist), and before
the preliminary plan is approved or otherwise acted upon, the
Planning Board shall schedule a site visit to the property. In order
to facilitate the inspection of the site, the Planning Board may
require field location of all proposed streets, improvements and site
features consistent with the level of information required at this
stage of review. The Existing Resources and Site Analysis Map shall
be distributed at the site visit to those Town officials in attendance,
if it has not been distributed earlier. It is strongly encouraged that
the site visit be attended by members of the Planning Board, Town
officials, the applicant and/or the applicant’s representatives.
Owners of property within the notice area specified in § 300-29D
shall also be notified by the applicant and invited to attend. The site
visit shall be considered a public meeting and shall be conducted in
accordance with the Town’s normal procedures for compliance
with the State Open Meetings Law. Members of the public shall be
permitted to attend the site visit.
(2) Lack of a quorum of the Planning Board in attendance at this visit
shall not constitute a failure on the part of the applicant to satisfy
the requirements of a site visit. In the event that the Planning
Board does not schedule a site visit, or that a scheduled site visit is
not conducted within the prescribed time period through no fault of
the applicant, the applicant shall not be found to be deficient in the
application process, and shall be allowed to proceed with the
application.
(3) The purpose of the visit is to familiarize local officials with the
property’s existing conditions and special features, to identify
potential site design issues, and to provide an informal opportunity
to discuss site design concepts, including the general layout of
designed open space lands, buildings and street alignments.
Comments made by Town officials or their staff and consultants
shall be interpreted as being only suggestive. It shall be understood
by all parties that no formal recommendation can be offered, and
no official decisions can be made at the site visit. Minutes of the
site visit shall be kept in accordance with Title 42, Chapter 46, of
the Rhode Island General Laws, entitled "Open Meetings."
D. Review by Technical Review Committee. The Technical Review
Committee shall review the application and shall comment and make
recommendations to the Planning Board. When reviewed by the
Technical Review Committee:
(1) If the land development or subdivision plan is approved by a
unanimous vote of the Committee members, the application shall
be forwarded to the Planning Board with a recommendation for
preliminary plan approval without further review.
§ 300-23 GLOCESTER CODE § 300-23
279:324
§ 300-24. Final plan.
(2) If the plan is not approved by a unanimous vote of the Committee
members, the minor land development and subdivision application
shall be referred to the Planning Board.
E. Reassignment to major review. The Planning Board may reassign a
proposed minor project to major review only when the Planning Board
is unable to make positive findings required in § 300-7.
F. Public hearing. If a street creation or extension is involved, the
Planning Board shall hold a public hearing prior to approval according
to the requirements in § 300-29D.
G. Decision where no street extension or creation is required. If no street
creation or extension is required, the Planning Board shall approve,
approve with changes, or deny the preliminary plan, within 65 days of
certification of completeness, or within such further time as is agreed to
by the applicant and Board, according to the requirements of § 300-44.
H. Decision where street extension or creation is required. If a street
extension or creation is required, the Planning Board shall hold a public
hearing prior to any action according to the requirements set forth in
§ 300-28D. The Planning Board shall approve, deny or approve with
conditions the preliminary plan within 95 days of certification of
completion.
I. Failure to act. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period
prescribed shall constitute approval of the preliminary plan, and a
certificate of the administrative officer as to the failure of the Planning
Board to act within the required time and the resulting approval shall
be issued on request of the applicant.
A. Submission requirements. Any applicant seeking final approval of a
proposed minor subdivision or minor land development project, as
defined in § 300-20, shall submit to the administrative officer everything
required for the preliminary plan of a minor subdivision and the items
required by Checklist F: Final Plat Checklist for Minor Land
Development Projects and Minor Subdivisions/(No Street Creation or
Extension) or Checklist G: Final Plat Checklist for Minor Land
Development Projects and Minor Subdivisions/(Creation or Extension of
a Public or Private Street).51 [Amended 11-15-2007, effective
12-20-2007]
B. Certification of completeness. The final plan shall be certified as
complete or incomplete by the administrative officer within 25 days
pursuant to the requirements of § 300-10.
C. Decision. The Technical Review Committee shall review and make a
finding on whether the final plan is consistent with the approved
51.Editor’s Note: Checklists F and G are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 300-23 YARD SALES § 300-24
279:325
§ 300-25. Expiration of approval; vesting.
Approval of a minor land development or subdivision shall expire 90 days
from the date of final approval unless within such period the plat or plan, in
conformity with such approval, and as defined in this chapter, is submitted
for signature and recording as specified in § 300-45. Validity may be
extended for a longer period, for cause shown, if requested by the applicant
in writing, and approved by the Planning Board.
preliminary plan and all the conditions and changes required as part
of the preliminary approval. The Technical Review Committee shall
report its actions, including its findings, to the Planning Board for
acceptance by the Planning Board at the next meeting to be recorded
in the minutes. The resulting decision shall mean:
(1) Approval: If the Technical Review Committee approves the final
plan submission the provisions of § 300-45 shall be initiated.
(2) Denial: If the Technical Review Committee denies the final plan
submission the application shall be considered by the Planning
Board within 45 days and a final decision shall be issued.
(3) The application can be referred to the Planning Board without a
recommendation from the Technical Review Committee.
D. Failure to act. Failure of the Technical Review Committee to act within
30 days shall result in the forwarding of the final plan to the Planning
Board for consideration.
§ 300-24 GLOCESTER CODE § 300-25
279:326
ARTICLE V
Major Subdivisions
§ 300-26. Definition of major subdivision.
A major subdivision is any subdivision not classified as either an
administrative subdivision or a minor subdivision.
§ 300-27. Review stages.
§ 300-28. Master plan.
A. Major subdivision plan review shall be required of all applications for
land development and subdivision approval subject to these
regulations, unless classified as an administrative subdivision or a
minor subdivision.
B. Major subdivision plan review shall consist of three stages of review,
master plan, including a site visit, preliminary plan, and final plan,
following the preapplication meeting(s) held before the Technical
Review Committee or Planning Board as specified in § 300-11. Also
required is a public informational meeting and a public hearing unless
the master plan and preliminary plan are being combined under the
conditions set forth in Subsection C below, in which case the
informational meeting shall be waived and the requirements of the
master plan, § 300-28A, shall be combined with the requirements of the
preliminary plan, § 300-29.
C. The master plan and preliminary plan stages will be combined,
provided that the proposed land development project or subdivision
meets the requirements established below. The application process will
then consist of the preapplication meeting, the preliminary plan process
and requirements, including a public hearing, and the final plan process
and requirements. The Technical Review Committee shall make a
recommendation to the Planning Board, which will make the
determination at the preapplication meeting as to whether the
proposed project meets the following requirements:
(1) No zoning amendment or special use permit is required. The
Planning Board may opt, at its discretion, not to combine stages in
the event variance is requested from the Chapter 350, Zoning.
(2) No waivers of subdivision design standards will be necessary or
requested.
(3) The project is not to be phased.
A. Submission requirements: Any applicant seeking approval of a
proposed master plan for a major subdivision or major land
development project, as defined in § 300-9, shall submit to the
administrative officer the items required by Checklist H: Master Plan
§ 300-26 YARD SALES § 300-28
279:327
Checklist for Major Land Development Projects and Major
Subdivisions.52
B. Certification of completeness. The application shall be certified
complete or incomplete by the administrative officer within 60 days,
according to the provisions of § 300-10. The running of the time period
set forth herein will be deemed stopped upon the issuance of a
certificate of incompleteness of the application by the administrative
officer and will recommence upon the resubmission of a corrected
application by the applicant. However, in no event will the
administrative officer be required to certify a corrected submission as
complete or incomplete less than 14 days after its resubmission.
[Amended 11-15-2007, effective 12-20-2007]
C. Review process.
(1) Technical Review Committee. The Technical Review Committee
shall review the application and make recommendations to the
Planning Board no less than 14 days prior to the date scheduled for
the Planning Board meeting at which the application is considered.
(2) Informational meeting. A public informational meeting shall be
held prior to the Planning Board decision on the master plan,
unless the master and preliminary plan approvals are being
combined, in which case the informational meeting shall be
optional, based upon Planning Board determination. Public notice
is required and shall be given at least seven days prior to the date
of the meeting in a newspaper of general circulation within the
Town of Glocester. Postcard notice shall be mailed to all property
owners within 200 feet of the property lines of the parcel on which
the proposed development will occur. At the informational meeting
the applicant shall present the proposed project. The Planning
Board shall allow written and oral comments from the general
public. All public comments shall be made part of the public record
of the project application. The costs of all notice and stenographer
fees shall be borne by the applicant.
D. Decision. The Planning Board shall, within 120 days of certification of
completeness, or within such further time as may be consented to by
the applicant, approve, approve with changes and/or conditions, or
deny the application, according to the requirements of § 300-44.
E. Failure to act. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period
prescribed shall constitute approval of the master plan, and a
certificate of the administrative officer as to the failure of the Planning
Board to act within the required time and the resulting approval shall
be issued on the request of the applicant.
F. Vesting. The approved master plan shall be vested for a period of one
year, with a one-year extension upon written request by the applicant,
52.Editor's Note: Checklist H is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 300-28 GLOCESTER CODE § 300-28
279:328
§ 300-29. Preliminary plan.
who must appear before the Planning Board for the annual review.
Vesting may be extended for a longer period, for good cause shown, if
requested by the applicant in writing, and approved by the Planning
Board. Master plan vesting shall include the zoning requirements,
conceptual layout and all conditions shown on the approved master
plan drawings and supporting materials and shall include all the
requirements set forth in Article VI. Preliminary and final plan
approvals are required before permits may be issued for construction
on the approved master plan parcel.
A. Submission requirements. Any applicant seeking approval of a
proposed preliminary plan for a major subdivision or land development
project, as defined in § 300-13, shall submit to the administrative officer
the items required by Checklist I: Preliminary Plat Checklist for Major
Land Development Projects and Major Subdivisions.53 [Amended
11-15-2007, effective 12-20-2007]
B. Certification of completeness. The application shall be certified as
complete or incomplete by the administrative officer within 60 days,
according to the provisions of § 300-10. The running of the time period
set forth herein will be deemed stopped upon the issuance of a
certificate of incompleteness of the application by the administrative
officer and will recommence upon the resubmission of a corrected
application by the applicant. However, in no event shall the
administrative officer be required to certify a corrected submission as
complete or incomplete less than 14 days after its resubmission.
[Amended 11-15-2007, effective 12-20-2007]
C. Review process.
(1) Technical Review Committee. The Technical Review Committee
shall review the application and shall comment and make
recommendations to the Planning Board within 30 days.
(2) Public improvement guarantees. Proposed arrangements for
completion of all required public improvements, including
construction schedule and/or financial guarantees, shall be
reviewed and approved by the Planning Board at the time of
preliminary plan approval as provided in § 300-32 of this chapter.
D. Public hearing. Prior to Planning Board decision on the preliminary
plan, a public hearing, which adheres to the requirements for notice
below, must be held. A public hearing shall be required for a major land
development project, a major subdivision, a minor land development
project or a minor subdivision which involves the creation or extension
of a street.
53.Editor’s Note: Checklist I is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 300-28 YARD SALES § 300-29
279:329
§ 300-30. Final plan.
(1) Public notice of the hearing shall be given at least 14 days prior to
the date of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within
the Town of Glocester. Notice shall be sent to the applicant and to
each record owner within 200 feet of the subject property, by
certified mail, return receipt requested, of the time and place of the
hearing not less than 10 days prior to the date of the hearing. Said
notice shall also include the street address of the subject property,
or if no street address is available, the distance from the nearest
existing intersection in tenths of a mile. The administrative officer
shall advertise for the public hearing upon instruction from the
Planning Board in writing.
(2) Additional notice within watersheds shall also be sent as required
in R.I.G.L. § 45-23-42-(C)(2).
(3) Notice of the public hearing shall be sent by the administrative
officer to the administrative officer of an adjacent municipality if
the notice area extends into the municipality, the development site
extends into the adjacent municipality, or the Planning Board
determines there may be a potential for significant negative impact
on the adjacent municipality.
(4) The cost of all such notice shall be borne by the applicant.
E. Decision. A complete application shall be approved, approved with
conditions, or denied within 120 days of the date when it is certified
complete, or within such further time as may be consented to by the
developer.
F. Failure to act. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period
prescribed shall constitute approval of the preliminary plan, and a
certificate of the administrative officer as to the failure of the Planning
Board to act within the required time and the resulting approval shall
be issued on request of the applicant.
G. Vesting. The approved preliminary plan shall be vested for a period of
one year and vesting may be extended for a longer period, for good
cause shown, requested in writing by the applicant, and approved by
the Planning Board. The vesting for the preliminary plan approval shall
include all general and specific conditions as shown on the approved
preliminary plan drawings and supporting materials.
A. Submission requirements. Any applicant seeking approval of a
proposed final plan for a major subdivision or major land development
project shall submit to the administrative officer everything required
for the preliminary plan of a major subdivision with any required
changes and/or modifications and the items required by Checklist J:
Final Plat Checklist for Major Land Development Projects and Major
Subdivisions.54 [Amended 11-15-2007, effective 12-20-2007]
§ 300-29 GLOCESTER CODE § 300-30
279:330
B. Certification of completeness. The application for final approval shall be
certified complete or incomplete by the administrative officer, after
soliciting comments from the Technical Review Committee on the
completeness of the final plan, within 25 days, according to the
provisions of § 300-10. This time period may be extended to 45 days by
written notice from the administrative officer to the applicant where the
final plans contain changes to or elements not included in the
preliminary plan approval. The running of the time period set forth
herein shall be deemed stopped upon the issuance of a certificate of
incompleteness of the application by the administrative officer and shall
recommence upon the resubmission of a corrected application by the
applicant. However, in no event shall the administrative officer be
required to certify a corrected submission as complete or incomplete
less than 14 days after its resubmission. If the administrative officer
certifies the application as complete and does not require submission to
the Planning Board as per Subsection C(1) below, the final plan shall be
considered approved. [Amended 11-15-2007, effective 12-20-2007]
C. Review process.
(1) Referral to the Planning Board. If the administrative officer
determines that an application for final approval does not meet the
requirements set by local regulations or by the Planning Board at
preliminary plan approval, the administrative officer shall refer the
final plans to the Planning Board for review. The Planning Board
shall, within 45 days after the certification of completeness, or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant,
approve or deny the final plan as submitted.
(2) Failure to act. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period
prescribed shall constitute approval of the final plan, and a
certificate of the administrative officer as to the failure of the
Planning Board to act within the required time and the resulting
approval shall be issued on request of the applicant.
D. Recording. The final approval of a major subdivision or land
development project shall expire one year from the date of approval
unless, within that period, the plat or plan shall have been submitted
and accepted for signature and recording as specified in § 300-45. The
Planning Board may, for good cause shown, extend the period for
recording for an additional period.
E. Acceptance of public improvements. Signature and recording as
specified in § 300-45 shall constitute the acceptance by the Town of
Glocester of any street or other public improvement or other land
intended for dedication. Final plan approval shall not impose any duty
upon the Town of Glocester to maintain or improve those dedicated
areas until the Town Council accepts the completed public
improvements as constructed in compliance with the final plans.
54.Editor’s Note: Checklist J is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 300-30 YARD SALES § 300-30
279:331
F. Validity of recorded plans. The approved final plan, once recorded, shall
remain valid as the approved plan for the site unless and until an
amendment to the plan is approved under the procedure set forth in
§ 300-46, or a new plan is approved by the Planning Board.
G. Issuance of permits. Unless otherwise authorized by the Planning Board
and Town Council, final plan approvals are required before permits may
be issued for construction on any lots of the proposed subdivision.
§ 300-30 GLOCESTER CODE § 300-30
279:332
ARTICLE VI
Special Provisions
§ 300-31. Physical design requirements.
The goal of a good subdivision and site design is to create a functional and
attractive development, to minimize adverse impacts, and to ensure that a
project will be an asset to the community. In order to achieve these goals,
land development projects and subdivisions shall conform to the following
standards, which are designed to result in a well-planned community.
A. Physical site design requirements. [Amended 11-15-2007, effective
12-20-2007]
(1) Lot design standards. The lot dimensions, setbacks, and
configuration shall be in accordance with Article III of Chapter 350,
Zoning. In addition, the following standards should be adhered to
wherever possible:
(a) Side lot lines should be at right angles to street lines or radial
curved street lines unless the Planning Board determines that
a variation from this rule will provide a better street or lot plan.
Except for those sides bordering a street, interior angles
should not exceed 200°.
(b) The preferred lot shape is rectangular, and the depth to width
ratio should not exceed 2.5 to 1.
(c) For all minor and major subdivisions, nonbuildable lots are
prohibited unless identified as permanent open space or
permanently reserved for a public purpose on the approved
recorded subdivision or land development plan. For the
purposes of these regulations, and for the purpose of
calculating the total number of buildable lots in a minor or
major subdivision, the provisions of § 350-58 of the Zoning
Ordinance shall apply.
(d) Every lot created within the subdivision shall possess the
minimum required frontage on an accepted public street or an
accepted suitably improved public street. Streets in a
conservation development or a rural residential compound may
be privately owned and maintained, subject to the approval of
the Planning Board.
(e) The minimum lot dimensions established by these regulations
or by any zoning ordinance adopted by the Town of Glocester
may be increased by the Planning Board if the report of the
Chief, Division of Water and Pollution Control, Rhode Island
Department of Health, indicates that larger dimensions are
warranted for the safe and effective operation of individual
sewage disposal systems. Lots in areas where public water is
not available shall be of such area, shape, and dimensions as
§ 300-31 YARD SALES § 300-31
279:333
will allow the operation of individual sewage disposal systems
in such a manner that the water supplies of said lots and of all
surrounding lots are adequately safeguarded.
(2) Fill requirements. All material that originates on the site or is
transported onto the site that is to be utilized as fill material for the
construction of public improvements within the proposed
subdivision or land development project shall be approved as
suitable fill material by the Director of Public Works and shall be
identified as to its source and destination prior to final approval.
The Planning Board may require any fill material to be removed if
prior approval is not granted or unsuitable fill material is utilized.
(3) Easements. Easements may be required by the Planning Board
where necessary for the proper location and placement of
improvements on private land as described below. Easements shall
be identified on the plat by metes and bounds description, to be
duly recorded as such in the office of the Town Clerk as part of the
recording process. The Board may, at its discretion, require
dedication of land to the Town of Glocester in lieu of easements if
such dedication would provide greater control over and access to
the intended use and meets a stated public purpose. The
maintenance responsibilities shall be permanently assigned or
delegated to a landowner or other legal organization over time. The
proposed language of assignment shall include provisions which
recognize the Town of Glocester's right to enforce the necessary
maintenance within the easements and to provide access in the
event of an emergency. The Town of Glocester shall also be
recognized as reserving the right to assess the responsible party
for the cost of any maintenance or enforcement the Town of
Glocester completes due to the failure of the entity to carry out its
responsibilities. The assessment shall become a lien on the
property or properties.
(a) Utilities. All utility easements shall have a minimum width of
20 feet and must contain at least one concrete or granite
bound.
(b) Drainage easements. Easements to install and maintain
surface and/or underground drainage facilities on private land
shall be dedicated to and accepted by the Town of Glocester
where required. However, wherever practical, easements will
remain privately owned and maintained. The nominal width for
such a drainage easement shall be 20 feet. Where aboveground
drainage flows are directed over private property which does
not contain natural watercourses or wetlands, or where
publicly owned and maintained drainage systems outflow onto
private land, a drainage easement shall be dedicated to the
Town of Glocester for the intended purpose. Easements into
and upon aboveground drainage facilities, such as stormwater
detention or retention basins, shall be granted to the Town of
§ 300-31 GLOCESTER CODE § 300-31
279:334
Glocester wherever stormwater from the Town of Glocesterowned
streets or other improvements is intended to be
directed to such basins.
(c) Public access easements. Bicycle and pedestrian access shall
be provided where required by the Planning Board on a
separate strip of land dedicated to the Town of Glocester or on
an easement having a minimum width of 10 feet with a fivefoot-
wide pavement.
(d) Other easements. All other easements shall be of sufficient
width and area for the intended purpose as determined by the
Planning Board.
(4) Landscaping standards.
(a) Every effort should be made to retain the natural landscape
and terrain, to avoid unnecessary alteration of natural
features, and to avoid disturbance of the natural ecology of the
area. Except as provided in § 300-32 of these regulations,
clearing and regrading of a natural site prior to final
subdivision approval is prohibited unless otherwise authorized
by the Planning Board.
(b) Reasonable landscaping should be provided at site entrances,
in public areas and adjacent to buildings. The type and amount
of landscaping required shall be allowed to vary with the type
of development, as reasonably determined by the Planning
Board. The plant or other landscaping material that best serves
the intended functions shall be selected. Landscaping
materials shall be appropriate for the local environment, soil
conditions, and availability of water. The use of native grasses
or ground cover that requires minimal watering and
fertilization is encouraged, particularly in areas that are
ecologically sensitive.
(5) Construction procedures.
(a) Preconstruction meeting. A preconstruction meeting shall be
held at least seven days prior to the start of any subdivision
improvements. It shall be called by the applicant and be
arranged at a time and place mutually agreed upon by the
applicant and the Technical Review Committee. It shall be
attended by the Technical Review Committee and the applicant
or duly authorized representative.
(b) Notification. No step in the construction of public
improvements shall commence until the Director of Public
Works has been notified at least 24 hours in advance of the
phases listed in Subsection A(6)(c) below.
§ 300-31 YARD SALES § 300-31
279:335
(c) Inspections. Inspection procedures and a schedule shall be
submitted to the Director of Public Works and approved prior
to the commencement of any construction. The applicant shall
be liable for the costs of all inspections, which should include
at least the following:
[1] During and following the installation of all underground
drainage structures, systems, and utilities prior to
backfilling.
[2] During and following the preparations of the subgrade and
road shoulders.
[3] During and following the spreading and compaction of the
sub-base course.
[4] During and following the spreading and compaction of the
base course.
[5] Immediately prior to and following the application and
compaction of the asphaltic binder course.
[6] Following the completion of all improvements and
installation of bounds.
[7] At periodic intervals as required to ensure compliance
with the approved erosion and sediment control plan.55
[8] Any other inspections required by the Planning Board or
Technical Review Committee as deemed necessary to
assure proper construction of improvements.
(d) Inspection fees. Inspection fees shall be set at 1% of the total
cost of the original performance bond. In the absence of a
performance bond, the fee shall be 1% of the total estimated
cost of all required improvements.
(e) As-built drawings. Two sets of as-built drawings shall be
submitted upon the certified completion by the Public Works
Director of all the required improvements to the administrative
officer.
(f) Borings and tests. The Town Director of Public Works may
require borings in a proposed roadbed and tests of compaction
with engineering evaluation at the applicant's cost to
determine compliance with street construction standards of
the Town or as may be promulgated by the RI Department of
Transportation for such situations as may be necessary as may
be determined by said Director.
55.Editor's Note: See Ch. 177, Erosion and Sediment Control.
§ 300-31 GLOCESTER CODE § 300-31
279:336
(6) Flood hazard areas. The applicant shall conform to the provisions
of Chapter 350, Zoning, § 350-54, Regulation of flood hazard areas.
(7) Potable water supply requirements. All buildable lots within the
proposed subdivision or land development project shall have direct
access to a permanent, adequate and potable water supply.
(8) Sewage disposal requirements. All buildable lots within the
proposed subdivision or land development project shall possess the
capability of accommodating an individual sewage disposal system
that conforms to the Rhode Island Department of Environmental
Management's ISDS standards, or those of any successor agency,
or an approved municipal or packaged sewage plant.
(9) Lot drainage requirements: See § 300-31B(16).
(10) Erosion and sediment control: See § 300-31B(17).
B. Public design and improvement standards.
(1) Street frontage requirements. The parcel to be subdivided shall
have frontage on and physical access to an existing improved
public street that has been formally accepted by the Town of
Glocester for street or highway purposes, or frontage on a highway
owned and maintained by the State of Rhode Island. The Planning
Board may require the developer to make certain improvements to
the street or roadway abutting the property or leading to the
property being subdivided for drainage, safety, traffic or other
reasons as deemed proper by the Board. See Subsection B(19) of
this section.
(2) Subdivision access. All developments shall have at least two means
of public street access to enter and exit the proposed subdivision
unless the Planning Board determines that two means of public
street access are not possible and/or practical due to site
orientation or physical site conditions.
(3) Street classifications.
(a) Arterial (See cross-section #4 for minimum requirements.): a
major public street that serves as the primary access for the
circulation of traffic in a nonresidential planned development.
(b) Residential collector (See cross-section #3 for minimum
requirements.): a public street whose principal function is to
carry traffic between local streets and between local and
arterial streets but which also provides direct access to
abutting properties. This street design is required for all
residential developments unless the Planning Board
determines that the development plan meets all the
requirements to decrease the street size.
§ 300-31 YARD SALES § 300-31
279:337
(c) Local residential (See cross-section #2 for minimum
requirements.): a public street whose principal purpose is to
provide access to abutting properties. This street must meet
the following additional criteria:
[1] Serve a maximum of eight dwelling units.
[2] No future or potential street extension or development
potential. [Amended 11-15-2007, effective
12-20-2007]
[3] Maximum length: 1,200 feet.
(d) Private lane: (Reserved).
Cross-Section No. 2 Local Residential
Minimum Requirements
1. Serves maximum of 8 dwelling units
2. No future or potential roadway extension
3. No designated on-street parking
§ 300-31 GLOCESTER CODE § 300-31
279:338
Cross-Section No. 3 Residential Collector
Minimum Requirements
1. Required for all residential subdivisions unless the
Planning Board waives these requirements pursuant to the
standards set forth in § 300-31B(3).
Cross-Section No. 4 Arterial
(4) Street width.
§ 300-31 YARD SALES § 300-31
279:339
(a) Street right-of-way widths shall conform to the widths shown
below:
Class of Street
Right-of-Way
Width
(feet)
Pavement
Width
(feet)
Arterial 50 36
Residential collector 45 28
Local residential 35 22
Private lane (Reserved)
(b) The street shall have the same width throughout the
subdivision, and the street layout shall be considered in
relation to the existing transportation system. Half streets are
prohibited. The widths set forth for a residential street shall be
required for every new street, street extension, or street
improvement unless the Planning Board waives the
requirement and approves lesser widths or requires greater
widths based on the present and future anticipated use of the
street. [Amended 11-15-2007, effective 12-20-2007]
(5) Street intersection requirements. Street intersections should
either coincide precisely with, or be offset by at least 200 feet from,
other intersections. Intersections should be at ninety-degree right
angles. Lesser angles between 75° and 90° may be approved by the
Director of Public Works where circumstances warrant and safety
requirements are met.
(6) Dead-end streets and cul-de-sacs. All dead-end streets must end in
a cul-de-sac turnaround. The length of any dead-end street,
including the turning area, shall not exceed 1,200 feet unless
approved by the Planning Board. Turnarounds shall be designed
with a right-of-way diameter of 124 feet, an unpaved center of sixtyfour-
foot diameter, and a minimum width of pavement of 30 feet
around the unpaved center as measured between the outside edge
of the unpaved center and the outside curbline, unless otherwise
authorized by the Planning Board on the recommendation of the
Director of Public Works. The minimum width of pavement may be
reduced to 26 feet where provisions are made for a one-way traffic
system around the turnaround. Unpaved centers must be left in a
natural state and provided with a twelve-foot clear grassed
shoulder for sight distance and snow placement and landscaped,
with private maintenance responsibility to be set forth by the
applicant and approved by the Planning Board. Curbing is required
only on the outside edge of pavement.
(a) The minimum requirements for cul-de-sac turnarounds are:
§ 300-31 GLOCESTER CODE § 300-31
279:340
Class of Street
Right-of-Way
Diameter
(feet)
Pavement
Diameter
(feet)
Pavement
Radius*
(feet)
Arterial N/A N/A N/A
Residential
collector
124 64 30
Local residential 124 64 30
Private lane (Reserved)
Notes:
*If an unpaved center is included, the pavement radius
measurement starts at the outer edge of the unpaved center.
(b) The Planning Board may require provision for a temporary
turn-around or a "Tee" until such time as the adjacent tract is
developed and the street is extended. Reservation of strips of
land controlling access to a street or land dedicated for other
public use will not be permitted.
[1] Access to adjoining property.
[a] Where the Planning Board determines that there is a
need to provide public street access for potential or
future development to adjoining property, proposed
streets may be required to be continued and improved
up to the property line. A temporary turnaround may
be required until such time as the adjacent tract is
developed. A bond may be required to insure
completion of the street or construction of a
permanent cul-de-sac within a reasonable amount of
time.
[b] Access to adjoining property for pedestrian and/or
bicycle circulation may be required wherever the
Planning Board determines that such connection will
increase accessibility between adjoining subdivisions,
to existing or proposed sidewalks or bicycle paths,
from subdivisions to major public or private schools,
recreation areas or other facilities or where public
safety will be significantly enhanced by such
pedestrian and/or bicycle connections.
[2] Provision for future resubdivision. Where a tract is
subdivided into lots substantially larger than the minimum
size required in the zoning district in which the subdivision
is located, such lots shall be arranged so as to allow for the
opening of future streets and logical further resubdivision
§ 300-31 YARD SALES § 300-31
279:341
in accordance with the requirements contained in these
regulations.
(7) Street names. When selecting names for all new streets, names
that differ significantly and phonetically from the names of all
existing streets within the Town of Glocester shall be selected. The
proposed street name shall be submitted by the applicant and shall
be reviewed by the Safety Commission, which will provide a
recommendation to the Planning Board, which shall provide a
recommendation to the Town Council for acceptance. The Town
Council, at the time of final street acceptance, shall approve the
street name.
(8) Extension of streets. The extension of any existing street shall have
the same name as the existing street.
(9) Curbing requirements.
(a) Curbing may be required, where deemed necessary by the
Director of Public Works or the Planning Board. Curbing shall
be required where sidewalks are being installed. All curbing
shall be one of the following types as determined by the
Planning Board upon recommendation of the Director of Public
Works:
[1] Rhode Island Standard #19 concrete.
[2] Cape Cod Berm, bituminous concrete.
[3] Rhode Island Standard #35A Granite.
(b) Concrete or granite curbing shall have a minimum base
thickness of six inches, a minimum top thickness of six inches
and a minimum depth of 18 inches, and shall extend a
minimum of six inches above the finished gutter grade. The
horizontal and vertical alignment of the curbing shall conform
to the established line and grade as shown on the approved
plans and profiles, and on Figure #1. Where curbing is not
required, an alternate means of providing adequate drainage
containment shall be demonstrated.
(10) Street layout requirements.
(a) Construction materials.
[1] Base course. The base course shall consist of bank run
gravel with a surface of crushed bank run gravel. The
suitability of the base course, including material
compaction, grade, and composition, shall be approved by
the Director of Public Works before application of the
binder asphalt course.
§ 300-31 GLOCESTER CODE § 300-31
279:342
[2] Binder and surface course shall consist of asphaltic
concrete pavement, hot mix, Class 1, Type I-1.
(b) Construction method.
[1] Sub-base preparation. All underground sewer and water
lines, utilities, laterals, service lines, and related facilities
shall be installed prior to any street construction. At least
30 days following filling and compaction of all utility
trenches, the sub-base shall be thoroughly compacted with
a ten-ton roller, true to the lines, grades, and crosssections
shown on the approved drawings. The sub-base
shall be swept or otherwise cleaned of all mud, loose and
foreign material and shall be thoroughly dry before the
base course is spread.
[2] Base course. After the sub-base has been properly
prepared and the curbs or shoulders set, the base course
of bank run gravel shall be spread by approved street
grading equipment and compacted in two four-inch layers
for the full width and in such volume as to provide an
eight-inch cross-section after compaction with a ten-ton
roller. [Amended 11-15-2007, effective 12-20-2007]
[3] Base course surface. Following thorough compaction of
the base course, crushed bank run gravel shall be spread
by approved street grading equipment for the full width to
a depth of two inches after compaction with a ten-ton
roller. [Amended 11-15-2007, effective 12-20-2007]
[4] Binder course. The binder course shall be applied no less
than six months following the backfilling and compaction
of all utility trenches unless a shorter time period is
permitted by the Director of Public Works. The base course
shall be swept clean and all holes, ripples, or unevenness
shall be brought back to true line and cross-section by the
spot application and proper compaction of Class I mix. The
hot mix shall be applied at a temperature of 250° to 350°
Fahrenheit by means of an approved paving spreader with
a compactor. Such material shall be placed in sufficient
quantity to provide a minimum compacted cross-section of
1.5 inches. Immediately after placement the binder course
shall be compacted with a ten-ton roller equipped with a
sprinkler system to wet the wheels. The street shall be
allowed to stand for a minimum of eight hours without
traffic upon the completion of the binder course.
[5] Surface course. The binder course shall be allowed to
stand for at least 30 days before application of the surface
course. The hot mix shall be applied at a temperature of
250° to 350° Fahrenheit by means of an approved paving
§ 300-31 YARD SALES § 300-31
279:343
spreader with a compactor. Such material shall be placed
in sufficient quantity to provide a minimum compacted
cross-section of 1.5 inches. Immediately after placement
the surface course shall be compacted with a ten-ton roller
equipped with a sprinkler system to wet the wheels. The
street shall be allowed to stand for a minimum of eight
hours without traffic upon the completion of the surface
course. Unless otherwise authorized by the Director of
Public Works, the surface course shall not be applied until
all heavy construction traffic has ceased within the
subdivision. Where a cape cod berm bituminous concrete
curbing is installed as provided in Subsection B(9) above,
such berm shall be installed as integral with the street
surface. [Amended 11-15-2007, effective 12-20-2007]
[6] Seasonal limits. No bituminous material shall be laid when
the temperature of the air is 50° Fahrenheit and falling or
during other unfavorable weather conditions as may be
determined by the Director of Public Works.
(c) Grade. Grades of residential streets shall not be less than 1%
nor more than 10%. Arterial grades shall not exceed 6% nor be
less than 0.5% in grade.
(d) Curves.
[1] Intersections. Corners at intersections shall be rounded to
provide curb radius of not less than 20 feet.
[2] Deflection angles. Where an angle deflection of 10° or
more occurs along the center line of a street, a curve with
a radius of not less than 150 feet shall be introduced.
(11) Street lighting requirements. Provisions shall be made for street
light connections where required and approved by the Director of
Public Works.
(12) Street trees. Where natural tree growth within the right-of-way or
on abutting lots is determined to be insufficient, the Planning Board
shall require the developer to plant street trees within the right-ofway.
Trees shall be appropriate for the terrain, soil, and climatic
conditions encountered in the subdivision, and in accordance with
the following standards:
(a) Location.
[1] Street trees shall be placed within 10 feet of the street
pavement. No street trees shall be placed in a manner that
will interfere with utility lines. Street trees shall be spaced
approximately 30 to 50 feet on center, depending on
anticipated ultimate size.
§ 300-31 GLOCESTER CODE § 300-31
279:344
[2] Street trees to be located on private property shall be
within 10 feet of the right-of-way and shall be perpetually
maintained and/or replaced by the property owner upon
whose land the trees are situated.
(b) Screening. Where a proposed residential development abuts
an existing or proposed commercial or industrial area, a dense
evergreen buffer at least 10 feet in depth and at least 5 1/2 feet
high shall be placed along the common boundary, but within
the bounds of the commercial property, between the
residential and such commercial or industrial development.
(c) Size. Minimum sizes for trees are three to inches' caliper,
measured diameter at breast height (dbh) in place, and 10 feet
to 12 feet of height in place.
(d) Inspection. The Tree Warden shall determine the suitability of
the street trees being proposed and require proper planting
techniques and maintenance to be followed. Trees suitable
include, but are not limited to:
[1] Deciduous trees such as honeylocust, pin oak, London
plane, gingko, zelkova and Bradford pear.
[2] Small deciduous trees such as crab and cherry varieties.
[3] Conifers such as pine, hemlock, and spruce.
(13) Sidewalks.
(a) Paved sidewalks may be required to be installed on one or both
sides of all new public streets if the Planning Board finds any of
the following:
[1] The subdivision is located within one mile of a public or
private school;
[2] The subdivision is located in proximity to major public or
private facilities such as churches, shopping areas,
playgrounds, parks, etc. where there is a likelihood that
pedestrian traffic to and from the proposed subdivision
would result;
[3] The subdivision is located in an area with high vehicular
traffic volumes and where there would be a likelihood of
significant danger to pedestrians;
[4] There is a reasonable likelihood that there will be conflicts
between pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
(b) Curbing is required wherever sidewalks are installed, and the
sidewalk shall meet the standards established by the American
With Disabilities Act for accessibility.
§ 300-31 YARD SALES § 300-31
279:345
(c) Where paved sidewalks are not required, the buffer between
the street pavement and the abutting lots shall be loamed to a
minimum depth of four inches, seeded, and maintained for
pedestrian access and use.
(14) Monuments. Monuments (granite or concrete boundary markers)
shall be located on plans, shall be the responsibility of the
developer, and shall be installed by a registered land surveyor or
engineer on the street line at the beginning and end of all
horizontal curves on both sides of each subdivision (public) street,
at all lot line intersections with street lines, and shall not be more
than 500 feet apart. Monuments shall be set flush with the finished
grade at the right-of-way. Monuments shall be installed as required
prior to final subdivision approval on all subdivisions.
(15) Manholes. Manholes shall be located on all storm sewer trunk lines
at:
(a) A maximum separation of 300 feet;
(b) All angles in the line;
(c) Street intersections and other points where catch basins,
inlets, or laterals are to be connected;
(d) Points where pipe sizes change;
(e) Points where the grade of the line changes.
(16) Drainage requirements. The drainage system may be comprised of
natural and man-made elements. These may include grass swales,
retention and detention basins, curbs, catchbasins, culverts, and
stormwater pipes. The applicant is encouraged to incorporate
natural elements into the drainage design whenever possible. All
drainage structures shall be in conformance with the accepted
State RIDOT standards, or approved equals.
(a) A drainage plan and drainage calculations for the entire parcel
are required if any of the following conditions are present:
[1] The subdivision or land development project is classified
as a major subdivision or a major land development
project.
[2] The proposed project requires the preparation of an
erosion and sediment control plan under the requirements
set forth in Chapter 177, Erosion and Sediment Control.
(b) The stormwater drainage calculations, runoff rates, and
system design shall be based on the application of the
appropriate method as follows:
§ 300-31 GLOCESTER CODE § 300-31
279:346
[1] Rational method. This method is preferred for small
systems four acres or less in size, where no wetlands,
ponds, or other storage depressions are present, and
where drainage is toward the point of analysis;
[2] TR-55. This method is preferred for calculating runoff
volumes, peak discharge rate, and flood storage
requirements for site development greater than four acres
and up to 2,000 acres;
[3] TR-20. This method is for complex watersheds and systems
beyond the scope of TR-55.
(c) The proposed drainage system shall be designed to
accommodate stormwater flows such that post-construction
conditions result in a zero net increase in run-off from
preconstruction/predevelopment conditions. The Planning
Board may have the proposed drainage system and
accompanying data reviewed by a registered professional
engineer for accuracy and suitability for the parcel. The
applicant shall be responsible for the fair and reasonable cost
of outside professional engineering review of subdivision
drainage plans as may be reasonably determined to be
necessary by the Board. The selection of engineering services
and fees shall be by mutual agreement of the applicant and the
Planning Board.
(d) The drainage plan shall indicate how the following
requirements will be met:
[1] That each lot will be adequately drained;
[2] That natural drainage patterns will be maintained
wherever possible;
[3] That all existing drainage systems will be left open, unless
approval to enclose is granted by the Planning Board and
all applicable state and federal authorities;
[4] That a continuous drainage system will be installed and
connected to a natural or man-made drainage system or to
an existing piped storm drainage system;
[5] That all new open drainage systems will be seeded,
sodded, or paved depending on grades and soil types;
[6] That the ultimate destination of such continuous drainage
shall be a permanent natural water body or wetland.
Where the Planning Board determines that such
destination is impractical, the Planning Board may require
the construction of a retention area capable of
§ 300-31 YARD SALES § 300-31
279:347
accommodating stormwater volumes based on a onehundred-
year frequency rainfall;
[7] Where any part of the drainage system is proposed for
location outside the public street right-of-way, provisions
for future maintenance approved by the Planning Board
and Department of Public Works will be provided;
[8] That all necessary easements to off-street drainage
systems will be obtained by the applicant and approved by
the Town Solicitor;
[9] Where the volume of the surface run-off is high, the flow
thereof shall be controlled by rip-rap, sediment basins,
flow spreaders, or other applicable devices and/or
techniques recommended in the Rhode Island Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control Handbook.
[10] That the overall design of the stormwater drainage system
incorporate best management practices (BMP's) for nonpoint
source pollution control and the design guidelines of
the Rhode Island Stormwater Design and Installation
Manual, where appropriate.
(17) Erosion and sediment control. An erosion and sediment control
plan shall be developed in accordance with the provisions set forth
in Chapter 177, Erosion and Sediment Control. However,
administrative and minor subdivisions and minor land development
projects shall not be required to submit such plans if the landdisturbing
activity involved in construction of subdivision
improvements meets all of the criteria for exceptions set forth in
Chapter 177. However, all major subdivisions and land
development projects shall submit an erosion and sediment control
plan. The cost for engineering review of the Erosion and sediment
control plan shall be the responsibility of the applicant as set forth
in the governing ordinance.
(18) Safety equipment and infrastructure requirements. The Planning
Board, upon the recommendation of the Fire Chief of the applicable
fire district, the Police Chief, or the Safety Commission, may
require the installation of safety equipment within the proposed
project area. Safety equipment may include, but shall not be
limited to:
(a) Fire hydrants.
(b) Holding ponds.
(c) Signage.
(d) Crosswalks.
(e) Fire lanes.
§ 300-31 GLOCESTER CODE § 300-31
279:348
(f) Emergency access facilities.
(g) Emergency signal services.
(19)Off-site improvements. As a condition of preliminary approval, the
Planning Board may require the construction of reasonable and
necessary improvements located off the site of the proposed
project. "Necessary" improvements are those clearly and
substantially related to or made fully or partly necessary by the
subdivision or land development project being proposed. The
Planning Board shall include in its preliminary approval the basis
for requiring such off-site improvements. In its resolution, the
Planning Board must find, and clearly document in the public
record, that a significant negative impact on existing conditions
related to public health, safety, and welfare will result if the off-site
improvements are not made. The mitigation required must be
related to the significance of the identified impact. Off-site
improvements may include, but shall not be limited to:
(a) Street improvements. The minimum street or roadway
standard or standards established for a proposed subdivision
street shall also be applicable to and necessary for the public
street(s) or roadway(s) from which access to the proposed
subdivision is dependent. The Planning Board shall have
authority to require an upgrading of the public street or
roadway serving as public access to the proposed subdivision,
at the expense of the developer, as an off-site improvement
required for the conditional approval of the subdivision. One or
more of the following findings are required:
[1] The existing street is inadequate to serve the proposed
subdivision for reasons of safety, geometric design,
capacity, or drainage purposes.
[2] Street improvements are not scheduled on the Town of
Glocester Capital Improvement Program for completion by
the Town of Glocester within the time period granted for
the completion of the proposed subdivision.
(b) Drainage improvements.
(c) Service improvements, including schools, fire, police, or
rescue.
(20) Private streets. Subject to the approval of the Planning Board,
streets within the parcel to be developed as a conservation
development or residential compound may be privately owned and
maintained in common by the residents of the development. At the
time of final approval, the Planning Board shall approve the form
and content of the following legal documents to be recorded
contemporaneously with the final plat: [Amended 11-15-2007,
effective 12-20-2007]
§ 300-31 YARD SALES § 300-31
279:349
§ 300-32. Construction and improvement guarantees.
The purpose of this section is to provide a guarantee that the required
improvements will be completed. An improvement guarantee is a security
instrument accepted by the Town of Glocester to ensure that all required
improvements, facilities, and work required by the Planning Board,
including but not limited to street, drainage, utility, landscaping, and offsite
improvements, will be completed and maintained in compliance with
the approved plans and specifications. The nature and duration of the
guarantee shall be structured to achieve this goal.
(a) A covenant by the owner of the parcel, binding on his
successors and assigns, that the Town of Glocester shall not be
asked or required to accept or maintain the private streets
within the parcel that do not meet the engineering and design
requirements for Town-accepted streets, for a minimum of 99
years from the date of recording; or, if only a lesser period is
legally enforceable, for that period with as many automatic
renewals as are necessary to total 99 years.
(b) A document or documents establishing the method of
ownership, and providing for maintenance of the streets and
drainage improvements.
A. General procedures. Before any land development or subdivision plan is
endorsed by the Planning Board, and before the recording of any
subdivision plat, the Planning Board shall be required to approve
agreements for the completion of all required improvements. Such
agreements may, at the option of the applicant, take the form of (1)
completion of actual construction of all improvements; (2) improvement
guarantees, or (3) a combination thereof. At the preliminary plat review
stage, the applicant shall submit either of the following: (1) a letter to
the Planning Board indicating his/her intent to complete the required
improvements prior to the Planning Board's approval of the final plat;
or (2) a letter requesting that security sufficient to cover the cost of
required improvements be established by the Board.
(1) If improvements are to be constructed without a financial
guarantee, all work shall be completed prior to final approval and
recording. Inspections shall be made by the Public Works Director
at all required stages of construction as required in § 300-31A(6)
under the direction of the administrative officer. Upon completion
of all required improvements, the Public Works Director shall
certify in writing to the administrative officer of such completion,
and a copy shall be provided to the applicant upon request. The
final plat shall be endorsed by the appropriate Planning Board
member, and the plat shall be recorded as provided in § 300-45, at
which time the lots within the subdivision may be transferred or
sold.
(2) Guarantees.
§ 300-31 GLOCESTER CODE § 300-32
279:350
(a) If financial guarantees are to be provided, they shall be set at
preliminary plan approval and received prior to final plan
approval. The guarantee shall be set at an amount and with all
necessary conditions to secure for the Town of Glocester the
actual construction and complete installation of all of the
required improvements, and the satisfactory completion of all
conditions of final approval within the time periods required
for the completion provided in said approval.
(b) The amount shall be based upon a minimum of two actual cost
estimates which would allow the Town of Glocester to obtain
completion of all improvements required as a condition of
preliminary approval. These estimates shall be prepared by a
contractor qualified in public street and drainage construction
or engineering, submitted by the applicant to the Director of
Public Works, who shall review the estimates with the
administrative officer and, if requested, with the applicant.
Estimates shall be broken down by construction category and
quantities, shall reflect the requirements of construction, and
shall include labor, material, and inspection costs. The Director
of Public Works shall forward a recommendation to the
Planning Board based on review of estimates, which shall
review and approve the final amount. The Board may set the
amount of the guarantee in reasonable excess of the estimated
costs in order to anticipate for increases in economic or
construction costs. However, the amount of such increase shall
not exceed 120% of the estimated cost of improvements as
recommended by the Director of Public Works. [Amended
11-15-2007, effective 12-20-2007]
(c) Construction of improvements, including regrading, clearing,
and removal of earth material, or land fill, shall not commence
without acceptance of a performance guarantee, except with
the expressed conditional prior approval of the Planning
Board. At the expiration of the final approval period, if all
improvements are not complete, the Planning Board shall
review the status of the improvements and may:
[1] Require the applicant to extend the period of the entire
improvement guarantee.
[2] Reduce the amount of the improvement guarantee to cover
the costs of the remaining improvements.
[3] Authorize the administrative officer to take the steps
necessary to ensure the completion of the remaining work
by using improvement guarantee funds.
B. Required form. The security shall be in the form of a financial
instrument acceptable to the Town Finance Director and shall enable
the Town of Glocester to gain timely access to the secured funds, for
§ 300-32 YARD SALES § 300-32
279:351
cause. Performance and maintenance guarantees may be provided by a
variety of means, including, but not limited to, the following:
(1) Security bond from a surety bonding company authorized to do
business in the State of Rhode Island.
(2) Letter of credit that is irrevocable from a bank or other reputable
financial institution.
(3) Escrow account. The applicant may deposit cash, or other
instruments readily convertible into cash at face value, either with
the Town of Glocester or in escrow with a bank.
(4) Bonding for erosion and sediment control purposes may be
combined with subdivision required guarantees, subject to review
and approval by the Town Solicitor and the Planning Board.
C. Release. At the expiration of the final plan approval period or
completion of the development, if all required improvements are
complete, any improvement guarantee shall be returned to the
applicant. Partial releases or reductions in the guarantee amount may
also be authorized at any time prior to the expiration of final approval. A
written request for release or reduction of any improvement guarantee
shall be made to the administrative officer, who shall refer the request
to the Technical Review Committee. After inspection of the
improvements, the Committee shall recommend that the Planning
Board:
(1) Authorize the return of all improvement guarantees to the
applicant;
(2) Authorize a reduction and partial release of the amount of the
guarantee being held by the Town of Glocester to cover the
remaining improvements; or
(3) Hold the improvement guarantee and make no releases or
reductions.
D. Phases. In the case of land development projects or subdivisions which
are approved and constructed in phases, the Planning Board shall
specify improvement guarantees related to each particular phase. If
any off-site improvements or other improvements not directly related to
a particular phase are required as a condition of approval, the Board
shall, in setting the guarantee amount for each phase, clearly specify
when such guarantees are to be provided. In phased developments, the
improvement guarantee for one phase shall not be released until an
improvement guarantee for the next phase has been accepted by the
Planning Board for the subsequent phase.
E. Maintenance guarantees. The Planning Board may require that a
maintenance guarantee be provided by the applicant for all
improvements which are being dedicated to the Town of Glocester for
§ 300-32 GLOCESTER CODE § 300-32
279:352
public acceptance and maintenance. The amount of the maintenance
guarantee shall be 5% of the original performance bond or other
original guarantee amount. In the absence of such a guarantee, 5% of
the total estimated cost of all required improvements shall be required.
The initial period for such maintenance guarantee shall be one year.
At the end of one year, the Public Works Director shall inspect all
improvements subject to the guarantee and shall certify in writing to
the administrative officer as to their condition. If found unacceptable,
the administrative officer shall recommend an extension of the
guarantee period to the Planning Board, and the original funds shall
not be returned to the applicant. If public improvements are found
to be in good condition and have not been damaged due to the fault
of the applicant, or through the faulty workmanship or design, the
maintenance guarantee shall be returned to the applicant.
F. Building permits.
(1) Building permits shall not be issued for any lot within a subdivision
prior to the acceptance of the subdivision streets by the Town
Council for maintenance and ownership as specified in § 300-32F.
[Amended 11-15-2007, effective 12-20-2007]
(2) The Planning Board may recommend waiver to this requirement to
the Town Council on an individual lot basis to allow for the issuance
of building permits on individual lots, provided that:
(a) All public improvements to the street fronting the lot to be
issued a building permit are certified complete by the Public
Works Director, with the exception of the final bituminous
layer. [Amended 11-15-2007, effective 12-20-2007]
(b) The lot meets all of the requirements established for the
issuance of building permits in Chapter 145, Building Permits.
G. Acceptance of improvements.
(1) Upon completion of all required improvements, the applicant shall
convey all public improvements to the Town of Glocester for
ownership and maintenance. Private facilities, such as privately
maintained drainage systems, shall not be conveyed to the Town of
Glocester. The applicant shall first request the Department of
Public Works to conduct a final inspection as provided in
§ 300-31A(6). The Director of Public Works shall certify to the
administrative officer in writing that all required improvements
have been satisfactorily completed. [Amended 11-15-2007,
effective 12-20-2007]
(2) The applicant shall also request, in writing to the administrative
officer, that public improvements, streets, land easements, or other
facilities be accepted by the Town of Glocester. This request shall
contain a description of all facilities to be accepted and shall be
accompanied by an accurate description of all streets, easements,
§ 300-32 YARD SALES § 300-32
279:353
§ 300-33. Requirements for dedication of land and fees.
(Reserved)
§ 300-34. Phasing of projects.
land, a set of as-built plans accepted by the administrative officer,
and other facilities by metes and bounds and by reference to the
final plat drawing(s) and by a warranty deed transferring
ownership to the Town of Glocester and describing any special
conditions or other requirements. Upon certification of completion
of all required improvements, and upon receipt of all required
information from the applicant, the administrative officer shall
place the request for acceptance on the next available agenda
of the Technical Review Committee, which shall make a
recommendation for acceptance, in writing, to the Town Council, if
all the requirements have been met.
(3) The Technical Review Committee shall also recommend an amount
for a maintenance bond and shall recommend that no public
facilities or improvements be accepted for ownership and
maintenance until such maintenance bond has been submitted as
required in § 300-32E. Upon acceptance by the Town Council, all
public improvements shall be permanently owned and maintained
by the Town of Glocester as part of the Town of Glocester system
and the applicant shall no longer be responsible for their care,
repair, or appearance.
A. When a major land development or major subdivision commences the
required preapplication meetings, the Planning Board shall review the
adequacy of existing and projected future public improvements,
services and facilities which may be impacted by the proposed
development in its entirety. If the Planning Board determines that such
improvements, services, and facilities, including but not limited to
water supply, sewerage, streets and associated drainage facilities,
schools, recreational facilities, and fire and police protection, will not
be adequate to serve the residents of the subdivision or development at
the time of recording of the plat, the Planning Board shall have the
authority to establish a rate of development of the entire subdivision by
requiring it to be built in phases, related to the ability of the Town of
Glocester improvements, services, and facilities to serve the residents
of the subdivision or development.
B. When an application is submitted for master plan approval, the
applicant shall submit to the applicable Town of Glocester, state,
agency, or utility as provided in the Master Plan Checklist for Major
Land Developments and Major Subdivisions, a copy of the master plan
narrative report for its review and comment. Each agency so notified by
the applicant shall be requested to provide its comments on the
application by the administrative officer. Comments shall be received
§ 300-32 GLOCESTER CODE § 300-34
279:354
from each agency prior to the date of the informational meeting
(§ 300-28C). If comments are not received by the administrative officer
by that date, it shall be assumed that the agency does not wish to
comment.
C. Comments and supplemental material.
(1) Each department or agency to which such a request for comments
is made shall deliver to the administrative officer, in written format,
and any supplemental material, which shall describe:
(a) An estimate of the impact of the subdivision on the facilities
and/or services provided by the department or agency;
(b) Whether existing facilities and/or services are adequate to
serve the subdivision's residents;
(c) Whether plans for the necessary improvements to existing
facilities and/or services are included in the department or
agency's capital improvement program or are otherwise
planned;
(d) An estimate of how long it would take to provide any necessary
improvements to existing facilities and/or services.
(2) All such written comments and supplementary material shall be
delivered to the administrative officer by the reviewing agency
within the time limits prescribed.
D. Based on the responses received from the various departments and
agencies, the Planning Board shall establish, at the time of preliminary
approval, a rate of development of the entire subdivision or
development that will permit residential construction only when
improvements, services, and facilities will be adequate to serve the
residents of the subdivision or development. As part of such growth rate
plan, the Planning Board may require that improvements be installed,
or lots developed, in two or more phases.
E. If phasing is required, the Planning Board shall approve the master plan
for the entire site first. Thereafter, the applicant shall be required to
submit plans for preliminary and/or final review and/or approval
indicating the development of the entire site in two or more phases as
required by the Planning Board in Subsection D above. In such review
and approval, the Board may, in its discretion, impose conditions for
determining the physical limits of phases, for allowing progression to
additional phases, for allowing two or more phases to proceed in review
or construction simultaneously, for interim public improvements or
construction conditions, for changes to master or preliminary plans,
and may include other provisions as necessitated by special conditions,
including the applicant's actual provision of the necessary improvement
or a payment to a dedicated restricted account in lieu of actual
provision.
§ 300-34 YARD SALES § 300-34
279:355
§ 300-35. Conservation developments. [Amended 11-15-2007,
effective 12-20-2007]
F. The master plan documents shall contain information on the physical
limits of the phases, the schedule and sequence of public improvement
installation, improvement guarantees, and the work and completion
schedules for approvals and construction of the phases.
G. The master plan shall remain vested as long as it can be proved, to the
satisfaction of the Planning Board, that work is proceeding on either the
approval stages or on the construction of the development as shown in
the approved master plan documents. Vesting shall extend to all
information shown on the approved master plan documents.
H. Phasing of a proposed development may be otherwise requested by a
developer for his/her own reasons, but shall be subject to the
requirements for phasing as may be determined applicable by the
Planning Board when phasing is approved by the Planning Board.
A. Purpose. The purposes of this section, entitled "Conservation
developments," are:
(1) To conserve open land, including those areas containing unique
and sensitive natural features such as woodlands, steep slopes,
streams, floodplains, wetlands, reservoirs and their drainage areas,
and agricultural lands, by setting them aside from development;
(2) To preserve historical, cultural, agricultural and archaeological
resources;
(3) To provide greater design flexibility and efficiency in the siting of
services and infrastructure, including the opportunity to reduce
length of streets, utility runs, and the amount of paving required for
residential development;
(4) To provide for a diversity of lot sizes and layouts;
(5) To provide for a diversity of housing choices to accommodate a
variety of age and income groups and residential preferences, so
that the population diversity of the community may be maintained;
(6) To implement adopted municipal policies to conserve a variety of
irreplaceable and environmentally important resources as set forth
in the Comprehensive Plan;
(7) To provide reasonable incentives for the creation of a greenbelt/
trails system within the Town;
(8) To implement adopted land use, environmental and open space
policies as set forth in the Comprehensive Plan;
§ 300-34 GLOCESTER CODE § 300-35
279:356
(9) To protect areas of the Town with productive agricultural soils for
continued or future agricultural use by conserving blocks of land
large enough to allow for efficient farm operations;
(10) To create neighborhoods with direct visual and/or physical access
to open land, with amenities in the form of neighborhood open
space, and with a strong neighborhood identity;
(11) To provide for the maintenance of open land set aside for active or
passive recreational use, stormwater drainage or conservation
lands;
(12) To conserve and create scenic views and preserve the rural
character of the Town; and
(13) To provide a buffer between new development and existing
neighborhoods, delicate natural features and habitats.
B. Applicability. The Planning Board may approve a proposed land
development project or subdivision in the form of a conservation
development only in accordance with the provisions of Article XII of the
Zoning Ordinance.
C. Procedures. Applications for conservation development approval shall
be made in accordance with the procedures for approval of a major or
minor subdivision or land development project based on the number of
lots or dwellings in the development as provided in Articles IV through
V of these Regulations.
D. Uses, lot area and dimensional regulations. The permitted uses,
maximum number of units, minimum lot areas and dimensional
regulations applicable to conservation development shall be those
provided in Article XII of the Zoning Ordinance.
E. Design process. The design of a conservation development shall follow
the design process specified in the following steps. As a guide in
designing conservation developments, applicants are encouraged to
review the provisions of the Rhode Island Conservation Development
Manual, RIDEM, June 2003, as amended, in the preparation of plans.
The maps illustrated in this manual will provide graphic examples of
what is required of applicants. When the master plan is submitted for
major land development projects or subdivisions, or preliminary plans
for minor land development projects or subdivisions, applicants shall
demonstrate to the Planning Board that this design process was
considered in determining the layout of proposed streets, building
locations, and open space. Checklists C, E and G56 provide the specific
information that must be provided.
(1) Step 1: Analyze the Site. The first step is to inventory existing site
features, taking care to identify sensitive and noteworthy natural,
56.Editor's Note: Checklists C, E and G are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 300-35 YARD SALES § 300-35
279:357
scenic and cultural resources on the site, and to determine the
connection of these important features to each other and strategies
for protection. For preapplication meetings, the applicant shall
submit the information required by the Preapplication Checklist.
For master plan meetings, this information shall be submitted in
the form of an Existing Resources and Site Analysis Map, as
specified in § 300-35L.
(2) Step 2: Evaluate site context. The second step is to evaluate the site
in its larger context of the neighborhood and Town by identifying
physical (e.g., stream corridors, wetlands), transportation (e.g.,
street and bicycle networks), and cultural (e.g., open spaces,
recreational opportunities) connections to surrounding land uses
and activities. This information shall be submitted in the form of a
Site Context Map, as specified in § 300-35G.
(3) Step 3: Designate potential conservation areas. The third step is to
identify the areas on the site to be preserved on the site as open
space. The open space shall at a minimum include portions of the
site that are unsuitable for development and which constitute the
most sensitive and noteworthy natural, cultural and recreational
resources of the site. Where appropriate, areas that serve to extend
neighborhood open space networks to/from surrounding property
shall be identified. The designation of open space shall reflect
consistency with the Town of Glocester Comprehensive Plan.
(4) Step 4: Determine maximum number of units. At the master plan
stage for major subdivisions and major land development projects,
and at the preliminary stage for minor subdivisions and minor land
development projects, the applicant and Planning Board shall
agree upon an initial number of dwelling units that will be
permitted in the conservation development or subdivision, using
the yield plan approach as described in § 300-35H. The number of
units may be changed by the Planning Board during subsequent
stages of review, as more information is provided, until the final
basic maximum number of dwelling units is determined.
(5) Step 5: Locate development areas and explore conceptual
alternatives. As part of the preapplication submission, the
applicant shall show a minimum of two alternative proposed
development layouts in the form of a sketch plan(s), or sketch plan
overlay sheet(s), as described in § 300-35F. These alternative plans
shall be substantially different. The Planning Board shall review
how each alternative impacts the viability of the development plan,
versus the benefits to the Town of one or another approach. This
sketch plan shall be further refined for resubmission and discussion
between the Board and applicant during subsequent stages of
review as an overlay to the Existing Resources and Site Analysis
Map described in § 300-35L.
§ 300-35 GLOCESTER CODE § 300-35
279:358
(6) Step 6: Locate the house sites. The sixth step is to locate building
sites, using the proposed open space as a base map as well as other
relevant data on the Existing Resources and Site Analysis Map. The
design shall take into account the potential negative impacts of
residential development on nearby conservation areas as well as
the potential positive benefits of such locations to provide
attractive views and visual settings for residences, with emphasis
on consistency with Glocester's rural character.
(7) Step 7: Lay out streets, trails and other infrastructure. Upon
designation of the building sites, a street plan shall be designed to
provide vehicular access to each building, complying with the
standards herein and bearing a logical relationship to topographic
conditions. Detailed information regarding stormwater drainage,
water supply and sewage disposal, trails, sidewalks and other
infrastructure are also provided during this step.
(8) Step 8: Design and program open space. Details regarding the use,
design, ownership and management of proposed open spaces shall
be developed during the review process. Starting with conceptual
proposals at the early stages of review, the function of open space
areas shall be developed and refined. Based on review by the
Planning Board and other reviewers, these concepts shall be
clarified during the review process to establish as clear an
approach to the use and maintenance of open space as it does for
development areas.
(9) Step 9: Draw in the lot lines. Upon completion of the preceding
eight steps, the next step is simply to draw in the lot lines to
delineate the boundaries of individual residential lots (if
applicable).
(10) Step 10: Establish ownership and management of open space and
other community elements. At the time of preliminary review for
major land development projects or major subdivisions, or at the
time of final review for minor land development projects or minor
subdivisions, a more detailed open space use and management plan
as described in § 300-35I(1) through (5) shall be submitted.
F. Sketch plan overlay sheet.
(1) The design process described above shall be documented by the
applicant and presented to the Planning Board. To expedite this
process, a conceptual sketch plan(s) for development shall be
presented as overlay sheets to be superimposed on top of more
detailed site surveys and environmental data (at the same scale).
(2) At the preapplication stage of review, the initial sketch plan may be
presented as an overlay to survey plans, topographic maps or aerial
photographs of the parcel(s) proposed for development. As an
alternative, a separate diagrammatic sketch plan(s) may be
presented.
§ 300-35 YARD SALES § 300-35
279:359
(3) At the preliminary stage of review for minor land development
projects and subdivisions, and at the master plan stage of review
for major land development projects and subdivisions, the sketch
plan of development shall be presented as an overlay to the
Existing Resources and Site Analysis Map.
G. Site Context Map.
(1) A map showing the location of the proposed development within its
neighborhood context shall be submitted. The Site Context Map,
which may be superimposed on an aerial photograph, shall be
drawn to a scale of one inch equals 400 feet or as necessary to
show the area within a one-half-mile radius of the subdivision
parcel. It shall show the locations of major streets and zoning
district boundaries. Major features that surround the site shall also
be indicated on this Map. Topography at ten-foot contour intervals
(from USGS maps) shall be shown.
(2) A separate soils map of the site and surrounding area shall be
prepared, along with a general analysis of soil types and suitability
for the development proposed. If present, agricultural land as
defined in Article X, and any very poorly drained soils shall also be
shown on this map.
H. Basic maximum number of dwelling units.
(1) The basic maximum number of dwelling units allowed on a parcel
of land proposed for development as a conservation development is
defined as the maximum number of single-family building lots or
dwelling units that could reasonably be expected to be developed
as a conventional subdivision upon that parcel under a
conventional yield plan as defined herein. The applicant shall have
the burden of proof with regard to the reasonableness and
feasibility of the design and of the engineering specifications for
such yield plan; provided, however, that the Planning Board's
determination of the basic maximum number shall be conclusive.
(2) Yield plans shall be prepared as conceptual layout plans in
accordance with the Preapplication Checklist (Checklist C57). Yield
plans shall show proposed streets, lots, rights-of-way, land
unsuitable for development and other pertinent features. The yield
plan must be drawn to scale, and it must be a realistic layout
reflecting a development pattern that could reasonably be expected
to be implemented, taking into account the presence of land
unsuitable for development (as defined in § 350-58 of the Zoning
Ordinance), existing easements or encumbrances and the
suitability of soils for subsurface sewage disposal.
(3) The yield plan shall also reflect the dimensional standards for uses
being proposed, as contained in the District Dimensional
57.Editor's Note: Checklist C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 300-35 GLOCESTER CODE § 300-35
279:360
Regulations in Article III of the Zoning Ordinance, and as further
provided in § 350-58 of the Zoning Ordinance. The yield plan must
identify how conventional lots or uses could be developed having
the required area, frontage and other dimensional requirements
of the Zoning Ordinance. Although lots shown in the yield plan
may contain land unsuitable for development, this area shall not be
counted towards the minimum lot area as provided in the Zoning
Ordinance.
(4) On sites served by individual sewage disposal systems (ISDS),
density shall be further determined by evaluating the number of
dwellings or other uses that could be supported by ISDS on lots in a
conventional subdivision. Lots or dwelling units shown on a yield
plan shall not include dwellings proposed to be serviced by an ISDS
that requires the granting of a variance by the Rhode Island
Department of Environmental Management. The Planning Board
shall determine the suitability of the parcel to be developed as a
conventional subdivision, based on the soils information provided
by the applicant, upon observations made during a site visit to the
property, and/or upon other evidence available to the Board at any
time during the development review process.
(5) Upon completion of its review, the Planning Board shall determine
the initial basic maximum number of lots/dwelling units permitted
in a development. This initial determination shall be made at the
master plan stage of review for major subdivisions and major land
development projects, and at the preliminary stage of review for
minor subdivisions and minor land development projects. The
applicant shall use this initial determination as the basis for
submission of more detailed information during subsequent stages
of review. Upon further investigation and upon receipt of more
detailed soils and environmental information as may be provided in
subsequent stages of review, the Planning Board may increase or
reduce the number of lots/dwelling units contained in the initial
basic maximum number. For all developments, the final basic
maximum number shall be established by the Planning Board at the
final stage of review.
(6) In developments that require alterations to be made to freshwater
wetlands, the Board may establish an initial basic maximum
number contingent upon confirmation by the Rhode Island
Department of Environmental Management that such alterations
are permitted under the provisions of the Freshwater Wetlands
Act.58
I. Open space. Every conservation development shall provide protected
open space lot or lots in accordance with the standards set forth below,
and in Article XII of the Zoning Ordinance.
58.Editor's Note: See R.I.G.L. § 2-1-18 et seq.
§ 300-35 YARD SALES § 300-35
279:361
(1) The Planning Board shall specifically authorize plans for the use,
ownership, management and maintenance of all open space areas
within any conservation development. Areas proposed to fulfill the
minimum open space requirement within a conservation
development shall not be excavated or regraded, except as
permitted by the Planning Board. Disturbance to the natural
contours of the land shall be minimized to the greatest extent
possible. Existing natural vegetation and any significant natural or
man-made features shall be preserved except as permitted by the
Planning Board to create or enhance areas of landscaping, parks,
recreation, conservation, forestry or wildlife habitat. These
disturbances shall be specifically shown on the open space use
plan.
(2) At the time of master plan review by the Planning Board for major
subdivisions or land development projects, or preliminary review
for minor subdivisions or land development projects, the applicant
shall submit a separate open space use plan containing:
(a) The general location and area of all proposed open space;
(b) The general proposed use(s) of the open space;
(c) Existing topography and existing ground cover of open space
areas;
(d) The location and nature of any existing buildings, structures,
stone walls or other unique natural and/or historic features;
(e) Areas of open space from which existing vegetation will be
removed or altered and areas which are proposed to be
disturbed or otherwise graded, excavated or altered from their
existing natural state;
(f) Generalized proposals for the regrading, revegetating and/or
landscaping of proposed disturbed areas;
(g) The location and nature of any proposed buildings, structures,
parking areas, streets or roadways, impervious areas,
recreation areas; and
(h) Areas proposed to be left in their existing natural states
without any disturbance.
(3) At the time of preliminary review by the Planning Board, a more
detailed management plan that specifies the use of the open space
shall be submitted for review and approval, which may be
combined with any required grading plans, landscaping plans, soil
erosion plans or drainage plans required for preliminary approval.
The Planning Board shall require final construction plans to show
proposed open space use(s) and alterations required as a condition
of final approval.
§ 300-35 GLOCESTER CODE § 300-35
279:362
(4) Clearing and excavation of open space areas may be permitted only
for the installation of stormwater retention or detention facilities,
other drainage facilities, or for permitted utilities, park, open
space, recreational, agricultural or forest management uses in
accordance with a plan approved by the Planning Board.
(5) In addition, no commercial earth removal, even if permitted by the
Zoning Ordinance in the zoning district in which the development
is proposed, shall be permitted within any open space areas. In
approving an open space use plan, the Board may permit grading
that includes removal of earth materials. The Board shall, however,
clearly indicate, as a condition of preliminary approval, the
approximate quantities of material and the general areas from
which earth removal is authorized, and shall only authorize the
minimal amount of earth removal required to grade the land for the
intended purpose.
J. Open space design review standards.
(1) List of resources to be conserved. The design of open space lands in
any conservation development shall reflect the standards set forth
in this § 300-35 and, to the fullest extent possible, incorporate any
of the resources listed below if they occur on the parcel (not listed
in order of significance). The applicant should be consulting the
greenspace maps for natural, cultural and recreational resources
as identified in the Comprehensive Plan.
(a) Stream channels, floodplains, hydric soils, swales, springs, and
other freshwater wetland areas, including adjacent buffer
areas that may be required to ensure their protection.
(b) Wellhead protection areas.
(c) Special aquatic sites, vernal pools and significant natural areas
of species listed as endangered, threatened, or of special
concern, such as those listed in the Statewide Natural Heritage
Inventory.
(d) Moderate to steep slopes, particularly those adjoining
watercourses and ponds, where disturbance and resulting soil
erosion and sedimentation could be detrimental to water
quality.
(e) Healthy woodlands, particularly those performing important
ecological functions, such as soil stabilization and protection of
streams, wetlands, and wildlife habitats.
(f) Areas where precipitation is most likely to recharge local
groundwater resources because of topographic and soil
conditions affording high rates of infiltration and percolation.
§ 300-35 YARD SALES § 300-35
279:363
(g) Areas where open space will mitigate the effects of stormwater
runoff, avoid or reduce non-point sources of watershed
pollution, or buffer surface watersheds or groundwater
resources.
(h) Hedgerows, groups of trees, location and species of large
individual trees of botanic significance, specimen vegetation
and other vegetation features representing the site's rural
past.
(i) Active agricultural uses, pastures, croplands, prime farmland
soils and farmland soils of statewide importance.
(j) Historic structures and archaeological sites.
(k) Visually prominent topographic features, such as knolls,
hilltops and ridges.
(l) Geologic features such as eskers or kettle holes.
(m) Scenic viewsheds as seen from public streets (particularly
those with historic features).
(n) Existing or potential trails connecting the parcel to other
locations in the Town.
(o) Any other natural, cultural or recreational resources
determined by the Planning Board.
(2) Other design considerations. The configuration of proposed open
space lands set aside for common use in a conservation
development shall comply with the following standards:
(a) They shall be free of all structures except historic buildings or
structures, stone walls, and structures related to open space
uses. The Planning Board may grant approval of structures and
improvements required for storm drainage and privately
owned and maintained water supply within the open space,
provided that such facilities would not be detrimental to the
purpose for which the open space is proposed.
(b) Placement of individual sewage disposal systems (ISDS) within
the open space shall be permitted only if the Planning Board
determines that such placement would not cause irreparable
harm to the natural or scenic character of the open space, and
would otherwise be consistent with the purposes of
conservation developments as set forth in § 300-35A herein.
(c) They shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable
number of lots or dwellings within the development.
Nonadjoining lots shall be provided with safe and convenient
pedestrian access to open space land.
§ 300-35 GLOCESTER CODE § 300-35
279:364
(d) They shall be suitable for passive recreational uses to the
extent deemed necessary by the Planning Board, without
interfering with adjacent dwelling units, parking, driveways,
streets and roads.
(e) They shall be interconnected wherever possible to provide a
continuous network of greenway lands within and adjoining
the development.
(f) They shall provide buffers to adjoining parks, preserves or
other protected lands.
(g) They shall provide for pedestrian pathways for use by the
residents of the development. Consideration shall be given to
providing for public access on such trails if they are linked to
other publicly accessible pathway systems within the Town or
region. Provisions should be made for access to the open space
lands, as required for land management and emergency
purposes.
(h) Whenever possible, they shall be undivided by public or private
streets, except where necessary for proper traffic circulation.
(i) They shall be suitably landscaped either by retaining existing
natural cover and wooded areas and/or according to a
landscaping plan to protect open space resources.
(j) They shall be consistent with the Comprehensive Community
Plan.
K. Streets. Streets within a conservation development may be publicly or
privately owned as determined by the Planning Board, and maintained
and shall conform to the standards of § 300-31 of these Regulations.
Public and private streets shall be designed to conform to the standards
of the Town where the street is or may be ultimately intended for
dedication and acceptance by the Town. Private streets shall be
maintained by an association of unit owners or such other means or
entity as may be approved by the Planning Board.
L. Existing Resources and Site Analysis Map.
(1) All major subdivisions and land development projects, including all
conservation developments, shall be required to prepare an
Existing Resources and Site Analysis Map. Minor subdivisions and
land development projects which involve the creation or extension
of a street shall also be required to prepare this map.
Administrative subdivisions and subdivisions that create lots which
are not for the purpose of present or future development shall not
be required to provide such map. The purpose of this map is to
provide the Planning Board with a comprehensive analysis of
existing conditions, both on the proposed development site and
within 500 feet of the site. Conditions beyond the parcel boundaries
§ 300-35 YARD SALES § 300-35
279:365
may be described on the basis of existing published data available
from governmental agencies and from aerial photographs.
(2) An Existing Resources and Site Analysis Map is required to be
prepared at the following stages of review of subdivisions and land
development projects:
(a) Checklists.59
[1] Checklist C: Checklist for Preapplication Meetings —
Major Land Development Projects/Major Subdivisions and
All Conservation Developments (Minor or Major).
[2] Checklist E: Preliminary Plat Checklist for Minor Land
Development Projects and Minor Subdivisions/(Creation or
Extension of a Public or Private Street).
[3] Checklist G: Master Plan Checklist for Major Land
Development Projects and Major Subdivisions.
(b) The checklists referenced above provide guidance to the
applicant regarding preparation and use of the map and its
components.
(3) The Planning Board shall review the map to assess its accuracy,
conformance with municipal ordinances and likely impact upon the
natural and cultural resources on the property. Unless otherwise
specified by the Planning Board, such plans shall generally be
prepared at the scale of one inch equals 100 feet or one inch equal
200 feet, whichever would fit best on a single standard size sheet
(24 inches by 36 inches). Where necessary for clarity, the map may
be submitted as a series of more than one map. The following
information shall be included in this map(s).
(a) Topography and slopes. Topography, the contour lines of which
shall generally be at ten-foot intervals, interpolated from USGS
published maps. More detailed topographic mapping with
contour intervals of two feet as determined by
photogrammetry or on-site survey shall be required in areas
proposed for development. The determination of appropriate
contour intervals shall be made by the administrative officer,
who may require greater or lesser intervals on exceptionally
steep or flat sites. Slopes between 15% and 25% and exceeding
25% shall be clearly indicated by shading on the map, and the
area thereof in acres shall be indicated. Topography for major
subdivisions shall be prepared by a professional land surveyor
or professional engineer from an actual field survey of the site
or from stereoscopic aerial photography and shall be
coordinated with official USGS benchmarks.
59.Editor's Note: The checklist are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 300-35 GLOCESTER CODE § 300-35
279:366
(b) Natural resources inventory.
[1] The location and delineation of ponds, streams, ditches,
drains, special aquatic sites, vernal pools, natural drainage
swales, one-hundred-year floodplains and freshwater
wetlands, as defined in the Zoning Ordinance. Additional
areas of wetlands on the proposed development parcel
shall also be indicated, as evident from testing, visual
inspection, or from the presence of wetland vegetation.
[2] Vegetative cover conditions on the property according to
general cover type, including cultivated land, agricultural
land, permanent grass land, meadow, pasture, old field,
hedgerow, woodland and wetland. Trees with a caliper in
excess of 18 inches diameter at breast height, if located
within an area proposed for disturbance or alteration shall
also be indicated. Vegetative types shall be described by
plant community, relative age and condition. Specimen
vegetation as defined in Article X shall be identified.
[3] Soil series, types and map units, as mapped by the United
States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation
Service, in the latest published soil survey for the state,
and accompanying data published for each soil relating to
its suitability for construction and for septic suitability.
[4] Geologic formations on the proposed development parcel,
including rock outcroppings, cliffs, kettle holes, eskers,
etc., based on available published information or more
detailed data obtained by the applicant.
[5] Ridgelines of existing hills and watershed boundaries shall
be identified. Where applicable, the watershed boundary
of the Scituate Reservoir shall be indicated.
(c) Cultural resources inventory.
[1] All existing man-made features, including, but not limited
to, streets, driveways, farm roads, woods roads, buildings,
foundations, walls, wells, drainage fields, dumps,
excavated areas, utilities, and storm and sanitary sewers.
[2] Location of all historically significant sites or structures on
the tract, including, but not limited to, cemeteries, stone
walls, cellar holes and foundations, and known
archaeological resources.
[3] A viewshed analysis showing the location and extent of
views both from and within the proposed development
parcel as well as views into the property from adjacent
public or private streets and properties. See definition in
Article X.
§ 300-35 YARD SALES § 300-35
279:367
(d) Recreational resources inventory.
[1] Location of trails that have been in public use (pedestrian,
equestrian, bicycle, etc.).
[2] Boat launches, stream access locations and water trails.
[3] Existing play fields and recreation areas.
(e) Utilities and infrastructure.
[1] Location of all easements and other encumbrances of
property which are or have been filed of record with the
Land Evidence Records of the Town.
[2] Location of all streets and utilities.
M. Buffer areas. The Planning Board may require a vegetated buffer
between new development and existing streets, neighborhoods, active
farmland, adjacent park or conservation land, reservoir watersheds, or
other surrounding uses or areas in accordance with the standards set
forth herein. If property abutting the proposed conservation
development contains developed residential building lots, or if there are
existing residential structures within 100 feet of the perimeter of the
conservation development, the following conditions shall apply:
(1) Structures in the conservation development must be located to
meet at least the minimum rear yard setback as provided in
§ 350-13 of the Zoning Ordinance; and
(2) A permanent buffer along the perimeter of the conservation
development shall be established, providing for the preservation of
existing trees or other vegetation or for the planting of new
vegetation having adequate density, height and type of vegetation,
in order to provide an all-season visual and audio screen between
the conservation development and adjacent land uses. This buffer
may be provided in either of two alternative forms, to be
determined by the Planning Board:
(a) A separate open space lot or lots as provided in § 300-35I
above, entitled "Open space"; or
(b) A permanent easement along the perimeter of the conservation
development to be located along the rear or side property line
of the proposed lot or lots that abut the perimeter of the
conservation development. Said easement shall run in favor of
the Town and shall be for conservation or open space purposes
only. Where such easements are located on privately owned
lots, they shall not be counted toward the minimum required
open space area.
(3) The width of the required perimeter buffer shall be at least 50 feet;
provided, however, that the Planning Board may reduce this width
§ 300-35 GLOCESTER CODE § 300-35
279:368
§ 300-36. Development plan review.
(Reserved)
§ 300-37. Fee schedule. [Amended 2-17-2005, effective 3-16-2005;
11-15-2007, effective 12-20-2007]
to a minimum of 10 feet. In making this determination, the
Planning Board shall consider the following factors:
(a) The nature of adjacent land uses existing at the time of master
plan review (or preliminary review for a minor subdivision or
land development project).
(b) The nature of proposed or projected future land uses on
adjacent property.
(c) The physical characteristics of adjacent property (e.g.,
wetlands, slopes, stone walls, etc.).
(d) The ownership of adjacent property (e.g., private, public,
nonprofit conservation, etc.).
(e) The zoning of adjacent property.
(f) The land use classification of adjacent property as provided on
the Comprehensive Plan Land Use Plan Map.
(4) If lots on the outer perimeter of the proposed conservation
development are not contiguous to developed residential building
lots outside the conservation development, the Planning Board
shall determine if a buffer is required.
(5) Lots on the outer perimeter of the proposed conservation
development, which are directly adjacent to a public street, must
be separated from said public street by a thickly wooded buffer or
screen of at least 100 feet in depth along the entire street frontage,
except for any necessary access streets.
N. Decision. The Planning Board may approve, approve with conditions, or
deny an application for a conservation development. In making this
decision, the Board shall make findings on the record as to whether the
conservation development better promotes the objectives of the Land
Development and Subdivision Regulations than would a conventional
development, and after consideration of the general requirements set
forth in § 300-8 herein and after consideration of the purposes of
conservation developments set forth in § 350-101A of the Zoning
Ordinance. The Planning Board may deny an application if, in the
opinion of the Board, the criteria set forth above are not met to the
satisfaction of the Board.
A. Administrative fees. Administrative fees as set from time to time by the
Town Council are required to be paid by an applicant for approval of
§ 300-35 YARD SALES § 300-37
279:369
any subdivision and/or land development project, for the adequate
review and hearing of applications. Building permits (See Chapter
368.), notice fees (See § 300-29D.), legal fees (See § 300-45.), and
inspection fees [See § 300-31A(6)(c).], erosion and sediment control
plan fees (See Chapter 177, Erosion and Sediment Control.) and the
recording of plats and plans (See § 300-45.) are separate from the fee
structure established in this section and shall also be the responsibility
of the applicant as applicable.
B. Project review fees.
(1) Applicability.
(a) In addition to an administrative fee, for all subdivisions and
land development projects, including conservation
developments, the Planning Board shall impose a project
review fee on those applications which require, in the
judgment of the Planning Board, review by outside consultants
due to the size, scale or complexity of a proposed project, the
project's potential impacts, or because the Town lacks the
necessary expertise to perform the review work related to the
permit or approval. The fee shall ultimately equal the actual
cost to the Town for such consultant. In hiring outside
consultants, the Town may engage engineers, surveyors,
planners, lawyers, landscape architects, architects, or other
appropriate professionals able to assist the Board and to
ensure compliance with all relevant laws, ordinances, and
regulations. Such assistance may include, but shall not be
limited to, analyzing an application, design review of
applications to determine consistency with the Comprehensive
Plan; determining consistency with the purposes and design
standards for conservation developments; assessing the
economic, archaeological, traffic or environmental impact of a
development proposal, review of unique site features including
trees; or for monitoring a project or site for compliance with
the Board's decisions or regulations.
(b) Project review fees are separate from, and in addition to, fees
imposed by the Town for inspecting a project during
construction or implementation as provided in § 300-31A(5).
(c) Administrative subdivisions and subdivisions that create lots
which are not for the purpose of present or future development
(e.g., open space lots) shall not be required to pay a project
review fee.
(2) Determination of applicability by Planning Board. The Planning
Board shall determine whether or not a project review fee must be
paid by the applicant. This determination may be made at the
preapplication conference, but no later than the master plan stage
of review for a major land development project or major
§ 300-37 GLOCESTER CODE § 300-37
279:370
subdivision; or at the time of informal concept review, if conducted,
for a minor land development project or minor subdivision. If an
informal concept review meeting is not held, no project review fee
shall be required.
(3) Submittal. Initial project review fees shall be submitted at the time
of the submittal of the master plan application (for major
subdivisions or land development projects) and at the time of the
submittal of the preliminary application (for minor subdivisions or
land development projects). These fees shall be held in custody by
the Finance Director (escrow account). Any application filed
without this fee shall be deemed incomplete, and no review work
shall commence until the fee has been paid in full.
(4) Schedule of initial project review fees. Project review fees shall be
as set from time to time by the Town Council.
(5) Replenishment. When the balance in an applicant's escrow account
falls below 25% of the initial project review fee, as imposed above,
the Planning Board may consider whether to require a
supplemental project review fee to cover the cost of the remaining
project review.
(6) Handling of project review fees. The project review fee is to be held
in an escrow account as established by the Finance Director. No
interest shall accrue on any funds held in this escrow account.
(a) Outside consultants retained by the Town to assist in the
review of an application shall be paid from this account.
(b) Project review fees may be used by the Town for the purposes
stated in Subsection B(1)(a) at any time during the review
process.
(c) Project review fees shall be turned over to the Finance
Director by the administrative officer to be held in an escrow
account.
(d) The Finance Director shall prepare a report for the
administrative officer on activity in the escrow account upon
request.
(e) An accounting of an applicant's funds held in the escrow
account may be requested by the applicant at any time. The
Finance Director shall respond to the request in a timely
fashion.
(f) An applicant may request the administrative officer to provide
an estimate of bills pending from consultants for work
completed, or in progress, but not yet invoiced.
(g) Excess fees in the escrow account shall be returned to the
applicant or the applicant's successor in interest. For the
§ 300-37 YARD SALES § 300-37
279:371
§ 300-38. Plats overlapping Town boundaries.
If a proposed project overlaps Town of Glocester boundaries, the process
shall be coordinated with that of the other jurisdiction. Lot lines shall not
overlap Town of Glocester boundaries.
purpose of this section, any person or entity claiming to be an
applicant's successor in interest shall provide the Board with
documentation establishing such succession in interest. Excess
fees shall be returned at the conclusion of the review process,
to be determined by the administrative officer as either:
[1] With the disapproval of a subdivision or land development
plan; or
[2] With the final approval of a subdivision or land
development plan; or
[3] If fees are proposed to be used to monitor the construction
of a site, with the release of the performance bond or other
financial guarantees at the end of construction; or
[4] If no financial guarantee is used, and if fees are proposed
to be used to monitor the construction of a site, with the
final inspection and approval of construction by the Town.
(7) Disqualification. The choice of a consultant hired by the Town for
the review of an application may be appealed as provided in Article
IX. Three circumstances may disqualify the selected consultant.
These conditions constitute the only grounds for an appeal.
(a) Conflict of interest: A consultant shall not have a financial
interest in the project under review or be in a position to
financially benefit in some way from the outcome of the
pending review process.
(b) Lack of appropriate qualifications: A consultant shall possess
the minimum required qualifications. The minimum
qualifications shall consist of either an educational degree in,
or related to, the field at issue or three or more years of
practice in the field at issue or a related field.
(c) Business relationship: The consultant has conducted business
with an applicant whose project the consultant is reviewing
within the past 18 months.
(8) Time limits. The required time limits for action upon an application
by the Planning Board shall be extended by duration of the appeal.
§ 300-37 GLOCESTER CODE § 300-38
279:372
ARTICLE VII
Administration
§ 300-39. Administrative officer.
§ 300-40. Technical Review Committee.
A. Administration. The Administration of this chapter shall be under the
direction of the administrative officer, who shall be the Town Planner,
who shall report to the Planning Board in matters pertaining to the
administration of subdivisions only.
B. Appointment. Appointment of the Town Planner shall be by the Town
Council pursuant to the Town of Glocester Charter.
C. Duties and responsibilities. The duties and responsibilities of the
administrative officer shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Service as Chairperson of the Technical Review Committee;
(2) Enforcement of these regulations as provided in § 300-47 of these
regulations;
(3) Coordination of the review and approval procedures for
subdivisions and land development projects with adjacent
municipalities as is necessary to be consistent with applicable
federal, state, and local laws as directed by the Planning Board;
(4) Coordination of the review, approval, recording, and enforcement
provisions of these regulations; including coordination of the
enforcement efforts of the Zoning Officer, the Building Official, the
Public Works Director, the Town Solicitor, the Planning
Department, and other local officials responsible for enforcing or
carrying out the elements of these regulations.
A. Administration. There is hereby established the Technical Review
Committee. This Committee shall consist of the Town Planner, the
Building Official, and the Public Works Director.
B. Duties:
(1) To conduct technical reviews of applications for subdivisions and
land development projects which are subject to Planning Board
jurisdiction.
(2) To review and decide administrative subdivisions.
(3) To assist the administrative officer in carrying out the duties
outlined in § 300-39.
(4) To carry out any other duties assigned or delegated by the Planning
Board or these regulations.
§ 300-39 YARD SALES § 300-40
279:373
C. Records. Reports of the Technical Review Committee to the Planning
Board shall be in writing and shall be kept as the permanent
documentation on the development application. In no case shall
recommendations made by the Technical Review Committee to the
Planning Board be binding on the Planning Board in its activities or
decisions.
§ 300-40 GLOCESTER CODE § 300-40
279:374
ARTICLE VIII
Procedures
§ 300-41. Public hearing and notice requirements.
A. No local rules or regulations shall be adopted, repealed, or amended
pursuant to the Act and this chapter until after a public hearing has
been held upon the question before the Town of Glocester Planning
Board. The Town of Glocester Planning Board shall first give notice of
the public hearing by publication of notice in a newspaper of general
circulation within the Town of Glocester at least once each week for
three successive weeks prior to the date of the hearing, which may
include the week in which the hearing is to be held. At this hearing
opportunity shall be given to all persons interested to be heard upon the
matter of the proposed regulations. Written notice, which may be a
copy of the newspaper notice, shall be mailed to the Associate Director
of the Division of Planning of the Rhode Island Department of
Administration at least two weeks prior to the hearing. The newspaper
notice shall be published as a display advertisement, using a type size
at least as large as the normal type size used by the newspaper in its
news articles, and shall:
(1) Specify the place of said hearing and the date and time of its
commencement;
(2) Indicate that adoption, amendment or repeal of local regulations is
under consideration;
(3) Contain a statement of the proposed amendments to the
regulations that may be printed once in its entirety, or may
summarize or describe the matter under consideration;
(4) Advise those interested where and when a copy of the matter under
consideration may be obtained or examined and copied; and
(5) State that the proposals shown therein may be altered or amended
prior to the close of the public hearing without further advertising,
as a result of further study or because of the views expressed at the
public hearing. Any such alteration or amendment must be
presented for comment in the course of said hearing.
B. The Planning Board shall notify and seek the advice of the Town Council
three weeks prior to the adoption, repeal, and/or amendment of these
rules and regulations. The Town Council may make recommendations
within the notice period, in writing, to the Planning Board regarding
any adoption, repeal, or amendment to these rules and regulations.
C. Notice of the public hearing shall be sent by first class mail to the city or
town planning board of any municipality where there is a public or
quasi-public water source, or private water source that is used or is
suitable for use as a public water source, located within 2,000 feet of
the Town of Glocester boundaries.
§ 300-41 YARD SALES § 300-41
279:375
§ 300-42. Coordination of review with Zoning Board and Town
Council.
§ 300-43. Waivers or modifications.
D. Notice of a public hearing shall be sent to the governing body of any
state or municipal water department or agency, special water district,
or private water company that has riparian rights to a surface water
resource and/or surface watershed that is used or is suitable for use as
a public water source located within either Glocester or 2,000 feet of
Glocester's boundaries; provided, however, that a map survey has been
filed with the Building Official as specified in the 1991 Zoning Enabling
Act [R.I.G.L. § 45-24-53(E)].
E. No defect in the form of any notice under this section shall render any
regulations invalid, unless such defect is found to be intentional or
misleading.
F. The above requirements are to be construed as minimum requirements.
A. Zoning Board of Review:
(1) Where an applicant requires both a variance from Chapter 350,
Zoning, and Planning Board approval, the applicant shall first
obtain an advisory recommendation from the Planning Board, as
well as conditional Planning Board approval for the first required
approval stage for the proposed project, which may be
simultaneous, then obtain conditional Zoning Board relief, and then
return to the Planning Board for subsequent required approval(s).
(2) Where an applicant requires both a special use permit under
Chapter 350, Zoning, and Planning Board approval, the applicant
shall first obtain an advisory recommendation from the Planning
Board, as well as conditional Planning Board approval for the
preliminary approval stage for the proposed project, which may be
simultaneous, then obtain a conditional special use permit from the
Zoning Board, and then return to the Planning Board for
subsequent required approval(s).
B. Town Council. Where an applicant requires both Planning Board
approval and Town Council approval for a Zoning Ordinance or Zoning
Map change, the applicant shall first obtain an advisory
recommendation on the zoning change from the Planning Board, as well
as conditional Planning Board approval for the first approval stage for
the proposed project, which may be simultaneous, then obtain a
conditional zoning change from the Town Council, and then return to
the Planning Board for subsequent required approval(s).
A. Waiver of development plan approval.
(1) The Planning Board may waive requirements for development plan
approval where there is a change in use or occupancy and no
§ 300-41 GLOCESTER CODE § 300-43
279:376
extensive construction of improvements is sought. The waiver may
be granted only by a decision by the Planning Board finding that
the use will not affect existing drainage, circulation, relationship of
buildings to each other, landscaping, buffering, lighting and other
considerations of development plan approval, and that the existing
facilities do not require upgraded or additional site improvements.
(2) The application for a waiver of development plan approval review
shall include documentation, as required by the Planning Board, on
prior use of the site, the proposed use, and its impact. Such
documentation shall include a zoning certificate for the existing
use; fully completed building permit application for the proposed
use, including all plans and documents as required by the Building
Official for a building permit; letter requesting a waiver stating all
reasons therefor; a survey of existing site conditions showing all
data as specified in § 23-27.3-113.6 of the Rhode Island Building
Code, and written evaluation by the Building Official of the
proposed permit application.
B. Waiver and/or modification of requirements. The Planning Board shall
have the power to grant such waivers and/or modifications from the
requirements for subdivision approval as may be reasonable and within
the general purposes and intent of the provisions for local regulations.
The only grounds for such waivers and/or modifications shall be where
the literal enforcement of one or more provisions of the regulations is
impracticable and will exact undue hardship because of peculiar
conditions pertaining to the land in question or where such waiver and/
or modification is in the best interest of good planning practice and/or
design as evidenced by consistency with the Glocester Comprehensive
Plan and Chapter 350, Zoning.
C. Reinstatement of applications.
(1) When an applicant has exceeded a deadline established by this
chapter thereby invalidating a previously granted approval, the
Planning Board may reinstate the application under the following
conditions:
(a) The subdivision is consistent with the Glocester
Comprehensive Plan at the time of reapplication;
(b) The zoning of the proposed parcel is substantially the same as
it was at the time of original approval;
(c) Any applicable state or federal regulations obtained are still
valid;
(d) Physical conditions on the parcel are substantially the same as
they were at the time of original approval;
(e) The land development and subdivision regulations are
substantially the same as they were at the time of original
§ 300-43 YARD SALES § 300-43
279:377
§ 300-44. Decisions and records.
§ 300-45. Recording of plats and plans.
approval and any changes made thereto would not have
affected the previously granted approval.
(f) There is no outstanding violation of any condition of prior
approval or of any local, state, or federal act, ordinance, rule or
regulation applicable to the site, including, but not limited to,
nonpayment of taxes or fees.
(2) Applications for reinstatement of a previously approved subdivision
shall be made to the Planning Board in writing by the applicant.
The Planning Board, in approving or denying the reinstatement,
shall make findings of fact which shall be made part of the record.
D. Decision. The Planning Board shall approve, approve with conditions,
or deny a request for a waiver or modification by the following
procedure:
(1) The Planning Board's decision shall be made within 45 days of the
date the request for waiver or modification was first considered by
the Planning Board, unless the applicant waives the deadline.
(2) The Planning Board shall refer the application to the Technical
Review Committee for advisory recommendation.
(3) The Planning Board's decision shall be in writing, and shall contain
findings of fact addressing the conditions contained in this section.
A. All records of the Planning Board proceedings and decisions shall be
written and kept permanently available for public review. Completed
applications for proposed land development and subdivision projects
under review by the Planning Board shall be available for public review.
B. Participation in a Planning Board meeting or other proceedings by any
party shall not be a cause for civil action or liability except for acts not
in good faith, intentional misconduct, knowing violation of law,
transactions where there is an improper personal benefit, or malicious,
wanton, or willful misconduct.
C. All final written comments to the Planning Board from the
administrative officer, Town departments, the Technical Review
Committee, state and federal agencies, and local commissions shall be
part of the permanent record of the development application.
D. Votes. All votes of the Planning Board shall be made part of the
permanent record and shall show the members present and their votes.
A decision by the Planning Board to approve any land development or
subdivision application shall require a vote for approval by a majority of
the current Planning Board membership.
§ 300-43 GLOCESTER CODE § 300-45
279:378
§ 300-46. Changes to plats and plans.
A. All approved final plans and plats for land development and subdivision
projects shall be endorsed by the Planning Board Chairperson or the
Secretary of the Planning Board attesting to the approval by the
Planning Board. All minor land development or subdivision plans and
plats and administrative plats shall be signed by the Planning Board
Chairperson or Secretary or the Board's designated agent.
B. Upon signature of approval, all plans and plats shall be submitted to the
administrative officer prior to recording and filing in the office of the
Town Clerk for final review by the administrative officer and the Town
Solicitor for proper legal form and content. The Planning Board shall
require the applicant to reimburse the Town for any fair and reasonable
legal expense that may be incurred by specific request of the Board for
legal review and/or advice as a result of a special circumstance or need.
The material to be recorded for all plans and plats shall include all
pertinent plans with notes thereon concerning all the essential aspects
of the approved project design, the implementation schedule, special
conditions placed on the development by the Town of Glocester, permits
and agreements with state and federal reviewing agencies, and other
information as required by the Planning Board. The final approval and
signed plat shall be affixed on a plat card in a manner approved by the
Town Clerk. The applicant shall be liable for the costs of recording the
final plans and plat.
C. Other parts of the application record for subdivisions and land
development projects, including all meeting records, approved master
and preliminary plans, site analyses, impact analyses, all legal
agreements, records of the public hearing, construction drawings and
the entire final approval set of drawings, shall be kept permanently by
the administrative officer who is responsible for implementation and
enforcement.
D. The administrative officer shall notify the Town 911 Coordinator
servicing the new plat with the information required by the emergency
authorities.
A. For all changes to the approved plans of land development projects or
subdivisions, an amendment of the final development plans is required
by the proper authority prior to the issuance of any building permits.
Any changes approved in the final plan shall be recorded as
amendments to the final plan in accordance with the procedure
established for recording plats in § 300-45.
B. Minor changes, as defined below, to a land development or subdivision
plan may be approved administratively, by the administrative officer,
whereupon a permit may be issued. Such changes may be authorized
without additional hearings, at the discretion of the administrative
officer. All such changes shall be made part of the permanent record of
the project application. This provision shall not prohibit the
§ 300-45 YARD SALES § 300-46
279:379
administrative officer from requesting a recommendation from either
the Technical Review Committee or the Planning Board. Denial of the
proposed change(s) shall be referred to the Planning Board for review
as a major change. For the purpose of this section, the term “minor
change” shall mean any change which, in the opinion of the
administrative officer, results in no substantial alteration of the intent
of the original approval. Such minor changes shall include, but are not
limited to the following:
(1) Any revision which can be reviewed and approved as an
administrative subdivision according to the provisions of Article III.
(2) Modifications which are required by outside permitting agencies
such as, but not limited to, the Department of Environmental
Management, and the Department of Transportation.
(3) Modifications to construction plans which are required due to
unforeseen physical conditions on the parcel being subdivided and
which are acceptable to the Director of Public Works and the
administrative officer.
(4) Modifications of utility plans which are acceptable to the Director
of Public Works and the applicable utility company.
(5) Modifications to drainage, grading, and erosion and sediment
control plans which are acceptable to the Director of Public Works
and the administrative officer and which do not require approval of
state or federal reviewing authorities.
C. Major changes to a land development or subdivision plan may only be
approved by the Planning Board and must follow the same review and
public hearing process required for the approval of preliminary plans as
described in § 300-29D. For the purpose of this section, the term “major
change” shall mean any change which, in the opinion of the
administrative officer, is substantially inconsistent with the intent of the
original approval. Such major changes shall include, but are not
necessarily limited to, the following:
(1) Changes which would have the effect of creating additional lots or
dwelling units for development;
(2) Changes which would be contrary to any applicable provision of
Chapter 350, Zoning, or which would require a special use permit
from the Zoning Board of Review;
(3) Changes which would have a significant adverse impact on any
utility, service, street or road; [Amended 11-15-2007, effective
12-20-2007]
(4) Changes which may have significant adverse impacts on abutting
property owner(s) or any property in the vicinity of the proposed
subdivision or land development project.
§ 300-46 GLOCESTER CODE § 300-46
279:380
§ 300-47. Violations and penalties.
D. The Planning Board, only upon application by all landowners of the plat
to be affected, may determine that the application for plat rescission is
not consistent with the Comprehensive Community Plan and is not in
compliance with the standards and provisions of Chapter 350, Zoning,
and/or this chapter and shall hold a public hearing, which adheres to
the requirements for notice described in § 300-29D. The Planning Board
shall approve, approve with conditions or modifications, or deny the
application for rescission of the plat according to the requirements of
§ 300-44. If it is necessary to abandon any street covered under Chapter
6 of Title 24 of the General Laws of the State of Rhode Island, the
Planning Board shall submit to the Town Council the documents
necessary for the abandonment process. Once the required process for
rescission or for rescission and abandonment has been completed, the
revised plat shall be signed and recorded as specified in § 300-45.
A. Any person who fails or refuses to adhere to all of the terms and
conditions of any subdivision of land or development plan that has been
approved by the Planning Board or the administrative officer shall be in
violation of these regulations.
B. Violation of these regulations shall include any action related to the
transfer or sale of land in unapproved subdivisions. Any owner, or agent
of the owner, who transfers, sells or negotiates to sell any land by
reference to or exhibition of, or by other use of, a plat of the subdivision
before the plat has been approved by the Planning Board and recorded
in the Town of Glocester land evidence records shall be in violation of
the local regulations and subject to the penalties described in these
regulations.
C. Any person who, having submitted an application for subdivision or
development approval, begins construction of the subdivision
development, or constructs any structure or improvement on the
parcel, without having first received approval from the Planning Board
or the administrative officer, shall be in violation of these regulations.
D. The Planning Board shall report any suspected violations to the Town
Council for further action. The Town of Glocester may also cause suit to
be brought to Providence County Superior Court or the Rhode Island
Supreme Court to restrain the violation of, or to compel compliance
with, the provisions of these regulations. The Town of Glocester may
consolidate an action for injunctive relief and/or fines under these
regulations in Providence County Superior Court.
E. The penalty for each violation shall reasonably relate to the seriousness
of the offense, and shall not exceed $500 for each violation, and each
day shall be a separate offense. Any such fine shall inure to the
municipality.
§ 300-46 YARD SALES § 300-47
279:381

ARTICLE IX
Appeals
§ 300-48. Zoning Board of Review to act as board of appeal.
The Town Council shall establish the Town Zoning Board of Review as
the board of appeal to hear appeals of decisions of the Planning Board
or the administrative officer on matters of review and approval of land
development and subdivision projects.
§ 300-49. Standards of review.
§ 300-50. Right to appeal.
A. As established by these regulations, in instances of a Board of Appeal's
review of a Planning Board, the Technical Review Committee, or the
administrative officer's decision on matters subject to these
regulations, the Board of Appeal shall not substitute its own judgment
for that of the Planning Board, the Technical Review Committee or the
administrative officer but must consider the issue upon the findings and
record of the Planning Board, the Technical Review Committee or the
administrative officer. The Board of Appeal shall not reverse a decision
of the Planning Board, the Technical Review Committee or the
administrative officer except on a finding of prejudicial error, clear
error, or lack of support by the weight of the evidence in the record.
B. The concurring vote of three of the five members of the Board of Appeal
sitting at a hearing shall be necessary to reverse any decision of the
Planning Board, the Technical Review Committee, or the administrative
officer.
C. In the instance where the Board of Appeal overturns a decision of the
Planning Board, the Technical Review Committee, or the administrative
officer, the proposed project application shall be remanded to the
Planning Board, the Technical Review Committee or the administrative
officer, at the stage of processing from which the appeal was taken, for
further proceedings before the Planning Board, the Technical Review
Committee or the administrative officer and/or for the final disposition,
which shall be consistent with the Board of Appeal's decision.
D. The Board of Appeal shall keep complete records of all proceedings,
including a record of all votes taken, and shall put all decisions on
appeals in writing. The Board of Appeal shall include in the written
record the reasons for each decision.
A. An appeal from any decision of the Planning Board, the Technical
Review Committee or the administrative officer charged in the
regulations with enforcement of any provisions, except as provided
herein, may be taken to the Board of Appeal by an aggrieved party.
§ 300-48 YARD SALES § 300-50
279:383
§ 300-51. Process of appeal.
§ 300-52. Public hearing on appeal.
§ 300-53. Superior Court.
See R.I.G.L. § 45-23-71 for more information.
B. An appeal from a decision of the Board of Appeal may be taken by an
aggrieved party to the Providence County Superior Court.
A. An appeal to the Board of Appeal from a decision or action of the
Planning Board the Technical Review Committee or the administrative
officer may be taken by an aggrieved party. Such appeal must be taken
within 20 days after the decision has been recorded and posted in the
office of the Town Clerk.
B. The appeal shall be in writing and shall state clearly and unambiguously
the issue or decision which is being appealed, the reason for the appeal,
and the relief sought. The appeal shall either be sent by certified mail,
with a return receipt requested, or shall be hand-delivered to the Board
of Appeal. The Town Clerk shall accept delivery of an appeal on behalf
of the Board of Appeal.
C. Upon receipt of an appeal, the Board of Appeal shall require the
Planning Board, the Technical Review Committee or the administrative
officer to transmit forthwith to the Board of Appeal all papers,
documents and plans, or a certified copy thereof, constituting the
record of the action which is being appealed.
A. The Board of Appeal shall hold a public hearing on the appeal within 45
days of the receipt of the appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as
due notice to the parties of interest. At the hearing any party may
appear in person, or may be represented by an agent or attorney. The
Board shall render a decision within 10 days of the close of the public
hearing. The cost of any notice required for the hearing shall be borne
by the appellant.
B. The Board of Appeal shall only hear appeals of the actions of the
Planning Board, the Technical Review Committee or the administrative
officer at a meeting called especially for the purpose of hearing such
appeals and which has been so advertised.
C. The hearing, which may be held on the same date and at the same place
as a meeting of the Zoning Board of Review, must be held as a separate
meeting from any Zoning Board of Review meeting. Separate minutes
and records of votes as required by § 300-49 shall be maintained by the
Board of Appeal.
A. Appeals to the Superior Court. An aggrieved party may appeal a
decision of the Board of Appeal to the Superior Court for Providence
County by filing a complaint setting forth the reasons of appeal within
§ 300-50 GLOCESTER CODE § 300-53
279:384
20 days after the decision has been recorded and posted in the office of
the Town Clerk. The Board of Appeal shall file the original documents
acted upon by it and constituting the record of the case appealed from,
or certified copies thereof, together with such other facts as may be
pertinent, with the Clerk of the Court within 30 days after being served
with a copy of the complaint. When the complaint is filed by someone
other than the original applicant or appellant, such original applicant
or appellant and the members of the Planning Board shall be made
parties to the proceedings. The appeal shall not stay proceedings upon
the decision appealed from, but the Court may, in its discretion, grant
a stay on appropriate terms and make such other orders as it deems
necessary for an equitable disposition of the appeal.
B. Enactment of or amendment of local regulations. An appeal of an
enactment of or an amendment of this chapter may be taken to the
Providence County Superior Court by filing a complaint, as set forth
herein, within 30 days after such enactment, or amendment has
become effective. The appeal may be taken by any legal resident or
landowner of the Town of Glocester or by any association of residents or
landowners of the Town of Glocester. The appeal shall not stay the
enforcement of the local regulations, as enacted or amended, but the
Court may, in its discretion, grant a stay on appropriate terms, which
may include the filing of a bond, and make such other orders as it
deems necessary for an equitable disposition of the appeal.
C. See R.I.G.L. § 45-23-72 for additional procedures.
§ 300-53 YARD SALES § 300-53
279:385

ARTICLE X
Definitions
§ 300-54. Terms defined.
Where words or phrases used in this chapter are defined in the definitions
section of either the Rhode Island Comprehensive Planning and Land Use
Regulation Act, R.I.G.L. § 45-22.2-4, or the Zoning Enabling Act of 1991,
R.I.G.L. § 45-24-31, they shall have the meanings stated therein. In addition,
the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings.
Additional words and phrases may be defined in local ordinances,
regulations and rules under this chapter; however, the words and phrases
herein defined shall be controlling in all local ordinances, regulations, and
rules created hereunder. In addition, the words "chapter," "ordinance," and
"regulations" are used interchangeably throughout.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Town Planner of Glocester as
designated by the Town Council to administer the land development and
subdivision regulations and to coordinate with local boards and
commissions, municipal staff and state agencies. See § 300-39.
ADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISION — Resubdivision of existing lots which
yields no additional lots for development, and involves no creation or
extension of streets. Such resubdivision shall only involve divisions,
mergers, mergers and division, or adjustments of boundaries of existing
lots.
AGRICULTURAL LAND — Land suitable for agriculture by reason of
suitability of soil or other natural characteristics or past use for agricultural
purposes. Agricultural land includes that defined as prime farm land or
additional farm land of statewide importance for Rhode Island by the Soil
Conservation Service of the United States Department of
Agriculture.[Added 11-15-2007, effective 12-20-2007]
APPLICANT — An owner or authorized agent submitting an application to
subdivide property.
BOARD OF APPEAL — The local review authority for appeals of actions
of the administrative officer and the Planning Board on matters of land
development or subdivision, which shall be the local Zoning Board of
Review constituted as the Board of Appeal. See § 300-48.
BOND — See “improvement guarantee.”
BUILDABLE LOT — A lot where construction for the use(s) permitted
on the site under Chapter 350, Zoning, is considered practicable by the
Planning Board, considering the physical constraints to development of the
site as well as the requirements of the pertinent federal, state and local
regulations. See § 300-8D.
BUILDING ENVELOPE — As defined in Chapter 350, Zoning.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETENESS — A notice issued by the administrative
officer informing an applicant that the application is complete and meets
§ 300-54 YARD SALES § 300-54
279:387
the requirements of the municipality's regulations, and that the applicant
may proceed with the approval process.
CONCEPT PLAN — A drawing with accompanying information showing the
basic elements of a proposed land development plan or subdivision as used
for preapplication meetings and early discussions, and classification of the
project within the approval process.
CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT — A type of land development project
which allows a community to guide growth to the most appropriate areas
within a parcel of land to avoid impacts to the environment and to protect
the character-defining features of the property. See § 300-35.[Added
11-15-2007, effective 12-20-2007]
CONSISTENCY WITH THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — A requirement of
all local land use regulations which means that all such regulations and
subsequent actions shall be in accordance with the public policies arrived at
through detailed study and analysis and adopted by the Town of Glocester
as the Comprehensive Community Plan as specified in § 300-6.
CONVENTIONAL SUBDIVISION — A residential subdivision in which all
land being subdivided is dedicated to either development lots or street
right-of-way, with no common open space; not a conservation
development.[Added 11-15-2007, effective 12-20-2007]
CONVENTIONAL YIELD PLAN — A plan of a conventional subdivision or
land development project (as opposed to a conservation development) that
depicts the maximum number of single-family building lots or dwelling units
that could reasonably be built on a parcel of land under current zoning,
taking into account physical constraints to development, such as wetlands,
or other land unsuitable for development.[Added 11-15-2007, effective
12-20-2007]
DEDICATION, FEE-IN-LIEU-OF — Payments of cash which are authorized
in the local regulations when requirements for mandatory dedication of land
are not met because of physical conditions of the site or other reasons. The
conditions under which such payments will be allowed and all formulas for
calculating the amount shall be specified in advance in the local regulations.
See § 300-34.
DEVELOPMENT REGULATION — Zoning, subdivision, land development
plan, development plan review, historic district, official map, floodplain
regulation, soil erosion control or any other governmental regulation of the
use and development of land.
DIVISION OF LAND — A subdivision.
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS — Natural features, resources, or land
characteristics that are sensitive to change and may require conservation
measures or the application of special development techniques to prevent
degradation of the site, or may require limited development or, in certain
instances, may preclude development. See also “physical constraints to
development.”
§ 300-54 GLOCESTER CODE § 300-54
279:388
FINAL PLAN — The final stage of land development and subdivision review.
See § 300-24 or 300-30.
FINAL PLAT — The final drawing(s) of all or a portion of a subdivision to
be recorded after approval by the Planning Board and any accompanying
material as described in the community's regulations and/or required by the
Planning Board.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — See the Rhode Island State Building Code.
GOVERNING BODY — The Town Council, which has the power to adopt
ordinances, accept public dedications, release public improvement
guarantees, and collect fees.
IMPROVEMENT — Any natural or built item which becomes part of, is
placed upon, or is affixed to real estate.
IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEE — A security instrument accepted by the
Town of Glocester to ensure that all improvements, facilities, or work
required by the land development and subdivision regulations, or required
by the Town of Glocester as a condition of approval, will be completed in
compliance with the approved plans and specifications of a development.
See § 300-33.
LAND DEVELOPMENT PROJECT — A project in which one or more lots,
tracts, or parcels of land are to be developed or redeveloped as a
coordinated site for a structure, including, but not limited to, planned
development, conservation development and/or cluster development for
residential, commercial, institutional, recreational, open space, and/or
mixed uses as may be provided for in the Zoning Ordinance.[Added
11-15-2007, effective 12-20-2007]
LOCAL REGULATIONS — The land development and subdivision review
regulations adopted under the provisions of the State Land Development
and Subdivision Review Enabling Act of 1992. For purposes of clarification,
throughout this chapter, where reference is made to local regulations,
it shall be understood as the land development and subdivision review
regulations and all related ordinances and rules properly adopted pursuant
to the Act.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — Any security instrument which may be
required and accepted by the Town of Glocester to ensure that necessary
improvements will function as required for a specific period of time. See
“improvement guarantee.”
MAJOR LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN — Any land development plan not
classified as a minor land development plan.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as either an
administrative subdivision or a minor subdivision.
MASTER PLAN — An overall plan for a proposed project site outlining
general, rather than detailed, development intentions. It describes the basic
parameters of a major development proposal, rather than giving full
§ 300-54 YARD SALES § 300-54
279:389
engineering details; required in major land development or major
subdivision review. See § 300-28.
MINOR LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A development plan for a
residential project as defined in local regulations, provided that such
development does not require waivers or modifications as specified in the
Act. All nonresidential land development projects shall be considered as
major land development plans.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — A plan for a residential subdivision of land
consisting of five or fewer units or lots, provided that such subdivision does
not require waivers or modifications as specified in these regulations. All
nonresidential subdivisions shall be considered as major subdivisions.
MODIFICATION OF REQUIREMENTS — See § 300-43.
PARCEL — A lot, or contiguous group of lots in single ownership or under
single control, and usually considered a unit for purposes of development;
also referred to as a “tract.”
PARKING AREA OR LOT — All that portion of a development that is used
by vehicles; the total area used for vehicular access, circulation, parking,
loading and unloading.
PERMITTING AUTHORITY — The local agency of government specifically
empowered by state enabling law and local ordinance to hear and decide on
specific matters pertaining to local land use.
PHASED DEVELOPMENT — Development, usually for large-scale projects,
where construction of public and/or private improvements proceeds by
section(s) subsequent to approval of a master plan for the entire site. See
§ 300-34.
PHYSICAL CONSTRAINTS TO DEVELOPMENT — Characteristics of a site
or area, either natural or man-made, which present significant difficulties
to construction of the uses permitted on that site, or would require
extraordinary construction methods. See also “environmental constraints.”
PLANNING BOARD — The official planning agency of the Town of Glocester.
PLAT — A drawing or drawings of a land development or subdivision plan
showing the location, boundaries, and lot lines of individual properties, as
well as other necessary information as specified in the local regulations.
PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE — An initial meeting between developers
and municipal representatives which affords developers the opportunity to
present their proposals informally and to receive comments and directions
from the Town officials and others. See § 300-11.
PRELIMINARY PLAN — The required stage of land development and
subdivision review which shall require detailed engineered drawings and all
required state and federal permits. See § 300-29.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT — Any street or other roadway, sidewalk,
pedestrian way, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, drainage feature, or
other facility for which the local government or other governmental entity
§ 300-54 GLOCESTER CODE § 300-54
279:390
either is presently responsible, or will ultimately assume the responsibility
for maintenance and operation upon municipal acceptance.
PUBLIC INFORMATIONAL MEETING — A meeting of the Planning Board
or Town Council preceded by a notice, open to the public and at which the
public shall be heard.
RESUBDIVISION — Any change of an approved or recorded subdivision
plat or in a lot recorded in the municipal land evidence records, or that
affects the lot lines of any areas reserved for public use, or that affects
any map or plan legally recorded prior to the adoption of the local land
development and subdivision regulations. For the purposes of this chapter,
any such action shall constitute a subdivision.
SPECIMEN VEGETATION — Rhode Island Natural Heritage Program plant
species listed as either state endangered, state threatened, state interest
species of concern, or state extirpated; plant species providing habitat
for animal species listed by the Heritage Program in the above-mentioned
categories; species such as American Holly (Ilex opalca) and Rhododendron
(Rhododendron maximum) which are at the limits of their natural range;
any species such as American Elm (Ulmus americana) and American
Chestnut (Castanea dentate) whose population has been drastically reduced
by disease, insects or habitat destruction.[Added 11-15-2007, effective
12-20-2007]
STORMWATER DETENTION — A provision for storage of stormwater runoff
and the controlled release of such runoff during and after a flood or storm.
STORMWATER RETENTION — A provision for storage of stormwater
runoff.
STREET — A public or private thoroughfare used, or intended to be used,
for passage or travel by motor vehicles. Streets are further classified by the
functions they perform. See “street classification.”
STREET, ACCESS TO — An adequate and permanent way of entering a lot.
All lots of record shall have access to a public street for all vehicles normally
associated with the uses permitted for that lot.
STREET, ALLEY — A public or private thoroughfare primarily designed to
serve as secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose
principal frontage is on some other street.
STREET CLASSIFICATION — A method of roadway organization which
identifies a street hierarchy according to function within a road system,
that is, types of vehicles served and anticipated volumes, for the purposes
of promoting safety, efficient land use and the design character of
neighborhoods and districts. Local classifications shall use the following as
major categories:
ARTERIAL — A major street that serves as an avenue for the circulation
of traffic into, out of, or around the municipality and carries high
volumes of traffic.
A.
§ 300-54 YARD SALES § 300-54
279:391
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC — A local street with only one outlet and having an
appropriate vehicular turnaround, either temporary or permanent, at the
closed end.
STREET, LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY — A freeway or expressway
providing for through traffic. Owners or occupants of abutting property on
lands and other persons have no legal right to access, except at such points
and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having
jurisdiction over the highway.
STREET, PRIVATE — A thoroughfare established as a separate tract for
the benefit of multiple, adjacent properties and meeting specific, municipal
improvement standards. This definition shall not apply to driveways.
STREET, PUBLIC — All public property reserved or dedicated for street
traffic which has been accepted by the Town of Glocester.
STREET, STUB — A portion of a street reserved to provide access to future
development, which may provide for utility connections.
SUBDIVIDER — Any person who:
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision, of a lot, tract or parcel of land
into two or more lots, tracts, or parcels. Any adjustment to existing lot
lines of a recorded lot by any means shall be considered a subdivision.
All resubdivision activity shall be considered a subdivision. The division of
property for purposes of financing constitutes a subdivision.
TECHNICAL REVIEW COMMITTEE — A committee appointed by the
Planning Board for the purpose of reviewing, commenting, and making
recommendations to the Planning Board with respect to approval of land
development and subdivision applications. See § 300-40.
TEMPORARY IMPROVEMENT — Improvements built and maintained by a
developer during construction of a development project and prior to release
of the improvement guarantee, but not intended to be permanent.
COLLECTOR — A street whose principal function is to carry traffic
between local streets and arterial streets but that may also provide
direct access to abutting properties.
B.
LOCAL — Streets whose primary function is to provide access to
abutting properties.
C.
Having an interest in land, causes it, directly or indirectly, to be divided
into a subdivision; or
A.
Directly or indirectly sells, leases, or develops, or offers to sell, lease, or
develop, or advertises to sell, lease, or develop, any interest, lot, parcel,
site, unit, or plat in a subdivision; or
B.
Engages, directly or through an agent, in the business of selling,
leasing, developing, or offering for sale, lease, or development a
subdivision or any interest, lot, parcel, site, unit, or plat in a
subdivision.
C.
§ 300-54 GLOCESTER CODE § 300-54
279:392
VESTED RIGHTS — The right to initiate or continue the development of
an approved project for a specified period of time, under the regulations
that were in effect at the time of approval, even if, after the approval, the
regulations change prior to the completion of the project.
VIEWSHED — The primary area which can be viewed from a defined
observation point. To determine the extent of the viewshed, important
vantage points and significant features should be identified. The area that
can be seen from those points should be designated as the
viewshed.[Added 11-15-2007, effective 12-20-2007]
WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS — See § 300-43.
§ 300-54 YARD SALES § 300-54
279:393
Chapter 350
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning and zoning — See Charter, Art. XII.
Planning Board — See Ch. 106.
Building permits — See Ch. 145.
Camping and travel trailer parks — See Ch.
151.
Drainage — See Ch. 162.
Earth removal — See Ch. 166.
Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 177.
Excavations, holes and wells — See Ch. 181.
Historical and archaeological burial
sites — See Ch. 195.
Mobile homes and house trailers — See Ch.
208.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 243.
Affordable housing — See Ch. 286.
Trees — See Ch. 251.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 300.
Fee Schedule — See Ch. 368.
Historic Commission Rules and
Regulations — See Ch. A423.
§ 300-54 GLOCESTER CODE § 300-54
279:394
ARTICLE I
Administration and Procedures
§ 350-1. Statement of purpose.
The zoning regulations and districts set forth in this chapter have been
established in accordance with the Glocester Comprehensive Community
Plan, adopted, and as may be amended, in accordance with R.I.G.L.
§ 45-22.2, and for the following purposes, each with equal priority and
numbered for reference purposes only:
A. Promoting the public health, safety, and general welfare;
B. Providing for a range of uses and intensities of use appropriate to the
character of the Town and reflecting current and expected future
needs;
C. Providing for orderly growth and development which recognizes:
(1) The goals and patterns of land use contained in the Comprehensive
Plan of the Town adopted pursuant to Rhode Island General Laws,
Title 45, Chapter 22.2;
(2) The natural characteristics of the land, including its suitability for
use based on soil characteristics, topography, and susceptibility to
surface and groundwater pollution;
(3) The values and dynamic nature of freshwater ponds, shorelines and
wetlands;
(4) The values of unique or valuable natural resources and features;
(5) The availability and capacity of existing and planned public and/or
private services and facilities;
(6) The need to shape and balance development; and
(7) The use of innovative development regulations and techniques.
D. Providing for the control, protection, and/or abatement of air, water,
groundwater, and noise pollution, and soil erosion and sedimentation;
E. Providing for the protection of the natural, historic, cultural, and scenic
character of the Town;
F. Providing for the preservation and promotion of agricultural
production, forest, silviculture, aquaculture, timber resources, and
open space;
G. Providing for the protection of public investment in transportation,
water, stormwater management systems, sewage treatment and
disposal, solid waste treatment and disposal, schools, recreation, public
facilities, open space, and other public requirements;
§ 350-1 YARD SALES § 350-1
279:395
§ 350-2. Consistency with Comprehensive Community Plan.
The districts and regulations contained in this chapter are made in
accordance with and consistent with the Glocester Comprehensive
Community Plan, as adopted and as may be amended. In the instance
of uncertainty in the construction or application of any section of this
chapter, the chapter shall be construed in a manner that will further the
implementation of, and not be contrary to, the goals and policies and
applicable elements of the Glocester Comprehensive Community Plan.
§ 350-3. Coordination with contiguous communities.
Any change in this chapter that may have an effect upon a contiguous
municipality or other agencies of local or state government shall allow
for the coordination of affected or interested parties in the ordinance
amendment, adoption and revision process, as specified § 350-7E(8) of this
chapter, and as may be required in Title 45, Chapter 22.2 of the Rhode
Island General Laws.
§ 350-4. Compliance with use, dimension and density regulations
required.
H. Promoting a balance of housing choices, for all income levels and
groups, to assure the health, safety and welfare of all citizens and their
rights to affordable, accessible, safe, and sanitary housing;
I. Providing opportunities for the establishment of low- and moderateincome
housing;
J. Promoting safety from fire, flood, and other natural or man-made
disasters;
K. Promoting a high level of quality in design in the development of private
and public facilities;
L. Promoting implementation of the Glocester Comprehensive Plan
adopted pursuant to Title 45, Chapter 22.2, of the Rhode Island General
Laws;
M. Providing for coordination of land uses with contiguous municipalities,
other municipalities, the state, and other agencies, as appropriate,
especially with regard to resources and facilities that extend beyond
municipal boundaries or have a direct impact on that municipality;
N. Providing for efficient review of development proposals, to clarify and
expedite the zoning approval process;
O. Providing for procedures for the administration of this chapter,
including, but not limited to, variances, special use permits, and, where
adopted, procedures for modifications.
§ 350-1 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-4
279:396
§ 350-5. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them and shall be controlling.
Terms not defined herein shall have the meanings customarily assigned to
them.
ABUTTER — One whose property abuts, that is, adjoins at a border,
boundary, or point with no intervening land.
ACCESSORY FAMILY DWELLING UNIT — An accessory dwelling unit for
the sole use of one or more members of the family of the occupant or
occupants of the principal residence, but not needing to have a separate
means of ingress and egress.
ACCESSORY USE — A use of land or of a building, or portion thereof,
customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or
building. An accessory use may be restricted to the same lot as the principal
use. An accessory use shall not be permitted without the principal use to
which it is related.
AGGRIEVED PARTY — An aggrieved party, for purposes of this chapter,
shall be:
AGRICULTURAL LAND — Land suitable for agriculture by reason of
suitability of soil or other natural characteristics or past use for agricultural
purposes. Agricultural land includes that defined as prime farmland or
additional farmland of statewide importance for Rhode Island by the Soil
Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture.
A. Use: No building, structure, premises or land shall be occupied, used,
erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, moved or enlarged for any
use other than that which is permitted in the zone in which such
building, structure or premises is located. No building, structure,
premises or land shall hereafter be used for any use other than is
permitted in the zone in which it is located, except as herein provided.
Any use not specifically listed or otherwise permitted in a district
hereafter established by this chapter shall be deemed prohibited.
B. Dimension: No building or structure shall hereafter be erected,
constructed, reconstructed, altered, moved or repaired to exceed the
dimensional limits established for the zone within which such building
or structure is located, except as hereafter so provided.
C. Density: No land shall be altered, divided, subdivided and no lot or lots
shall be created, used or occupied unless in conformity with the density
and dimensional requirements of this chapter.
Any person or persons or entity or entities who can demonstrate that
their property will be injured by a decision of any officer or agency
responsible for administering this chapter; or
A.
B. Anyone requiring notice pursuant to this chapter.
§ 350-4 YARD SALES § 350-5
279:397
AIRPORT HAZARD AREA — Any area of land or water upon which an airport
hazard might be established if not prevented as provided for in Title 1,
Chapter 3 of the Rhode Island General Laws.
ALTERATIONS — As applied to a building or structure, means a change
or rearrangement in the structural parts or in the existing facilities, or an
enlargement whether by extension of a side or by increasing in height or by
movement from one location or position to another.
ANTENNA — A device utilized to emit or receive radio frequency
communications, including antenna configurations such as panel antennas,
whip-style antennas, dish antennas and multielement antennas.
APPLICANT — An owner or authorized agent of the owner submitting an
application or appealing an action of any official, board or agency.
APPLICATION — The completed form or forms and all accompanying
documents, exhibits, and fees required of an applicant by an approving
authority for development review, approval, or permitting purposes.
BILLBOARD or ADVERTISING STRUCTURE — Any sign or advertising
device not related to a use on the lot regardless of its size or dimensions.
BOARD — The Zoning Board of Review of the Town of Glocester.
BUFFER — Land which is maintained in either a natural or landscaped
state, and is used to screen and/or mitigate the impacts of development on
surrounding areas, properties or rights-of-way.
BUILDING — Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering
any use or occupancy.
BUILDING ENVELOPE — The three-dimensional space within which a
structure is permitted to be built on a lot and which is defined by
regulations governing building setbacks, maximum height, and bulk; by
other regulations; and/or any combination thereof.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance from grade, as determined
by the Town, to the top of the highest point of the roof or structure. The
distance may exclude spires, chimneys, flagpoles, and the like.
CAMOUFLAGE — A method of disguising or reducing the visibility of
wireless facilities, towers and antennas through painting, enclosing,
shielding behind or inside another structure.
CLUSTER — A site planning technique that concentrates buildings in
specific areas on the site to allow the remaining land to be used for
recreation, common open space, and/or preservation of environmentally,
historically, culturally, or other sensitive features and/or structures. The
techniques used to concentrate buildings shall be specified in this chapter
and may include, but are not limited to, reduction in lot areas, setback
requirements, and/or bulk requirements, with the resultant open land being
devoted by deed restrictions for one or more uses. Under cluster
development there is no increase in the number of lots that would be
permitted under conventional development except where chapter
§ 350-5 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-5
279:398
provisions include incentive bonuses for certain types or conditions of
development.
COMMON OWNERSHIP — Either:
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE — A home or residential facility where children
and/or adults reside in a family setting and may or may not receive
supervised care. This shall not include halfway houses or substance abuse
treatment facilities. This shall include, but not be limited to the following:
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The Comprehensive Plan adopted and
approved pursuant to Title 45, Chapter 22.2 of the Rhode Island General
Laws; and any zoning ordinance adopted shall be in compliance with said
aforementioned chapter.
CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT — A type of land development project
which allows a community to guide growth to the most appropriate areas
within a parcel of land to avoid impacts to the environment and to protect
the character-defining features of the property. See Glocester Land
Ownership by one or more individuals or entities in any form of
ownership of two or more contiguous lots; or
A.
Ownership by any association (such ownership may also include a
municipality) of one or more lots under specific development
techniques.
B.
Whenever six or fewer retarded children or adults reside in any type
of residence in the community, as licensed by the state pursuant to
Chapter 24 of Title 40.1 of the Rhode Island General Laws. All
requirements pertaining to local zoning are waived for these
community residences;
A.
A group home providing care or supervision, or both, to not more
than eight mentally disabled or mentally handicapped or physically
handicapped persons, and licensed by the state pursuant to Chapter 24
of Title 40.1 of the Rhode Island General Laws;
B.
A residence for children providing care or supervision, or both, to not
more than eight children, including those of the caregiver, and licensed
by the state pursuant to Chapter 72.1 of Title 42 of the Rhode Island
General Laws;
C.
A community transitional residence providing care or assistance, or
both, to no more than six unrelated persons or no more than three
families, not to exceed a total of eight persons, requiring temporary
financial assistance, and/or to persons who are victims of crimes, abuse,
or neglect, and who are expected to reside in that residence not less
than 60 days nor more than two years. Residents will have access to
and use of all common areas, including eating areas and living rooms,
and will receive appropriate social services for the purpose of fostering
independence, self-sufficiency, and eventual transition to a permanent
living situation.
D.
§ 350-5 YARD SALES § 350-5
279:399
Development and Subdivision Regulations.60[Added 11-15-2007,
effective 12-20-2007]
CONVENTIONAL SUBDIVISION — A residential subdivision in which all
land being subdivided is dedicated to either development lots or street
right-of-way; not a conservation development. [Added 11-15-2007,
effective 12-20-2007]
CONVENTIONAL YIELD PLAN — A plan of a conventional subdivision or
land development project (as opposed to a conservation development) that
depicts the maximum number of single-family building lots or dwelling units
that could reasonably be built on a parcel of land under current zoning,
taking into account the presence of physical constraints to development,
such as wetlands, or other land unsuitable for development.[Added
11-15-2007, effective 12-20-2007]
CUL-DE-SAC — A required turnaround at the termination of a dead-end
street, the right-of-way diameter of which is required to be as set forth in
Chapter 300, Subdivision of Land.
DAY CARE —
DENSITY, RESIDENTIAL — The number of dwelling units per unit of land.
DEVELOPMENT — The construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure; any mining,
excavation, landfill or land disturbance; any change in use, or alteration or
extension of the use, of land.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW — The process whereby authorized local
officials review the site plans, maps, and other documentation of a
development to determine the compliance with the stated purposes and
standards of this chapter.
DISTRICT — See "zoning use district."
DRAINAGE SYSTEM — A system for the removal of water from land by
drains, grading, or other appropriate means. These techniques may include
runoff controls to minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after
construction or development, the means for preserving surface and
groundwaters, and the prevention and/or alleviation of flooding.
DRIVE-IN BUSINESS — A business enterprise where goods such as, but not
limited to, food, beverages, retail commodities, or services, such as, but not
DAY-CARE CENTER — Any other day-care center which is not a family
day-care home.
A.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — Any home other than the individual's
home in which day care in lieu of parental care or supervision is offered
at the same time to six or fewer individuals who are not relatives of the
caregiver, but may not contain more than a total of eight individuals
receiving day care.
B.
60.Editor’s Note: See Ch. 300, Subdivision of Land.
§ 350-5 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-5
279:400
limited to, banking or car wash services, are sold or transacted outside the
confines of a building or portion thereof, in such a manner that customers
are not usually required to leave their vehicles.
DUPLEX — Two single dwelling units, within the same structure, each with
separate entrances divided by a common party wall and/or floor assembly.
DWELLING UNIT — A structure or portion thereof providing complete,
independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation, and
containing a separate means of ingress and egress.
EARTH REMOVAL — The extraction, or removal of any soil, loam, sand,
gravel, or clay from deposits on a tract of land, as regulated and licensed by
the Town Council under Chapter 166, Earth Removal, as may be amended.
EXTRACTIVE INDUSTRY — The extraction of minerals, including solids,
such as coal and ores; liquids, such as crude petroleum; and gases, such
as natural gases. The term also includes quarrying; well operation; milling,
such as crushing, screening, washing, and flotation; and other preparation
customarily done at the extraction site or as a part of the extractive activity.
FAMILY — A person or persons related by blood, marriage, or other legal
means. See also "household."
FLOATING ZONE — An unmapped zoning district adopted within the
chapter which is established on the Zoning Map only when an application
for development, meeting the zone requirements, is approved.
FLOODPLAINS or FLOOD HAZARD AREA — An area that has a one-percent
or greater chance of inundation in any given year, as delineated by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency pursuant to the National Flood
Insurance Act of 1968, as amended.
GROUNDWATER — Water found underground which completely fills the
open spaces between the particles of sand, gravel, clay, silt, and
consolidated rock fractures. The zone of materials filled with groundwater
is called the "zone of saturation."
HABITABLE SPACE — As defined in Article 2, Section 201, of the Rhode
Island State Building Code (RISBC SBC-1), as amended.
HALFWAY HOUSE — A residential facility for adults or children who have
been institutionalized for criminal conduct and who require a group setting
to facilitate the transition to a functional member of society.
HARDSHIP — A determination rendered by the Zoning Board of Review that
is consistent with the requirements of R.I.G.L. § 45-24-41.
HISTORIC DISTRICT or HISTORIC SITE — As defined in R.I.G.L.
§ 45-22.2-4.
HOME OCCUPATION — Any activity customarily carried out for gain by
a resident, conducted as an accessory use in the resident's dwelling unit
located within a residentially zoned area, but not to include any dealing and/
or selling of firearms or related products.
§ 350-5 YARD SALES § 350-5
279:401
HOUSEHOLD — One or more persons living together in a single dwelling
unit, with common access to, and common use of, all living and eating areas
and all areas and facilities for the preparation and storage of food within the
dwelling unit. The term "household unit" shall be synonymous with the term
"dwelling unit" for determining the number of such units allowed within
any structure on any lot in a zoning district. An individual household shall
consist of any one of the following:
INCENTIVE ZONING — The process whereby the local authority may grant
additional development capacity in exchange for the developer's provision
of a public benefit or amenity as specified in local ordinances.
INFRASTRUCTURE — Facilities and services needed to sustain residential,
commercial, industrial, institutional, and other activities.
LAND DEVELOPMENT PROJECT — A project in which one or more lots,
tracts, or parcels of land are to be developed or redeveloped as a
coordinated site for a complex of uses, units or structures, including, but not
limited to, planned development, conservation development and/or cluster
development for residential, commercial, institutional, recreational, open
space, and/or mixed uses as may be provided for in this chapter.[Amended
11-15-2007, effective 12-20-2007]
LAND SUITABLE FOR DEVELOPMENT — Total lot area less land unsuitable
for development.[Amended 11-15-2007, effective 12-20-2007]
LAND UNSUITABLE FOR DEVELOPMENT — Land which has
environmental constraints or physical constraints to development. The
regulations in § 350-58 shall apply. [Added 11-15-2007, effective
12-20-2007]
LARGE TOWER FACILITIES — Sometimes referred to as “high-intensity
facilities.” These facilities are considered to be greater than 125 feet in
height or are designed to carry antenna arrays for more than four
telecommunications carriers.
LINE, STREET — A lot line separating a lot from an adjacent street.
LOT — Either:
A family, which may also include servants and employees living with the
family; or
A.
A person or group of unrelated persons living together. The maximum
number may be set by local ordinance, but this maximum shall not be
less than three.
B.
The basic development unit for determination of lot area, depth, and
other dimensional regulations; or
A.
A parcel of land whose boundaries have been established by some legal
instrument such as a recorded deed or recorded map and which is
recognized as a separate legal entity for purposes of transfer of title.
B.
§ 350-5 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-5
279:402
LOT AREA — The total area within the boundaries of a lot, excluding any
street right-of-way, usually reported in acres or square feet.
LOT BUILDING COVERAGE — That portion of the lot that is or may be
covered by buildings and accessory buildings.
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the junction of and fronting on two or more
intersecting streets.
LOT DEPTH — The distance measured from the front lot line to the rear lot
line. For lots where the front and rear lot lines are not parallel, the lot depth
is an average of the depth.
LOT FRONTAGE — That portion of a lot abutting a street. A zoning
ordinance shall specify how noncontiguous frontage will be considered with
regard to minimum frontage requirements.
LOT LINE — A line of record, bounding a lot, which divides one lot from
another lot or from a public or private street or any other public or private
space and shall include:
LOT OF RECORD — A parcel of land recorded by deed or plat in the office
of the Town Clerk of Glocester.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot which fronts upon two parallel streets, or which
fronts upon two streets which do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot
measured at right angles to its depth along a straight line parallel to the
front lot line at the minimum front setback line.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA — [Added 3-16-2017, effective 3-16-2017]
A. FRONT — The lot line separating a lot from a street right-of-way.
REAR — Lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line, or in
the case of triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped lots, an assumed
line at least 10 feet in length entirely within the lot, parallel to and at a
maximum distance from the front lot line; and
B.
SIDE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. On a corner lot, a
side lot line may be a street lot line, depending on requirements of this
chapter.
C.
CAREGIVER CULTIVATION — Marijuana cultivation for medical use
only by a single registered caregiver cardholder, as defined by R.I.G.L.
§ 21-28.6.
A.
COMPASSION CENTER — As defined in R.I.G.L. § 21-28.6-3, a notfor-
profit entity registered under R.I.G.L. § 21-28.6-12 that acquires,
possesses, cultivates, manufactures, delivers, transfers, transports,
supplies or dispenses marijuana, and/or related supplies and
educational materials, to patient cardholders and/or their registered
caregiver cardholder or authorized purchaser.
B.
§ 350-5 YARD SALES § 350-5
279:403
MERE INCONVENIENCE — A standard which is considered by the Zoning
Board of Review in applications for variances, pursuant to Title 45, Chapter
24-41 of the Rhode Island General Laws.
MIXED USE — A mixture of land uses within a single development, building,
or tract.
MODIFICATION — Permission granted and administered by the zoning
enforcement officer of the city or town, and pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter contained herein to grant a dimensional variance other than lot
area requirements from this chapter to a limited degree as determined by
MARIJUANA CULTIVATION CENTER — Any entity that, under state
law, may acquire, possess, cultivate, manufacture, deliver, transfer,
transport or supply marijuana, medical or otherwise, to a registered
compassion center, or other entity authorized to dispense marijuana.
C.
MARIJUANA EMPORIUM — Any retail or commercial establishment, or
club, whether for-profit, nonprofit, or otherwise, at which the sale or
use of marijuana, medical or otherwise, takes place. This shall include
without limitation any so-called "vape lounge," or any other
establishment at which marijuana, medical or otherwise, is consumed
in vaporized form. This shall not include a compassion center or
medical marijuana cultivation center regulated and licensed by the
State of Rhode Island, as defined herein.
D.
MARIJUANA STORE — Any retail establishment at which the sale or use
of marijuana, medical or otherwise, takes place. This shall not include a
compassion center regulated and licensed by the State of Rhode Island,
as defined herein.
E.
MARIJUANA TESTING PROVIDER — Any entity that, under state law,
may perform independent testing of marijuana or marijuana products,
medical or otherwise.
F.
NONRESIDENTIAL COOPERATIVE CULTIVATION — A use of land
located in a nonresidential zone, or of a building, or portion thereof,
located in a nonresidential zone, for the cultivation of marijuana by two
or more cardholders, as defined in R.I.G.L. § 21-28.6-3.
G.
RESIDENTIAL COOPERATIVE CULTIVATION — A use of land located
in a residential zone, or of a building, or a portion thereof, located
in a residential zone, for the cultivation of marijuana by two or more
cardholders, as defined by R.I.G.L. § 21-28.6-3.
H.
PERSONAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATION — Marijuana cultivation by a
single registered cardholder, as defined by R.I.G.L. § 21-28.6, within his
or her residential dwelling for medical use only. This use shall only be
permitted as an accessory use to a lawfully permitted residential use. In
a mixed-use building that contains residential and nonresidential uses,
this use shall be contained within the residential dwelling unit only.
Please refer to § 350-58.1 for additional criteria for personal marijuana
cultivation.
I.
§ 350-5 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-5
279:404
this chapter, but not to exceed 25% of each of the applicable dimensional
requirements.
MOTEL — A structure or group of structures which provide sleeping rental
units for temporary occupancy, in which each rental unit has a private
entrance direct to the outside or a corridor and in which each rental unit
has its own sanitary facilities. Motels include motor courts, tourist courts,
cabins, motor lodges, and similar facilities.
MULTIPLE DWELLING or APARTMENT STRUCTURE — A residential
building designed for or occupied by three families or more, with the
number of families in residence not to exceed the number of dwelling units
provided.
NONCONFORMANCE — A building, structure, or parcel of land, or use
thereof, lawfully existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of
a zoning ordinance and not in conformity with the provisions of such
ordinance or amendment. Nonconformance shall be of only two types:
OVERLAY DISTRICT — A district established in a zoning ordinance that is
superimposed on one or more districts or parts of districts and that imposes
specified requirements in addition to, but not less than, those otherwise
applicable for the underlying zone.
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS — A set of criteria or limits relating to
elements which a particular use or process either must meet or may not
exceed.
PERMITTED USE — A use by right which is specifically authorized in a
particular zoning district.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — A land development project, as defined
herein, and developed according to plan as a single entity and containing
one or more structures and/or uses with appurtenant common areas.
PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE — A review meeting of a proposed
development held between applicants and reviewing agencies as permitted
Nonconforming by use: a lawfully established use of land, building, or
structure which is not a permitted use in that zoning district. A building
or structure containing more dwelling units than are permitted by the
use regulations of a zoning ordinance shall be nonconforming by use;
or
A.
Nonconforming by dimension: a building, structure, or parcel of land
not in compliance with the dimensional regulations of this chapter.
Dimensional regulations include all regulations of this chapter, other
than those pertaining to the permitted uses. A building or structure
containing more dwelling units than are permitted by the use
regulations of this chapter shall be nonconforming by use; a building or
structure containing a permitted number of dwelling units by the use
regulations of this chapter, but not meeting the lot area per dwelling
unit regulations, shall be nonconforming by dimension.
B.
§ 350-5 YARD SALES § 350-5
279:405
by law and municipal ordinance, before formal submission of an application
for a permit or for development approval.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — An occupation and office use to carry out
professional activities relating to an activity that properly involves a
scientific or artistic education or its equivalent and usually mental rather
than manual labor.
PUBLIC — As used in this chapter, refers to use and not ownership.
SERVICE STATION or FILLING STATION — A building or premises, or
portion thereof, arranged, intended, or designed to be used for the sale
of gasoline or other motor vehicle, airplane or motorboat fuel, oils and
accessories for the use of motor vehicles and the rendering of services
such as lubrication, washing, minor repairs with hand tools where such
service facilities are incidental to such principal filling station uses but not
including body or fender work or major repairs.
SETBACK LINE OR LINES — A line or lines parallel to a lot line at the
minimum distance of the required setback for the zoning district in which
the lot is located that establishes the area within which the principal
structure must be erected or placed.
SITE PLAN — The development plan for one or more lots on which is shown
the existing and/or the proposed conditions of the lot.
SOIL — Any naturally occurring unprocessed earth, sand, clay, loam, gravel,
humus, or similar loose earth product, including topsoil.
SMALL TOWER FACILITIES — Sometimes referred to as “low-intensity
facilities.” These facilities are considered to be 125 feet or less in height or
are designed to carry four or fewer telecommunications carriers.
SPECIAL USE — A regulated use which is permitted pursuant to the special
use permit issued by the authorized governmental entity, pursuant to Title
45, Chapter 24-42 of the Rhode Island General Laws; formerly referred to
as a “special exception.”
STREET — Includes streets, avenues, highways, boulevards, parkways,
roads, lanes, alleys, and other public ways.
STREET LINE — A lot line separating a lot from an adjacent street.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for use,
occupancy, or ornamentation, whether installed on, above, or below, the
surface of land or water.
SUBSTANDARD LOT OF RECORD — Any lot lawfully existing at the time
of adoption or amendment of this chapter and not in conformance with the
dimensional and/or area provisions of this chapter.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — An installation that provides for the
transmission or reception of any type of radio communications.
TOWER — Any structure constructed for the purpose of elevating and/
or supporting of antenna from ground level such as a lattice tower or
monopole.
§ 350-5 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-5
279:406
TOWN — Shall refer to and be interpreted to mean the Town of Glocester.
TRAILER or MOBILE HOME — Any vehicle or similar portable structure
designed and constructed so as to permit the occupancy thereof as a
dwelling by one or more persons and so designed and constructed that it
is or may be mounted on wheels and used as a conveyance on a street or
highway, propelled or drawn by its own or other motive power.
USE — The purpose or activity for which land or buildings are designed,
arranged, or intended, or for which land or buildings are occupied or
maintained.
VARIANCE — Permission to depart from the literal requirements of this
chapter; an authorization for the construction or maintenance of a building
or structure, or for the establishment or maintenance of a use of land, which
is prohibited by this chapter. There shall be only two categories of variance:
a use variance or a dimensional variance.
WATERS — All surface waters, including all waters of the territorial sea,
tidewaters, all inland waters of any river, stream, brook, pond, or lake, and
wetlands.
WETLAND, FRESHWATER — Includes, but shall not be limited to, marshes;
swamps; bogs; ponds; rivers; river and stream floodplains and banks; areas
subject to flooding or storm flowage; emergent and submergent plant
communities in any body of fresh water, including rivers and streams and
that area of land within 50 feet of the edge of any bog, marsh, swamp or
pond.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (WCF) — An installation at one
site that facilitates the provision by one service provider of a personal
wireless service as defined by the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996,
as amended; the combination of a complete set of equipment that facilitates
the provision of wireless services. Such equipment typically includes base
station equipment, and related hardware, antennas, interconnecting cables
and antenna supports (mounts).
YARD — An open space on the same lot with a principal building or
structure, unoccupied and unobstructed by a building or structures.
USE VARIANCE — Permission to depart from the use requirements of
this chapter where the applicant for the requested variance has shown
by evidence upon the record that the subject land or structure cannot
yield any beneficial use if it is to conform to the provisions of this
chapter.
A.
DIMENSIONAL VARIANCE — Permission to depart from the
dimensional requirements of this chapter, where the applicant for the
requested relief has shown, by evidence upon the record, that there
is no other reasonable alternative way to enjoy a legally permitted
beneficial use of the subject property unless granted the requested
relief from the dimensional regulations. However, the fact that a use
may be more profitable or that a structure may be more valuable after
the relief is granted shall not be grounds for relief.
B.
§ 350-5 YARD SALES § 350-5
279:407
YARD, FRONT — The area between the street line and the minimum setback
line extending between side lot lines.
YARD, REAR — The area between the rear lot line and the minimum rear
yard setback line extending between side lot lines.
YARD, SIDE — A required yard extending from the rear of the required front
yard to the front of the rear yard.
ZONING CERTIFICATE — A document signed by the zoning enforcement
officer, as required in this chapter, which acknowledges that a use,
structure, building or lot either complies with or is legally nonconforming
to the provisions of this chapter or is an authorized variance or modification
therefrom.
ZONING MAP — The map or maps which are a part of the zoning ordinance
and which delineate the boundaries of all mapped zoning districts within
the physical boundary of the Town.61
ZONING ORDINANCE — An ordinance enacted by the legislative body of
the Town pursuant to Title 45, Chapter 24 of the Rhode Island General Laws
and in the manner providing for the adoption of ordinances in the Town's
home rule charter, which sets forth regulations and standards relating to
the nature and extent of uses of land and structures, which is consistent
with the Comprehensive Plan of the Town as defined in Title 45, Chapter
22.2 of the Rhode Island General Laws, which includes a Zoning Map, and
which complies with the provisions of said chapter.
ZONING USE DISTRICTS — The basic unit in zoning, either mapped or
unmapped, to which a uniform set of regulations applies, or a uniform
set of regulations for a specified use. The districts include, but are not
limited to: agricultural, commercial, industrial, institutional, open space,
and residential. Each district may include subdistricts. Districts may be
combined.
§ 350-6. Districts; Zoning Map.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, the Town of Glocester is hereby divided
into the following districts:
A-4 Agricultural-
Residential
This district is intended for agricultural
use and low-density single-family
dwellings, detached structures, located
on lots containing a minimum lot area of
four acres
A-3 Agricultural-
Residential
This district is intended for agricultural
use and low-density single-family
dwellings, detached structures, located
on lots containing a minimum lot area of
three acres
61.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 350-5 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-6
279:408
R-2 Residential This district is intended for single-family
dwellings, detached structures, located
on lots containing a minimum lot area of
two acres
B-1 Neighborhood
Commercial
This district is intended for commercial
uses that primarily serve local
neighborhood market needs for
convenience retail, services and
professional office establishments
B-2 Highway Commercial This district is intended for commercial
uses that serve Town-wide or regional
market needs for retail, services and
professional office establishments
I Industrial This district is intended to provide for
general manufacturing and industrial
uses
B. Special provisions. These districts comprise overlay, floating or specialpurpose
designations that are superimposed on existing zoning
district(s) or portion(s) thereof and which are intended to impose
specific requirements and standards, in addition to or in place of the
otherwise applicable and/or existing regulations. These districts exist
as follows:
(1) Historic District. This district is structured in accordance with Title
45, Chapter 24.1, of the Rhode Island General Laws, as amended,
to preserve districts and specific buildings of the Town of Glocester
which reflects elements of its cultural, social, economic, political,
and architectural history, to stabilize and improve property values
in the historic districts, to preserve specific buildings, to foster
civic beauty, to strengthen the local economy and to promote the
use of such districts and specific buildings for the education,
pleasure and welfare of the residents of the Town of Glocester.
(2) Flood Hazard Area. This district is established to govern the
development and use of land subject to flood hazards, as defined as
wholly or partly within Zone A and Zones A1-A30 as identified on
the Flood Insurance Rate Map as part of the Flood Insurance Study,
which also includes the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map,
compiled by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(3) Planned District. This district is intended to encourage and provide
a means for effectuating desirable residential, industrial and
commercial development, and conservation in the Town of
Glocester, which will feature variations in siting mixed land uses
and/or varied dwelling types; to preserve open space for
community facilities and aesthetic considerations; and to provide
more efficient and economical services and facilities to the
residents of the area.
§ 350-6 YARD SALES § 350-6
279:409
§ 350-7. Administration and enforcement.
(4) Wellhead Protection District. (Reserved)
(5) Residential Compound District. (Reserved)
(6) Residential Cluster District. (Reserved)
(7) Village Overlay District. [Amended 3-15-2012, effective
4-11-2012]
(8) Commercial Cluster District. (Reserved)
(9) Watershed Protection District. (Reserved)
(10) Natural Resources Protection District. (Reserved)
(11) Scenic Highway District. (Reserved)
C. Zoning Map. The location and boundaries of the zoning districts are
hereby established as shown on maps filed in the office of the Town
Clerk, entitled “Official Zoning Map of the Town of Glocester,” and the
Historic District Designation Map, and are hereby incorporated into
and made a part of this chapter.62
A. Zoning Officer. A zoning officer, hereinafter referred to as “Inspector,”
shall be appointed by the Town Council. The minimum qualifications of
the Inspector shall be the ability to intelligently interpret this chapter
and to enforce the chapter in an effective, firm and tactful manner, and
to carry out such other related duties as may be required from time to
time by the Town Council.
B. Zoning Officer duties. The Inspector shall enforce the provisions of this
chapter, unless otherwise specified. No application, building permit or
zoning certificate, plan specification or intended use which is not in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be approved by the
Inspector. In addition, the following duties shall be administered by the
Inspector:
(1) Issue zoning certificates.
(a) Issue zoning certificates, upon written application, which shall
be required for any of the following:
[1] Proposed occupancy and intended use of a building
hereinafter erected, enlarged, or relocated.
[2] Proposed change in use of an existing building to a use of
different classification.
[3] Proposed change in the use of land to a different use.
62.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map and the Historic District Designation Map and the Village
Overlay District Map are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 350-6 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-7
279:410
[4] Proposed change in use of a nonconforming use.
[5] Proposed driveway access to a state or Town road.
[6] Proposed erection, enlargement, replacement or
relocation of any sign except as specified in Article V of
this chapter.
(b) No such occupancy, use, change in use, driveway access or
sign shall be initiated until the Inspector has issued a written
zoning certificate stating that such conforms to all provisions
of this chapter. If there is such conformity, such zoning
certificate will be issued within five days of the receipt of
written application for same is received by the Inspector.
(c) Written application for a zoning certificate for a new building
or for an existing building which is intended to be enlarged
shall be made at the same time as the application for the
building permit for such building. No building permit for the
erection of any building shall be issued before application has
been made for a zoning certificate.
(d) The Inspector may require that copies of plans, specifications
and other such information as he may deem necessary be filed
with the application for such certificate.
(e) Pending the issuance of such a certificate, a temporary zoning
certificate may be issued by the Inspector for a period of not
more than six months during the completion of the
construction of a building or of alterations, which are required
under the terms of any law or ordinance. Such temporary
certificate shall not be construed in any way to alter the
respective rights, duties or obligations of the owner or the
Town relating to the use or occupancy of the land or building,
or any other matter covered in this chapter, and such
temporary certificate shall not be issued except under such
restrictions and provisions as will adequately insure the safety
of the occupants.
(f) A record of all zoning certificates shall be kept on file in the
office of the Inspector, and a copy shall be forwarded to the
applicant, Zoning Board of Review, Town Council, and a copy
shall be forwarded, on request, to any person.
(g) A fee for each copy requested shall be determined from time to
time by the Town Council, in accordance with Title 45, Chapter
24-59 of the Rhode Island General Laws.
(2) Review and approve, for zoning compliance, building permits and
certificates of occupancy.
§ 350-7 YARD SALES § 350-7
279:411
(3) Collect required fees for variances, special use permits, and appeal
applications.
(4) Receive and review for proper form all applications for variances,
special use permits, and appeals.
(5) Transmit all applications to the Zoning Board of Review, Planning
Office, Town Council, and other agents or employees of the Town as
elsewhere specified in this chapter.
(6) Prepare the calendar of the Zoning Board of Review in compliance
with the Board's adopted rules of procedure.
(7) Keep records on compliance of uses of land.
(8) Inspect suspected violations and issue violation notices in
cooperation with the appropriate law enforcement authority or the
Town Solicitor.
(9) Maintain and update the text and Zoning Map comprising the
zoning ordinance, in coordination with the Town Clerk.
(a) Changes which impact the Zoning Map shall be depicted on the
Official Zoning Map within 90 days of the authorized
change(s), and amendments to the text shall be included in the
ordinance within 60 days of such authorized change(s). The
Town Clerk shall be the custodian of the official zoning text and
Zoning Map which comprises the zoning ordinance. In
addition, the Town Clerk shall be responsible to receive, in
proper form, petitions for amendments or repeals to the zoning
text and/or amendments to the Zoning Map, as provided for
elsewhere in this chapter. The Town Clerk shall also be
authorized to collect fees for such petitions for amendment or
repeal, as set forth and may be amended by the Town Council,
in accordance with Title 45, Chapter 24-59 of the Rhode Island
General Laws.
(b) In the case of a conditional zone change, the limitations,
restrictions and conditions shall not be included on the Zoning
Map until the zone change has become effective.
(10) Provide printed copies of the zoning ordinance, in a manner as
specified elsewhere in this chapter, to the general public. A fee
shall be charged for said ordinance, as specified and may be
amended by the Town Council, and in accordance with Title 45,
Chapter 24-59 of the Rhode Island General Laws. In addition, the
Town shall send a copy of the zoning ordinance, without charge, to
the Associate Director, Division of Planning, Department of
Administration, State of Rhode Island.
§ 350-7 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-7
279:412
C. Actions and decisions of the Inspector. Actions and decisions of the
Inspector may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Review, as specified
elsewhere in this chapter.
D. Violations. The erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration,
enlargement or moving of any building or structure and the use of any
land, premises, building or structure which is continued, operated or
maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared
to be a violation of this chapter and unlawful. The Inspector may
institute appropriate action(s) against any known violation(s), as
follows:
(1) Any person, group of persons, or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter or any safeguard or condition attached to
the granting of a special use permit or variance may be fined not
more than $100 for each offense. Each day of the existence of a
violation shall be deemed a separate offense. Immediately upon
notification of any violation, the Town Solicitor shall institute
appropriate action by way of warning or suit or other means in his
discretion to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove such violation, or to
recover fines therefor.
(2) The Town may cause suit to be brought in the Supreme or Superior
Court, or any municipal court, including a municipal housing court
having jurisdiction, in the name of the Town, to restrain the
violation of, or to compel compliance with, the provisions of this
chapter. The Town may consolidate an action for injunctive relief
and/or fines under this chapter in the Providence County Superior
Court.
E. Adoption and amendment(s). This chapter may be adopted and
amended by application to the Town Council by a member of the Town
Council, any person, group of persons, corporation or others desiring
such adoption or amendment(s). Any amendment to this chapter, either
the text, map or both, shall be consistent with the Glocester
Comprehensive Community Plan, the Rhode Island Zoning Enabling Act
of 1991, as specified in Title 45, Chapter 22.2 and Chapter 24 of the
Rhode Island General Laws, and the Glocester Home Rule Charter. An
amendment(s) may include the text language, the Zoning Map or a
combination of the text and map. A petition to amend this chapter may
be obtained from and must be filed in the office of the Town Clerk and
shall conform to the following requirements:
(1) Define the section or subject area that is the subject of the instant
petition and explain the nature of the proposed amendment and
decision sought by the applicant.
(2) Assert whether the proposed amendment is consistent with the
Glocester Comprehensive Community Plan, which shall include a
specific citation referring to the goals and policies statement, the
§ 350-7 YARD SALES § 350-7
279:413
implementation program, and all other applicable elements of the
plan.
(3) Provide the filing fee established, and as may be amended, by the
Town Council, in accordance with Title 45, Chapter 24-59 of the
Rhode Island General Laws.
(4) In the instance where a Zoning Map amendment is proposed, a map
must be submitted showing the shape, dimension and area of the
existing and proposed amendment boundaries for the subject area
and extending out 200 feet from the outer perimeter of the
proposed amendment area, indicating:
(a) The location of all zoning district boundaries;
(b) The street numbers and assessor's lot numbers of all
properties;
(c) The general location, shape, and use of all existing structures
and buildings;
(d) A listing of all owners of real property located in or within not
less than 200 feet of the perimeter of the area proposed for
amendment, as listed on the most recent real estate tax
assessment records of the town in which the property is
located, regardless of municipal boundaries; and
(e) Such other information that may be determined necessary by
Town officials for the proper execution of this chapter.
(5) Assert whether there is a public or quasi-public water source, or
private water source, within 2,000 feet of any real property that is
the subject of the proposed zoning text, map or both, amendment,
regardless of municipal boundaries. In the instance of a text
amendment(s) that affects a district or districts generally, this
requirement shall include a determination as to whether a public or
quasi-public water source is located in or within not less than a
two-thousand-foot radius beyond the municipal boundaries of the
Town. Such information shall be available in the office of the Town
Clerk.
(6) Review process. All petitions for adoption or amendment(s) to this
chapter shall be subject to the following review procedure:
(a) Upon receipt of a petition to amend the zoning ordinance text,
map or both, the Glocester Town Clerk shall transmit a copy of
such petition to the Town Council and Planning Board. The
Planning Board shall study the proposal and submit an
advisory recommendation to the Town Council within 45 days
of its receipt of the proposal and give its findings and
recommendations as specified in Title 45, Chapter 24 of the
Rhode Island General Laws and § 350-7 of this chapter. The
§ 350-7 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-7
279:414
Town Council shall hold a public hearing on the instant
proposal, after giving proper notice as specified in § 350-8 in
this chapter, within 65 days of its receipt of the amendment
proposal. The Town Council shall render a decision on any
proposal within 45 days after the date of completion of the
public hearing. However, these deadlines may be extended by
consent of the applicant(s), and these deadlines shall be in
accordance with Title 45, Chapters 22.2 and 24 of the Rhode
Island General Laws. In addition, within 15 days after the
approval of an amendment to this chapter by the Town Council,
the Town Clerk shall make copies of such amendment available
to the public and shall append copies of such amendment to
the record copy of the zoning ordinance. Where an amendment
changes the zoning ordinance map, the record copy of said
map shall be amended to show the change and a notation
shall be made thereon, giving the date of amendment and the
appropriate reference into the Town Council records.
(b) In the instance where an amendment(s) to the zoning
ordinance text, map or both is submitted by the Planning
Board, the requirements for study by the Board may be waived,
provided the proposal by the Planning Board includes its
findings and recommendations pursuant to § 350-7E(7)(b) of
this chapter and Title 45, Chapter 24, Section 52 of the Rhode
Island General Laws.
(c) In granting a zoning ordinance text, map, or both, amendment,
the Town Council may limit the amendment to one of those
permitted uses in the zone to which the subject land is rezoned,
and impose such limitations, restrictions, and conditions,
including, without limitation:
[1] Requiring the petitioner to obtain a permit or approval
from any and all state or local government agencies or
instrumentalities having jurisdiction over the land and use
which are the subject of the zoning ordinance amendment;
[2] Those relating to the effectiveness or continued
effectiveness of the zoning ordinance amendment; and/or
[3] Those relating to the use of the land, as it deems
necessary. If such limitation, restrictions and/or conditions
are imposed by the Town Council, the Town Clerk shall
cause such to be clearly noted on the zoning ordinance
map and recorded in the land evidence records; provided,
however, in the case of a conditional zone change, the
limitations, restrictions and conditions shall not be noted
on the zoning ordinance map until the zone change has
become effective.
§ 350-7 YARD SALES § 350-7
279:415
(d) If the permitted use for which the land has been rezoned is
abandoned or if the land is not used for the requested
purposed for a period of two years or more after the
amendment becomes effective, the Town Council may, after a
public hearing as specified elsewhere in this chapter, change
the land to its original zoning use before the petition was filed.
(e) In the instance where a proposed change to the zoning
ordinance text, map, or both, requires an amendment to the
Comprehensive Community Plan, the Town Council shall first
be required to approve the amendment to the Comprehensive
Community Plan prior to granting the zoning ordinance
change, in accordance with the requirements of this chapter
and Title 45, Chapters 22.2 and 24 of the Rhode Island General
Laws.
(7) Planning Board. The Glocester Planning Board shall have the
following responsibilities with regard to this chapter:
(a) At least once every two years, the Planning Board shall review
this chapter and make a written report to the Town Council
recommending any amendments deemed appropriate in the
light of current development trends and needs. In addition,
whenever changes are made to the Comprehensive Community
Plan of the Town, the Planning Board shall identify any
changes necessary to the zoning ordinance and/or Zoning Map
to maintain consistency between the documents and forward a
written report regarding its findings and proposed changes to
the Town Council.
(b) Every proposal for an amendment or relief or repeal of any
provision of this chapter shall be forwarded to the Planning
Board for review to determine whether the proposed
amendment(s) or relief or repeal is consistent with the
Comprehensive Community Plan, adopted pursuant to Title 45,
Chapter 22.2 of the Rhode Island General Laws, including the
goals and policies statement, the implementation program, and
all other applicable elements of the Comprehensive
Community Plan, and for an advisory opinion regarding the
merits of the proposal. This determination and opinion shall be
conveyed in a written report to the initiating body, within the
time allowed as specified elsewhere in this chapter, that details
a demonstration of recognition and consideration of each of the
applicable purposes of the zoning ordinance and sound
principles of planning and land use. In forming this
determination and opinion the Planning Board may solicit the
input and advice of other Town boards, officials and/or experts.
The report to be prepared by the Planning Board shall include
a determination whether the instant proposal is consistent with
the Glocester Comprehensive Community Plan, including the
goals and policies statement, the implementation program, and
§ 350-7 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-7
279:416
all other applicable elements of the comprehensive community
plan, or whether an amendment to the Glocester
Comprehensive Community Plan is necessary and proper, as
specified in Title 45, Chapters 22.2 and 24 of the Rhode Island
General Laws.
(8) Notification. No amendment to the zoning ordinance text, map, or
both, shall be enacted until after a public hearing has been held
upon the specific proposal before the Town Council. Prior to the
date of the public hearing by the Town Council, the Town Clerk
shall first give notice of the public hearing by publication of notice
in a newspaper of general circulation within the Town at least once
each week for three successive weeks prior to the date of the
hearing, which may include the week in which the hearing is to be
held, at which hearing opportunity shall be given to all persons
interested to be heard upon the matter of the proposed
amendment.
(a) The newspaper notice shall be published as a display
advertisement, using a type size at least as large as the normal
type size used by the newspaper in its news articles, and shall:
[1] Specify the place of the hearing and the date and time of
its commencement;
[2] Indicate the proposed amendment of the zoning ordinance
text, map, or both, that is under consideration;
[3] Contain a statement of the proposed amendment(s) to the
zoning ordinance text, map, or both, that may be printed
once in its entirety, or summarize and describe the matter
under consideration;
[4] Advise those interested where and when a copy of the
matter under consideration may be obtained or examined
and copied;
[5] State that the proposed amendment(s) may be altered or
amended prior to the close of the public hearing without
further advertising, as a result of further study or because
of the views expressed at the public hearing. However, any
amendment or alteration of the proposal must be
presented for comment in the course of the hearing;
(b) Notice shall also be sent by certified or registered mail to the
city or town council of any municipality that is located in or
within 200 feet of the boundary of the area proposed for
amendment, or also where there is a public or quasi-public
water source, or private water source that is used or is suitable
for use as a public water source, within 2,000 feet of any real
property that is the subject of a proposed zoning ordinance
amendment, regardless of municipal boundaries.
§ 350-7 YARD SALES § 350-7
279:417
(c) Notice of a public hearing shall be sent to the governing body
of any state or municipal water department or agency, special
water district, or private water company that has riparian
rights to a surface water resource and/or surface watershed
that is used or is suitable for use as a public water source and
that is within 2,000 feet of any real property which is the
subject of a proposed zoning ordinance amendment; provided,
however, that the governing body of any state or municipal
water department or agency, special water district, or private
water company has filed with the Glocester Town Clerk a map
survey, which shall be kept as a public record, showing the
areas of surface water resources and/or watersheds and
parcels of land within 2,000 feet thereof.
(d) In instances where a proposed general amendment to an
existing zoning ordinance includes changes in an existing
Zoning Map, public notice shall be given as required in
§ 350-7E(5) and (8).
(e) In instances where a proposed amendment(s) to an existing
ordinance includes a specific change in a zoning district map,
but does not affect districts generally, public notice shall be
given as required in § 250-7E(5) and (8), with the following
additional requirements:
[1] Notice shall include a map showing the existing and
proposed boundaries, zoning district boundaries, and
streets and roads and their names, and municipal
boundaries where appropriate;
[2] Written notice of the date, time, and place of the public
hearing and the nature and purpose thereof shall be sent
to all owners of real property whose property is located in
or within not less than 200 feet of the perimeter of the
subject area proposed for change, whether within the
Town or within an adjacent municipality; such notice shall
be sent by registered or certified mail to the last known
address of the owner(s), as shown on the current real
estate tax assessment records of the municipality in which
the property is located.
(f) Written notice, without charge, which may be a copy of the
newspaper notice, shall be mailed to the Associate Director of
the Division of Planning of the Rhode Island Department of
Administration.
(9) Repetitive petitions.
(a) Where the Town Council, in the case of an amendment, or the
Zoning Board of Review, in the case of a special use permit, or
variance, denies the application, the Town Council or the
Zoning Board may not consider another application requesting
§ 350-7 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-7
279:418
§ 350-8. Zoning Board of Review.
the same amendment, special use permit, or variance for a
period of one year from the date of such denial or withdrawal.
(b) The Town Council or the Zoning Board, as the case may be,
may accept such an application after six months, provided that
the application is accompanied by an affidavit setting forth
facts, to the satisfaction of said Council or Board, showing a
substantial change or circumstances justifying a rehearing.
A. Membership.
(1) The Zoning Board of Review, hereinafter called the “Board,” is
created. The Board shall be appointed by the Town Council and
shall consist of five members, each to hold office for the term of five
years; provided, however, that the original appointments shall be
made for terms of one, two, three, four, and five years, respectively.
The Zoning Board of Review shall also include two alternates to be
designated as the first and second alternate members, appointed
for terms of one year. These alternate members shall sit and may
actively participate in hearings. The first alternate shall vote if a
member of the Board is unable to serve at a hearing and the second
shall vote if two members of the Board are unable to serve at a
hearing. In the absence of the first alternate member, the second
alternate member shall serve in the position of the first alternate.
No member or alternate may vote on any matter before the Board
unless he or she has attended all hearings concerning that matter.
If vacancy occurs in the Board, the Town Council shall appoint a
new member for the unexpired term. All members of the Board
shall be legal residents of the Town, and no member shall be an
elected official or salaried employee of the Town. All regular
members shall be subject to removal by the Town Council for
excessive absences from the Board meetings in accordance with
Chapter 27, Meetings, Article I.
(2) Members of the Board serving on the effective date of adoption of
this chapter shall be exempt from provisions of this section
respecting terms of originally appointed members until the
expiration of their current terms.
B. Organization. Once each year, the Board shall organize by electing from
its membership a Chair and Vice-Chair. The Board may engage the
services of a secretary or recorder within the limits of funds available to
it or may appoint one of its members secretary.
(1) Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chair and at
such other times as the Board may determine; provided, however,
said meetings are in accordance with the notice and open meeting
requirements as specified elsewhere in this chapter and all
applicable General Laws of Rhode Island. The Chairperson, or in
§ 350-7 YARD SALES § 350-8
279:419
his or her absence the Acting Chairperson, may administer oaths
and compel the attendance of witnesses by the issuance of
subpoenas.
(2) All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public and in
accordance with all such applicable local and state laws and
regulations. All decisions of the Board shall be made and voted
upon at a public hearing. In conducting meetings and rendering
decisions, the Board shall consist of five participating members;
provided, however, that no participating member of the Board shall
participate or pass on any matter in which there exists a business,
professional or personal interest. If such a conflict occurs, that
member shall notify the Chair of such conflict and recuse himself or
herself, and not sit as a participating member of the Board, nor
take part in the conduct of the hearing before the Board.
(3) Participation in a zoning hearing or other proceeding by a party
shall not be a cause for civil action or liability except for acts not in
good faith, intentional misconduct, a knowing violation of law,
transactions where there is an improper personal benefit, or
malicious, wanton, or willful misconduct.
C. Powers and duties. The Board shall have the following powers, duties,
and obligations.
(1) Powers and duties:
(a) To hear and decide appeals in a timely fashion where it is
alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or
determination made by an administrative officer or agency in
the enforcement or interpretation of this chapter, or of any
ordinance adopted pursuant hereto;
(b) To hear and decide appeals from a party aggrieved by a
decision of an Historic District Commission, pursuant to Title
45, Chapters 24.1-7.1 and 7.2 of the Rhode Island General
Laws;
(c) To authorize, upon application, in specific cases of hardship,
variances in the application of the terms of this chapter,
pursuant to Title 45, Chapter 24-41 of the Rhode Island
General Laws;
(d) To authorize, upon application, in specific cases, special use
permits, pursuant to Title 45, Chapter 24-42(A) of the Rhode
Island General Laws, where the Board is designated as a
permit authority for special use permits;
(e) To refer all petitions for relief or special use permits to the
Planning Board for findings and recommendations, prior to
action by the Board on any such petition(s);
§ 350-8 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-8
279:420
(f) To provide for issuance of conditional zoning approvals where
a proposed application would otherwise be approved except
that one or more state or federal agency approvals which are
necessary are pending. A conditional zoning approval shall be
revoked in the instance where any necessary state or federal
agency approvals are not received within a specified time
period, as determined by the Board through testimony
received at such hearing, and so noted on the decision record;
and
(g) To hear and decide other matters, according to the terms of the
ordinance or other statutes, and upon which the Board may be
authorized to pass under the ordinance or other statutes;
(2) No application for a variance or special use permit involving the
same parcel and same request, which was denied by or withdrawn
from the Board, may be resubmitted for consideration by the Board
for a period of one year from the date of such denial or withdrawal,
unless the Board determines there is a substantial change of
circumstances which justifies a new hearing, determined in
accordance with § 350-7E(9) of this chapter; and
(3) Any variance or special use permit granted by the Board shall
expire six months from the date of approval, unless the applicant
shall within that period exercise the right granted by the decision.
The Board may, upon application within the six-month period and
for good cause, extend the limitation for one additional six-month
period. The application for an extension need not be advertised.
(4) Be required to vote as follows:
(a) Five active members shall be necessary to conduct a hearing.
As soon as a conflict of interest occurs for a member, that
member shall recuse himself or herself, shall not sit as a
participating member, and take no part in the conduct of the
hearing. Only five participating members shall be entitled to
vote on any issue;
(b) The concurring vote of three of the five members of the Board
sitting at a hearing shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirement, decision, or determination of any zoning
administrative officer from whom an appeal was taken; and
(c) The concurring vote of four of the five members of the Board
sitting at a hearing shall be required to decide in favor of an
applicant on any matter within the discretion of the Board
upon which it is required to pass under this chapter, including
variances and special use permits.
(5) Issue decisions, in a manner as follows:
§ 350-8 YARD SALES § 350-8
279:421
(a) Following a public hearing, the Board shall render a decision
within 15 days. The Board shall include in its decision all
findings of fact and conditions, showing the vote of each
member participating thereon, and the absence of a member
or his or her failure to vote. Decisions shall be recorded and
filed in the office of the Town Clerk within 30 working days
from the date when the decision was rendered, and shall be a
public record. The Board shall keep written minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each
question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact,
and shall keep records of its examinations, findings of fact, and
other official actions, all of which shall be recorded and filed in
the office of the Town Clerk in an expeditious manner upon
completion of the proceeding. For any proceeding in which the
right of appeal lies to the Superior or Supreme Court, the
Board shall have the minutes taken either by a competent
stenographer or recorded by a sound-recording device.
(b) Any decision by the Board, including any special conditions
attached thereto, shall be mailed to the applicant, to the
Zoning Enforcement Officer of the Town, and to the Associate
Director of the Division of Planning of the Rhode Island
Department of Administration. Any decision evidencing the
granting of a variance, modification, or special use shall also be
recorded in the land evidence records of the Town.
D. Appeals to the Board. Appeals to the Board may be taken by any party
aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau affected by
the order or decision of the Inspector concerning the provisions of this
chapter or the Historic District Commission, in accordance with the
following provisions:
(1) The appeal shall be taken within 30 days of the date of the
recording of the decision by the Inspector, by filing an application
for appeal to the Board with the Inspector's office. A filing fee shall
be payable, as established, and may be amended, by the Town
Council, in accordance with Title 45, Chapter 24-59 of the Rhode
Island General Laws.
(2) An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from, unless the Inspector certifies to the Board, after an
appeal shall have been duly filed, that by reason of facts stated in
the certificate a stay would in the Inspector's opinion cause
imminent peril to life or property. In that case, proceedings shall
not be stayed other than by a restraining order, which may be
granted by a court of competent jurisdiction on application thereto
and upon notice to the Inspector from whom the appeal is taken on
due cause shown.
(3) Such application for appeal shall specify the nature of the
grievance and ground(s) therefor. The party from whom the appeal
§ 350-8 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-8
279:422
is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action or decision appealed
from was taken. Notice of the appeal shall also be transmitted to
the Planning Board.
(4) The Board shall fix a time for the hearing of the appeal within 45
days after the filing of an application for appeal, give public notice
thereof, as well as due notice to the parties of interest, as specified
elsewhere in this chapter and in accordance with Title 45, Chapter
24 of the Rhode Island General Laws, and decide the matter within
15 days of such public hearing. Upon the hearing, any party may
appear in person or by agent or by attorney.
(5) In exercising its powers regarding appeals, the Board may, in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm
wholly or partly and may modify the order, requirement, decision,
or determination appealed from and may make such orders,
requirements, decisions, or determinations as ought to be made,
and to that end shall have the powers of the officer from whom the
appeal was taken. All decisions and records of the Board respecting
appeals shall conform to the provisions as specified elsewhere in
this chapter and in Title 45, Chapter 24-61 of the Rhode Island
General Laws.
E. Variances from this chapter. The Board may grant variances in the
application of the terms of this chapter, as follows:
(1) An application for relief from the literal requirements of this
chapter because of hardship may be made by any person, group,
agency, or corporation by filing with the Inspector an application
describing the request and supported by such data and evidence as
may be required by the Board, and amended from time to time, or
by the terms of this chapter, along with a fee, as established, and
may be amended, by the Town Council, in accordance with Title 45,
Chapter 24-59 of the Rhode Island General Laws. The Inspector
shall immediately transmit each application received to the Board
and shall transmit a copy of each application to the Planning Office
for distribution to the Planning Board.
(2) Immediately upon receipt of an application for a variance in the
application of the literal terms of this chapter, the Inspector shall
refer said application to the Planning Office and request that the
Planning Board provide findings and recommendations, including a
statement on the general consistency of the application with the
goals and purposes of the Comprehensive Plan of the Town, in
writing to the Board within 30 days of receipt of the application
from the Board. This report shall be entered into the record of the
proceedings. The Board shall hold a public hearing on any
application for variance in a manner as specified in § 350-8 in this
chapter, after receipt, in proper form, of an application, and shall
give public notice thereof at least 14 days prior to the date of the
§ 350-8 YARD SALES § 350-8
279:423
hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town. Notice
of hearing shall be sent by certified or registered mail to the
applicant, and to at least all those who would require notice as
specified in § 350-7E(5) and (8) of this chapter, and in accordance
with Title 45, Chapter 24-53 of the Rhode Island General Laws. The
notice shall also include the street address of the subject property.
(3) In granting a variance, the Board shall require that evidence to the
satisfaction of the following standards be entered into the record of
the proceedings:
(a) That the hardship from which the applicant seeks relief is due
to the unique characteristics of the subject land or structure
and not to the general characteristics of the surrounding area;
and is not due to a physical or economic disability of the
applicant, excepting those physical disabilities addressed in
R.I.G.L. § 45-24-30(16); [Amended 3-15-2007, effective
3-15-2007]
(b) That the hardship is not the result of any prior action of the
applicant and does not result primarily from the desire of the
applicant to realize greater financial gain;
(c) That the granting of the requested variance will not alter the
general character of the surrounding area or impair the intent
or purpose of this chapter or the Comprehensive Plan upon
which this chapter is based; and
(d) That the relief to be granted is the least relief necessary.
(e) The Board shall, in addition to the preceding standards,
require that evidence be entered into the record of the
proceedings showing that:
[1] In granting a use variance the subject land or structure
cannot yield any beneficial use if it is required to conform
to the provisions of this chapter. Nonconforming use of
neighboring land or structures in the same district and
permitted use of lands or structures in an adjacent district
shall not be considered in granting a use variance; and
[2] In granting a dimensional variance, that the hardship that
will be suffered by the owner of the subject property if the
dimensional variance is not granted shall amount to more
than a mere inconvenience. The fact that a use may be
more profitable or that a structure may be more valuable
after the relief is granted shall not be grounds for relief.
[Amended 3-15-2007, effective 3-15-2007]
(4) In granting a variance or in making any determination upon which
it is required to pass after a public hearing under this chapter, the
Board may apply such special conditions that may, in the opinion of
§ 350-8 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-8
279:424
the Board, be required to promote the intent and purposes of
the Comprehensive Plan and this chapter of the Town. Failure to
abide by any special conditions attached to a grant shall constitute
a zoning violation. Those special conditions shall be based on
competent credible evidence on the record, be incorporated into
the decision, and may include, but are not limited to, provisions for:
(a) Minimizing adverse impact of the development upon other
land, including the type, intensity, design, and performance of
activities;
(b) Controlling the sequence of development, including when it
must be commenced and completed;
(c) Controlling the duration of use or development and the time
within which any temporary structure must be removed;
(d) Assuring satisfactory installation and maintenance of required
public improvements;
(e) Designating the exact location and nature of development; and
(f) Establishing detailed records by submission of drawings,
maps, plats, or specifications.
F. Special use permits. The Board, upon application, in specific cases, may
authorize special use permits, where the Board is acting as the
permitting authority for special use permits, provided the Board shall
require that evidence to the satisfaction of the following standards be
entered into the record of the proceedings during the public hearing on
such special use permit application and to determine whether the use
should be permitted, whether the use meets special safeguards and/or
conditions, and, whether in granting a special use permit, what
additional conditions and/or limitations may be necessary.
(1) Standards.
(a) The use is listed in the Table of Use Regulations,63 as specified
elsewhere in this chapter, that may be allowed by special use
permit, upon application to and favorable decision by the
Board;
(b) An application, as required by the Board, has been properly
filed with the Inspector and the requisite fee has been paid, as
established, and may be amended, by the Town Council, as
specified elsewhere in this chapter and in accordance with
Title 45, Chapter 24-59 of the Rhode Island General Laws;
(2) Immediately upon the receipt of an application for a special use
permit, the Inspector shall refer and request that the Planning
Board shall report its findings and recommendations, including a
63.Editor's Note: The Table of Use Regulations is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 350-8 YARD SALES § 350-8
279:425
statement on the general consistency of the application with the
goals and purposes of the Comprehensive Plan of the Town, in
writing to the Board within 30 days of receipt of the application
from the Board. This report shall be entered into the record of the
proceedings.
(3) The Board shall hold a public hearing on any application for a
special use permit in a manner as specified elsewhere in this
chapter, after receipt, in proper form, of an application, and shall
give public notice thereof at least 14 days prior to the date of the
hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town. Notice
of the hearing shall be sent by first class mail to the applicant, and
to at least all those who would require notice as specified in
§ 350-7E(5) and (8) of this chapter, and in accordance with Title 45,
Chapter 24-53 of the Rhode Island General Laws. The notice shall
also include the street address of the subject property.
(4) In granting a special use permit, the Board shall affirmatively
determine and enter into the record of the public hearing that:
(a) The proposed use shall be compatible with surrounding land
uses;
(b) The proposed use shall conform with the applicable elements
of the Glocester Comprehensive Community Plan;
(c) The proposed use shall be in harmony with the general
purposes and intent of this chapter;
(d) The public convenience and welfare will be substantially
served; and
(e) The proposed use shall not result in or create conditions that
will be inimical to the public health, safety, morals and general
welfare of the community.
(5) In granting a special use permit, the Board may apply such special
conditions as may, in the opinion of the Board, be required to
promote the intent and purposes of the Comprehensive Plan and
this chapter of the Town. Those special conditions shall be based on
competent credible evidence on the record, be incorporated into
the decision, and may include, but not be limited to, provisions for:
(a) Minimizing adverse impact of the development upon other
land, including the type, intensity, design, and performance of
activities;
(b) Controlling the sequence of development, including when it
must be commenced and completed;
(c) Controlling the duration of use or development and the time
within which any temporary structure must be removed;
§ 350-8 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-8
279:426
§ 350-9. Appeals.
An appeal from a decision or action of the Town Council or Zoning Board
of Review may be taken by an aggrieved party(ies) in accordance with the
following provisions:
(d) Assuring satisfactory installation and maintenance of required
public improvements;
(e) Designating the exact location and nature of development; and
(f) Establishing detailed records by submission of drawings,
maps, plats, or specifications.
(6) In the event that a special use permit is sought with a dimension
variance, the Board must make affirmative findings consistent with
the granting of a special use permit and dimensional variance and
the following: [Added 7-15-2004, effective 8-11-2004]
(a) The special use permit could not exist without the dimensional
variance;
(b) The approval will not adversely affect the surrounding area
and will not have an undesirable impact on abutting
properties;
(c) Off-street parking and loading areas are adequate for the
proposal;
(d) Outdoor lighting is designed and located in a manner which
complements the character of the neighborhood;
(e) The use will not disrupt the neighborhood or the privacy of
abutting landowners by excessive noise, light or excessive
traffic; and
(f) The approval will not pose a threat to the groundwater and/or
drinking water supply.
A. From the Zoning Board of Review.
(1) An aggrieved party may appeal a decision of the Board to the
Superior Court for Providence County by filing a complaint setting
forth the reasons of appeal within 20 days after the decision has
been recorded and posted in the office of the Town Clerk. The
decision shall be posted in a location visible to the public in the
Town hall for a period of 20 days following the recording of the
decision. The Board shall file the original documents acted upon by
it and constituting the record of the case appealed from, or
certified copies thereof, together with such other facts as may be
pertinent, with the Clerk of the Court within 30 days after being
served with a copy of the complaint. When the complaint is filed by
someone other than the original applicant or appellant, the original
§ 350-8 YARD SALES § 350-9
279:427
applicant or appellant and the members of the Board shall be made
parties to the proceedings. The appeal shall not stay proceedings
upon the decision appealed from, but the Court may, in its
discretion, grant a stay on appropriate terms and make such other
orders as it deems necessary for an equitable disposition of the
appeal.
(2) If, before the date set for hearing in the Superior Court, an
application is made to the Court for leave to present additional
evidence before the Board and it is shown to the satisfaction of the
Court that the additional evidence is material and that there were
good reasons for the failure to present it at the hearing before the
Board, the Court may order that the additional evidence be taken
before the Board upon conditions determined by the Court. The
Board may modify its findings and decision by reason of the
additional evidence and shall file that evidence and any new
findings or decisions with the Superior Court.
(3) The review shall be conducted by the Superior Court without a jury.
The Court shall consider the record of the hearing before the Board
and, if it shall appear to the Court that additional evidence is
necessary for the proper disposition of the matter, it may allow any
party to the appeal to present the evidence in open court, which
evidence, along with the report, shall constitute the record upon
which the determination of the Court shall be made.
(4) The Court shall not substitute its judgment for that of the Board as
to the weight of the evidence on questions of fact. The Court may
affirm the decision of the Board or remand the case for further
proceedings, or may reverse or modify the decision if substantial
rights of the appellant have been prejudiced because of findings,
inferences, conclusions, or decisions which are:
(a) In violation of constitutional, statutory, or ordinance
provisions;
(b) In excess of the authority granted to the Board by statute or
ordinance;
(c) Made upon unlawful procedure;
(d) Affected by other error of law;
(e) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable, probative, and
substantial evidence of the whole record; or
(f) Arbitrary or capricious or characterized by abuse of discretion
or clearly unwarranted exercise of discretion.
(5) Upon the entry of any case or proceeding brought under the
provisions of this chapter or in accordance with Title 45, Chapter
24 of the Rhode Island General Laws, including pending appeals
§ 350-9 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-9
279:428
and appeals hereinafter taken to the Court, the Court shall, at the
request of either party, advance the case, so that the matter shall
be afforded precedence on the calendar and shall thereupon be
heard and determined with as little delay as possible.
B. From an act to adopt, amend, revise or repeal this chapter.
(1) An appeal of an enactment of or an amendment to this chapter may
be taken to the Superior Court for Providence County by filing a
complaint, as set forth herein, within 30 days after the enactment
or amendment has become effective. The appeal may be taken by
an aggrieved party or by any legal resident or landowner of the
Town or by any association of residents or landowners of the
municipality. The appeal shall not stay the enforcement of this
chapter, as enacted or amended, but the Court may, in its
discretion, grant a stay on appropriate terms, which may include
the filing of a bond, and make such other orders as it deems
necessary for an equitable disposition of the appeal.
(2) The complaint shall set forth with specificity the area or areas in
which the enactment or amendment does not conform with the
Comprehensive Plan and/or the manner in which it constitutes a
taking of private property without just compensation.
(3) The review shall be conducted by the Court without a jury. The
Court shall first consider whether the enactment or amendment of
the chapter is in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan. If the
enactment or amendment is not in conformance with the
Comprehensive Plan, then the Court shall invalidate the enactment
or the amendment, or those parts of the enactment or amendment
which are not in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan. The
Court shall not revise the ordinance to conform with the
Comprehensive Plan, but may suggest appropriate language as
part of the Court decision.
(4) In the case of an aggrieved party, where the Court has found that
the enactment or amendment of the chapter is in conformance with
the Comprehensive Plan, then the Court shall next determine
whether the enactment or amendment works as a taking of
property from the aggrieved party. If the Court determines that
there has been a taking, the Court shall remand the case to the
Town Council, with its findings that a taking has occurred, and
order the municipality to either provide just compensation or
rescind the enactment or amendment within 30 days.
(5) The Superior Court shall retain jurisdiction, in the event that the
aggrieved party and the Town do not agree on the amount of
compensation, in which case the Superior Court shall hold further
hearings to determine and to award compensation. Furthermore,
the Superior Court shall retain jurisdiction to determine the
§ 350-9 YARD SALES § 350-9
279:429
§ 350-10. Judicial aid in enforcement; vested rights.
amount of an award of compensation for any temporary taking, if
that taking shall exist.
(6) The Court may, in its discretion, upon motion of the parties or on its
own motion, award reasonable attorney's fees to any party to an
appeal, as set forth herein, including the Town.
(7) In case there is filed in the office of the Town Clerk on or before the
day of a public hearing held by the Town Council regarding
adoption, amendment, revision or repeal of any section or sections
of this chapter or within three days thereafter, a written protest
against the petition request pending or voted on by the Town
Council, signed by the owners of 20% or more of the street frontage
directly opposite the property proposed to be affected or by the
owners of property abutting on 20% or more at the boundary line
between the property proposed to be affected and the property
immediately in the rear thereof when there is no street between
said properties, no change shall be passed, except by three-fifths
vote of the Town Council.
A. Judicial aid in enforcement. The Supreme Court and the Superior Court,
within their respective jurisdictions, or any justice of either of those
courts in vacation, shall, upon due proceedings in the name of the
Town, instituted by the Town Solicitor, have power to issue any
extraordinary writ or to proceed according to the course of law or
equity or both:
(1) To restrain the erection, alteration, or use of any building,
structure, sign, or land erected, altered, or used in violation of the
provisions of this chapter, enacted under the authority of Title 45,
Chapter 24 of the Rhode Island General Laws, and to order its
removal or abatement as a nuisance;
(2) To compel compliance with the provisions of this chapter enacted
under the authority of said Title 45, Chapter 24;
(3) To order the removal by the property owner of any building,
structure, sign, or improvement existing in violation of this chapter
enacted under the provisions of said Title 45, Chapter 24, and to
authorize the Inspector of the Town, in the default of the removal
by the owner, to remove it at the expense of the owner;
(4) To order the reimbursement for any work or materials which shall
have been done or furnished by or at the cost of the Town;
(5) To order restoration by the owner, where practicable; and/or
(6) To issue fines and other penalties.
B. Vested rights.
§ 350-9 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-10
279:430
(1) Any application(s) for development(s) that are substantially
complete and have been submitted for approval to the appropriate
review agency in the Town prior to enactment of this chapter shall
be considered by the Town under the protection of this section and
shall be reviewed according to the regulations applicable in the
chapter in force at the time the application was submitted. If an
application for development under the provisions of this section is
approved, failure to initiate and/or complete the improvement of
the property(ies) prior to the time limits that may be established at
the time of approval, shall render the aforementioned approval null
and void. Any subsequent proposal for development of the property,
whether or not the proposal is substantially similar to any
previously approved plan, shall require a resubmission of
development plans by the applicant, subject to the current
regulations in effect at the time of such resubmission.
(2) For the purposes of this section, “substantially complete” shall
mean that any application shall have been deemed such by the local
official designated to receive such applications, as specified
elsewhere in this chapter, and that all required forms, plans,
signatures, fees, supporting documentation and other required
information has been received and certified by the proper local
official to be in proper order. Failure to submit the required
information in the proper form, as determined by the designated
local official, shall render the submission null and void to any rights
afforded through this section.
§ 350-10 YARD SALES § 350-10
279:431

ARTICLE II
Zoning District Use Regulations64
§ 350-11. Table of Use Regulations. [Amended 11-15-2007, effective
12-20-2007]
The Table of Use Regulations is included at the end of this chapter. The
provisions of this Table notwithstanding, the uses permitted in a
conservation development in any zoning district where permitted shall be
governed by the provisions of Article XII of this chapter.
§ 350-12. Prohibited uses. [Amended 12-15-2011, effective
12-15-2011]
Prohibited uses are as follows:
Abattoir
Commercial raising of hogs
Distillation of bones
Gas manufacture from coal
Fertilizer manufacture
Offal or dead animal reduction or dumping
Processing of vinegar or yeast
Tanning or curing of raw hides
Tar distillation
Junkyard or motor vehicle junkyard
Cart track and motor vehicle racetrack
Asphalt manufacture or refining
Cement, lime or gypsum manufacture
Creosote manufacture or treatment
Chlorine manufacture
Horse and dog tracks
Massage parlors
Above- and below-ground storage of industrial waste and by-products
All other uses which are obnoxious by reason of the emission of odors,
gases, dust, noise or vibration, water pollution or by reason of danger of
health, fire or explosion
Any use not specifically listed or otherwise permitted or allowed by
special use permit in a district
64.Editor's Note: Refer to § 350-6 for a complete explanation of each zoning district.
§ 350-11 YARD SALES § 350-12
279:433

ARTICLE III
District Dimensional Regulations
§ 350-13. Table of Dimensional Regulations. [Amended 3-15-2007,
effective 3-15-2007]
The Table of Dimensional Regulations is included at the end of this chapter.
The provisions of this Table notwithstanding, for the purposes of calculating
minimum lot and yard dimensions, area, density, maximum percent
coverage and the maximum number of lots or dwelling units permitted
in a conservation development in any zoning district where permitted the
provisions of Article XII of this chapter shall apply.
§ 350-13 YARD SALES § 350-13
279:435

ARTICLE IV
Planned Districts
§ 350-14. Findings.
It has become readily apparent that residential development dominates
the economic base and land use pattern of the Town of Glocester. It has
become equally apparent that the scattered residential pattern resulting
from houses placed far apart not only has accentuated the great burden and
expense of providing adequate community facilities and services, but has
destroyed the concept of an integrated community.
§ 350-15. Purpose.
§ 350-16. Objectives.
The objectives of planned districts are to:
A. The purposes of this article are to:
(1) Encourage and provide a means for effectuating desirable
residential, industrial and commercial development, and
conservation in the Town of Glocester, which will feature variations
in siting mixed land uses and/or varied dwelling types;
(2) Preserve open space for community facilities and aesthetic
considerations; and
(3) Provide more efficient and economical services and facilities to the
residents of the area.
B. The amenities and compatibility of planned districts, hereinafter "PDistricts,"
are to be insured through adoption and periodic updating of
a Comprehensive Community Plan reflecting the physical development
goals of the community.
A. Provide a more desirable living environment than would be possible
through the strict application of chapter requirements.
B. Encourage developers to use more creative approaches in the
development of land.
C. Encourage a more efficient, aesthetic and desirable use of open areas.
D. Encourage variety in the physical development pattern of the Town.
E. Maximize individual freedom of choice regarding the personal living
environment.
§ 350-14 YARD SALES § 350-17
279:437
§ 350-17. Standards and requirements for P-Districts.
The following provisions shall apply in a P-District, which district shall also
be subject to other provisions of this chapter, except that where conflict in
regulations occurs, the regulations specified in this article shall apply.
A. P-Districts may be established on parcels of land which are suitable for,
and of sufficient size to be planned and developed in a manner
consistent with the purpose of this article and the objectives of this
chapter. No P-District shall include less than 25 acres of contiguous
land unless the Planning Board and the Town Council find that property
of less acreage is suitable as a P-District by virtue of its unique
historical character, topography, or land features.
B. No P-District shall be established or plans reviewed by the Planning
Board unless and until there is on file with the Town written consent of
every property owner within such district at the time of the
establishment of the district agreeing that the applicant shall be bound
by the conditions and regulations proposed and which will be effective
within the district.
C. Standards for area, coverage, density, yard requirements, parking and
screening for P-District uses shall be governed by the standards of the
residential, commercial and industrial zoning district most similar in
nature and function to the proposed P-District use(s), as determined by
the Planning Board. Standards for public improvements shall be
governed by applicable ordinances of the Town. Exceptions to these
standards by the Planning Board and Town Council are possible when
these bodies find that such exceptions encourage a desirable living
environment and are warranted in terms of total proposed development
or unit thereof.
D. The gross population density and building intensity of any area
proposed for development under the planned unit approach may be
increased and therefore do not have to conform to the basic overall
density and building intensity requirements of the zoning district. In
addition, lot dimensions, building setbacks and area do not have to
meet the specific ordinance requirements, provided that a more
functional and desirable use of the property is made.
E. Lot size and layout.
(1) Residential lot sizes related to single-family detached units may be
reduced as follows (provided that public water and sewers are
available):
(a) A-4: 60,000 square feet (with public water and sewers).
(b) A-3: 40,000 square feet (with public water and sewers).
(c) R-2: 20,000 square feet (with public water and sewers).
§ 350-17 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-17
279:438
(2) Drawings must be submitted that show that the relationship of
interior and exterior living or working area is desirable and
adequate and that the living and working environment is just as
desirable as the strict requirements of this chapter. Building
intensities may be increased if, in the opinion of the Planning Board
and the Town Council, the character and configuration of the land
will accommodate the increased density and that such development
will not violate the intent or character of the proposed P-District.
F. For each six square feet of land gained within a residential subdivision,
through the reduction of lot size below minimum chapter requirements,
or other means, one square foot of land shall be dedicated to the Town,
either by rights in fee or through a conservation easement, and retained
as open space for park, recreational and related uses. All lands
dedicated in fee or easement must meet the Town's requirements.
G. All water supply sources and sewage treatment systems must be
consistent with Rhode Island Department of Environmental
Management regulations. All such regulations are hereby considered as
part of this chapter together with any new regulations that the Rhode
Island Department of Environmental Management may add from time
to time.
H. Ownership and maintenance of water and sewer facilities must be
arranged to the satisfaction of the Town of Glocester prior to final
approval of a P-District.
I. Townhouses.
(1) In areas where townhouses are uses, there shall be no more than
five townhouse units in any contiguous group. A townhouse is
defined as a single-family dwelling with no side yards between
adjacent townhouses.
(2) A variety of building setbacks, color and building materials for
contiguous townhouse units is encouraged. An average rear yard
depth shall be a minimum of 25 feet where the lot does not abut a
park or open space easement. A minimum side yard between the
two end units, or contiguous townhouse groups, shall be a
minimum of 80 feet plus five feet for each additional story over one
story for the end units.
J. All areas proposed for dedication to the Town under the planned
districts approach must be acceptable as to shape, size and location, as
required by the Glocester Planning Board.
K. In all areas proposed as homeowner parks or similar approaches, if
using the advantages of the planned districts approach, the developer
must convey to the Town the development rights (i.e., conservation,
recreational and open space easement) and must meet the
requirements of the Planning Board as to shape, size and location.
§ 350-17 YARD SALES § 350-17
279:439
§ 350-18. Procedure and applications.
L. Rights-of-way for riding, hiking or other types of trails and scenic ways
may be dedicated in fee to the Town through a space exchange by
reduction in lot sizes on a six-to-one basis, provided that the
requirements as to area and location meet the requirements of the
Planning Board. Rights-of-way for watercourses and other similar
channels are not acceptable for space exchange under planned unit
development. However, the portion of the right-of-way that is usable as
a trail or similar way may be acceptable but must be approved by the
Glocester Planning Board.
M. A possible clustering of dwellings may be accomplished through
reduction of lot area and the provision of usable and desirable open
space easements dedicated to the Town; size and location of such
easements to be subject to approval by the Planning Board.
N. Public utility and other similar easements cannot be used for a space
exchange under the planned district approach.
O. Any subdivision which includes the proposal to dedicate to the Town
land for park and open space use, under the planned district approach,
must include, by dedication or by other reasonable means, the total
park area, at the time of filing of the final map on all, or any portion, of
the tract or tracts.
P. The Town will do the basic working drawings and landscape
architectural design for all areas dedicated to the Town for public
purpose and provide the basic landscape requirements if the developer
will do the grading and reasonable contouring work to an approved
plan; the necessary grading plan of the park to be provided by the Town
upon a minimum of 30 days' notice by the developer at the tentative
map stage.
Q. Planned district development is not limited to the creation of park area.
Application could be made to permit variety in the location of dwelling
units within the subdivision.
R. A diversification of lot sizes may be permitted within a zoning district
without the dedication or creation of park areas, provided the overall
density of the zoning district is not increased.
S. Note: The developer is encouraged to obtain a trained and experienced
land planner, registered architect, and/or landscape architect to
prepare plans for all planned district developments, to enable the most
expedient processing of such developers. The use, by developers, of
qualified professionals to do plans for planned district developments
enables the Planning Board to reduce the time it must spend on said
development.
A. Preliminary development plan review and approval.
§ 350-17 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-18
279:440
(1) The applicant shall submit a preliminary development plan to the
Planning Board for review and approval in principle under the
applicable provisions of Chapter 300, Subdivision of Land, and the
Planning Board shall so approve prior to the submission of a PDistrict
rezoning application (application for amendment of this
chapter). The tentative written consent of all property owners
within the proposed P-District shall be on file with the Town before
Planning Board review of a preliminary development plan shall be
commenced.
(2) Approval in principle of the preliminary development plan shall be
limited to conformance to subdivision regulations and to the
general acceptability of the land uses proposed and their
interrelationship, and shall not be construed to endorse the precise
location of uses, configuration of parcels, or engineering feasibility.
Any preliminary development plan and text shall be prepared and
endorsed by a qualified land planning specialist (planner architect,
landscape architect or engineer) and shall include the following
information presented in a general, schematic fashion:
(a) Proposed land uses, population densities and building
intensities;
(b) Proposed circulation pattern, indicating all public streets;
(c) Proposed parks, playgrounds, school sites, and open spaces;
(d) A land use marketability study (LUM) of proposed commercial
uses, if the property is not zoned for commercial purposes at
the time of submittal of the preliminary development of the
plan;
(e) Delineation of the units to be constructed in progression, if
any;
(f) Relation to future land uses in surrounding area and
comprehensive plan; and
(g) Any additional information that the Glocester Planning Board
may require.
B. General development plan and schedule approval. In addition to
submission of the application for amendment of this chapter, to the
Town Council, the applicant shall submit the following documents and
supporting evidence to the Planning Board. (Such documents shall be
prepared and endorsed by a qualified professional team, which shall
include a licensed architect, licensed land surveyor, registered civil
engineer, and a qualified landscape architect.)
(1) A sepia map with 10 prints of a survey of the property showing
existing features of the property, including specimen trees,
§ 350-18 YARD SALES § 350-18
279:441
structures, streets, easements, utility lines, and land use. In
addition, the following shall be shown:
(a) Proposed name of development.
(b) Location by legal description.
(c) Scale of plan: one inch equals 50 feet.
(d) Date, North arrow and contours at two-foot intervals.
(e) Boundary line of proposed development indicated, and total
acreage encompassed thereby.
(2) A sepia map with 10 prints of a general development plan, which
shall be in conformance with the approved preliminary showing, as
appropriate, all the information required on the preliminary
development plan; the approximate location and proposed density
of dwelling units; nonresidential building intensity; and land use
considered suitable for adjacent properties.
(3) A schedule for the development of units to be constructed in
progression and description of the design principles for buildings
and streetscapes; tabulations of total number of acres in the
proposed project and the percent thereof designated for various
uses; the number of dwelling units proposed by type of dwelling for
each unit of a P-District; estimated number of nonresidential
population; proposed retail sales area and economic justification;
anticipated timing for each unit; and standards for height, open
space, building intensity, population density, and public
improvements proposed for each unit of development whenever the
applicant proposed an exception from standard zoning district or
other ordinance regulations governing development.
(4) Evidence that the applicant has sufficient control over the land to
effectuate the proposed plan.
(5) Engineering feasibility studies as necessary.
(6) Any additional information that the Glocester Planning Board may
require.
C. Planned district development approval. Planned district development
approval, under applicable provisions of Chapter 300, Subdivision of
Land, by the Planning Board, valid for one year, shall be secured for
each unit of a P-District as delineated on the general development plan.
Planned district development plans shall be prepared by a qualified
professional team, which shall include a licensed architect, registered
civil engineer and a qualified landscape architect; and shall be
concerned with, but not necessarily limited to, the following:
(1) Site plan showing buildings, various functional use areas,
circulation, and their relationships;
§ 350-18 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-18
279:442
§ 350-19. Findings required.
The Planning Board, after public hearing, may recommend the
establishment of a P-District, and the Town Council, after public hearing,
may by ordinance establish a P-District, provided that the facts submitted
with the application and presented at the hearings establish that:
(2) Preliminary building plans, including floor plans and exterior
elevations;
(3) Landscaping plans;
(4) Engineering plans, including site grading, street improvements,
drainage, and public utility extensions, as necessary;
(5) Proposed use and occupancy, type of construction, building height
and area of each building or structure, and proposed distances
between buildings and structures, and distances to property lines.
Minor changes to an approved planned unit development
pertaining to siting may be approved by the Planning Board,
provided the change is in accord with the intent expressed in the
general development plan.
(6) Any additional information that the Glocester Planning Board may
require.
A. The proposed P-District, or given unit thereof, can be substantially
completed within four years of the establishment of the P-District.
B. Each individual unit of development, as well as the total development,
can exist as an independent unit capable of creating an environment of
sustained desirability and stability or that adequate assurance will be
provided that such objective will be attained; that the uses proposed
will not be detrimental to present and potential surrounding uses, but
will have a beneficial effect which could not be achieved under other
zoning districts;
C. The streets and thoroughfares proposed are suitable and adequate to
carry anticipated traffic, and increased densities will not generate
traffic in such amounts as to overload the street network outside the PDistrict;
D. Any proposed commercial development can be justified economically at
the location proposed to provide for adequate commercial facilities of
the types proposed;
E. Any exception from standard chapter requirements is warranted by the
design and amenities incorporated in the general development plan;
F. The area surrounding said development can be planned and zoned in
coordination and substantial compatibility with the proposed
development;
§ 350-18 YARD SALES § 350-19
279:443
§ 350-20. Planning Board and Town Council action.
§ 350-21. Utilities.
Underground utilities, including telephone and electrical systems, are
required within the limits of all P-Districts. Appurtenances to these systems
which can be effectively screened may be excepted from this requirement
if the Planning Board finds that such exception will not violate the intent or
character of the proposed P-District.
§ 350-22. P-Districts created.
Pursuant to this article and R.I.G.L. §§ 45-24-1 and 45-24-4, the Town
Council of the Town of Glocester hereby establishes P-Districts as follows:
G. The P-District is in conformance with the general plan of the Town of
Glocester; and
H. Existing or proposed utility services are adequate for the population
densities proposed.
A. If from the facts presented the Planning Board or the Town Council is
unable to make the necessary findings, the application shall be denied.
In no instance shall a Planning Board decision be binding on any action
by the Town Council relative to granting a zone change for a P-District.
B. In taking action, the Planning Board may deny the general development
plan and general development schedule as submitted, or may
recommend approval of said plan and schedule subject to specified
amendments.
C. Major changes in a general development plan shall be considered the
same as a change in the Zoning Map and shall be made in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
D. At the time of adopting any ordinance establishing a P-District, the
Town Council shall make appropriate arrangements with the applicant,
which will insure the accomplishment at the scheduled times of the
public improvements and grants of easement shown on the approved
general development plan.
E. If no development has occurred to effectuate a P-District development
within two years after the district is created, the Planning Board shall
review the action and determine whether or not the continuation of a
given P-District is in the public interest.
A. The Town of Glocester's Zoning Ordinance and Zoning Map are hereby
amended and a P-District established with respect to certain property
shown on Assessor's Plat Map No. 18, Lot 10, and shown on that certain
final approved general development plan of Glocester Pines, Inc.,65
which has been filed with the Town of Glocester, said parcel comprising
approximately 87.2 acres.
§ 350-19 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-22
279:444
(1) Standards for area, placement and location of structures and land
features, coverage, density, use, development, improvements, and
all other manner of land uses shall be governed by and limited to
those standards which have been set forth and detailed on the final
approved general development plan filed by the owner of the PDistrict
with the Town of Glocester.
(2) In addition to these deviations from standard zoning and
subdivision requirements which are depicted on the final approved
general development plan, the Town of Glocester hereby grants to
the applicant the following additional exceptions to the P-District
standards. All other zoning, subdivision66 and Town ordinance
requirements shall be applicable to the P-District.
(a) The requirement set forth in § 350-21 of Chapter 350
pertaining to underground utilities need not be complied with;
(b) Any requirements for public water and sewer service need not
be complied with;
(c) Any requirement for paved roads need not be complied with;
(3) Development, use, location and placement of structures and
improvements, and all aspects of dimensional and area regulation
within this P-District, shall be subject to and governed by the
enforcement provisions of Chapter 350. Any deviation from the
final approved general development plan shall be subject to all the
penalties provided for in Chapter 350 and the Zoning Enabling
Legislation. Any exception or variance to the plans as presently
constituted will require prior Town Council approval by means of
an appropriate amendment to this article.
(4) The applicant will take appropriate measures and use best efforts
to reduce the flow of silt, if and when there is any flow of silt.
(5) The Town Council will retain custody of the final approved general
development plan until such time as the Town's Highway
Commissioner certifies to the Town Council that the roads within
the P-District have been properly constructed, such that sale of
parcels within the P-District should be allowed to proceed. At this
time, if the Town Council is satisfied that lots within the P-District
are ready for sale, it shall so certify on the final approved general
development plan and release said plan to the owner for recording
with the Town. Until said plan is recorded in the manner specified
above, no lots shall be sold by the owner, except for Lot #1. During
the pre-recordation period when the Town Council has custody of
65.Editor's Note: The Glocester Pines, Inc., general development plan, adopted 9-10-1981,
has been amended as follows: 5-21-1987; 1-20-1994; 3-19-1998; 10-15-1998; 8-5-2010,
effective 9-8-2010.
66.Editor's Note: See Ch. 300, Subdivision of Land.
§ 350-22 YARD SALES § 350-22
279:445
said plan, it shall be filed at the Town Hall and open to inspection
by the public.
(6) This article supersedes and takes precedence over all other Town
ordinances which conflict herewith. To the extent other Town
ordinances do not conflict with the terms of this article, they are
fully applicable.
(7) This section shall take effect upon its passage.
(8) No licenses, permits, or approvals shall issue with respect to this PDistrict
unless the activity in question is in conformance with the
final approved general development plan. Any such license, permit,
or approval which does issue with respect to activity which is not in
conformance with said plan shall be null and void and shall not
prevent or in any way prejudice the Town from enforcing this
article under the zoning laws.
(9) The procedure for amending this plan in any respect shall be the
same as that provided for in Title 45, Chapter 24 of the Rhode
Island General Laws and § 350-8.
§ 350-22 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-22
279:446
ARTICLE V
Sign Regulations
§ 350-23. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meaning given in this section:
NEIGHBORHOOD OR COMMUNITY SHOPPING CENTER — A group of
commercial establishments, planned, developed, owned and managed as
a unit, with off-street parking provided on the property; or any group of
commercial establishments sharing common walls; or a series of two or
more separately owned establishments which share a common parking lot
with spaces for at least 10 cars.
SIGN — Any permanent or temporary device or structure which is
freestanding, attached to a building or structure, or erected, painted,
represented or reproduced inside or outside any building or structure or
any natural object, including the ground itself; which displays, reproduces
or includes any letter, work, name, number, model, symbol, insignia, design,
device, representation or trademark or a flag; which is used to identify
the premises or occupant or owner of the premises; to advertise or call
attention to any trade, business, profession, industry, service, or their
activity; to advertise any product or item; to advertise the sale or rental
or use of all or part of any premises, including that upon which it is
displayed; to direct vehicular or pedestrian traffic, other than state, county
or municipal highway and roadway markers; and shall include any
announcement, declaration, insignia, or any representation used to
advertise or promote the interests of any person. The word “sign” shall not
be construed to mean any sign in the interior of any structure unless it is
specifically set forth in this article or displayed within the view of persons
passing on a street, or within view of persons in a parking lot.
SIGN, AREA THEREOF — The area of the smallest triangle, rectangle, or
circle which can wholly enclose the surface area of the sign. All visible
faces of a multiface sign shall be counted separately and then totaled in
calculating sign area, with the exception that on dual-faced signs where
two faces are parallel, only one side shall be counted. Three-dimensional
signs shall be treated as dual-faced signs, such that the total area shall be
twice the area of the smallest triangle, rectangle or circle which can totally
circumscribe the sign in the plane of its largest dimension. Frames and
structural members which do not meet the definition of “sign” above shall
not be included in the computation of sign area.
SIGN, BUSINESS — A sign which identifies or advertises a permitted
business, including permitted home occupations, located on the premises
where such sign is located.
SIGN, ELECTRIC — A sign which provides artificial light directly or through
any transparent or translucent material.
SIGN, FREESTANDING — A sign not supported by a wall or screening
surface.
§ 350-23 YARD SALES § 350-23
279:447
SIGN, ILLUMINATED — A sign illuminated by artificial light focused upon
or directed chiefly at the surface of the sign.
SIGN, NONCONFORMING USE — A sign which identifies or advertises a
use on the premises which use is not allowed under this chapter.
SIGN PLAZA — An area established and maintained by the Town of
Glocester, or other approved organization as specified in this article, where
approved informational and directional signs are grouped.
SIGN, PROJECTING — A sign which is attached to a wall or a screening
surface, and which extends more than 12 inches therefrom.
SIGN, RESIDENTIAL — A sign, other than the name and address of the
resident, which identifies the residential premises on which it is located.
SIGN, WALL-MOUNTED — A sign which is attached directly to or painted
upon a wall or screening surface, and which does not extend more than 12
inches therefrom. Signs located inside a building and intended to be visible
from off the property or from a parking lot shall be considered wall-mounted
signs.
ZONES — Zones established by this chapter.67
§ 350-24. Off-premises signs.
Unless otherwise specified elsewhere in this article, all signs shall pertain
to the principal use, service rendered, or product sold on the premises
on which the sign is located, and shall not include advertisement,
identification, publicity or notice of goods, services, establishments,
enterprises, activities, persons, organizations and facilities which are not
located on the premises, or which are incidental to the primary use of the
premises.
§ 350-25. Permit required.
Except as specified in this article, it shall be unlawful to erect, replace or
relocate any sign within the Town of Glocester without first obtaining a
sign permit issued only for such signs as are specifically allowed for the
particular premises and zones by the provisions of this article.
§ 350-26. Permitted signs.
The following signs are permitted without permits issued by the Zoning
Inspector of the Town of Glocester, and shall not be counted when
calculating the quantity of signs permitted and the total allowable sign area;
however, such signs shall conform with all other applicable regulations:
A. Name and address of resident, not to include any commercial
advertising. Such signs shall not exceed two square feet in sign area
and shall be nonilluminated and nonelectric.
67.Editor's Note: See § 350-6.
§ 350-23 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-26
279:448
B. ”No trespassing” sign, or other such signs regulating the use of the
property on which it is located, provided such signs do not exceed two
square feet in area in any zone except in commercial and industrial
zones where such signs may not exceed five square feet in area. Such
signs shall be nonilluminated and nonelectric.
C. Temporary signs which advertise the sale, rental, lease or improvement
of the property on which they are located, provided such signs do not
exceed six square feet in any residential and agricultural zone, 20
square feet in commercial zones, and 30 square feet in industrial zones.
Signs advertising pending improvements shall not be in place more
than 60 days prior to commencement of such improvements. Temporary
signs shall be removed within 10 days after completion of the activity
advertised. Such signs shall be nonilluminated and nonelectric.
D. Bulletin board for public charitable or religious institutions when
located on the property thereof, provided the area of such sign does not
exceed 25 square feet and bears no commercial advertising. Such signs
may be illuminated but must be nonelectric.
E. Signs identifying on-premises traffic, parking, or other functional
activity, such as lavatory facilities, telephone, signs denoting other
sections of a building, signs denoting entrances, offices, etc., bearing no
commercial advertising. There shall be no more than one sign for each
activity, and each sign shall not exceed two square feet in area if wallmounted
and four square feet if freestanding. Such signs may be
illuminated or electric.
F. Signs erected by the Town of Glocester and traffic control devices
erected by the State of Rhode Island or by the United States of America,
provided such signs bear no commercial advertising.
G. Memorial signs or tablets and signs denoting the date of erection or
name of a building when cut into any masonry surface or when
constructed of bronze or other noncombustible material. Such signs
shall be nonilluminated and nonelectric. Signs denoting the date of
erection or name of a building shall be wall-mounted and shall not
exceed six square feet in area.
H. The flag, pennant or insignia of any government, or of any religious,
charitable or fraternal organization.
I. Temporary signs no larger than 12 square feet which advertise auctions
and special events or charities or public service groups, provided such
signs shall not be in place for more than 10 days. Such signs shall be
nonilluminated and nonelectric.
J. Signs identifying churches and places of worship, when located on the
property thereof, and which shall be no larger than 12 square feet. Such
signs may be illuminated but shall not be electric.
§ 350-26 YARD SALES § 350-26
279:449
§ 350-27. Signs prohibited in all zones.
The following signs shall not be permitted, erected or maintained in any
zone:
K. Signs identifying nonprofit educational institutions, when located on
the property thereof, and which shall be no larger than 12 square feet.
Such signs may be illuminated but shall not be electric.
L. Incidental business signs indicating the hours of operation, credit card,
business affiliations, and the like, provided the total area of all such
signs for a single business does not exceed two square feet per
entrance.
M. Election signs shall be permitted on the premises of the headquarters
and party committee members, on motor vehicles, and on existing
billboards. Election signs shall be removed within 10 days after the
election, with the candidate for office having responsibility for removal
of signs advertising his candidacy. Election signs may be illuminated,
but shall be nonelectric.
N. Temporary signs which advertise special sales of products and special
events attached to a store window or windows, the total area of such
sign or signs not to exceed 30% of the window space.
A. Signs which incorporate in any manner any flashing or moving
illumination or with illumination which varies in color. Digital data
displays transmitting the time of day and the temperature are
exempted.
B. Signs which have any visible moving parts, including signs which
achieve movement by action of wind currents. Hanging signs which
swing in the wind and barber poles are exempted, provided they comply
with all other provisions of this article.
C. Any sign or sign structure which constitutes a hazard to public safety or
health, including signs which by reason of size, location, content,
coloring or manner of illumination obstruct the vision of a driver, or
obstruct or detract from the visibility or effectiveness of any traffic sign
or control device on public streets and roads; or which obstruct free
ingress to or egress from a fire escape, door, window, or other required
exitway; or which make use of words such as “stop,” “look,” “one way,”
“danger,” “yield,” or any similar words, phrases, symbols, lights, or
characters, in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse
traffic.
D. Any obsolete sign, which no longer advertises a bona fide business
conducted, or product sold on the premises. Such signs shall be
removed within 30 days of the date on which they became obsolete.
E. Signs on publicly owned property or publicly owned rights-of-way, other
than signs erected by the Town of Glocester, the State of Rhode Island
§ 350-26 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-27
279:450
§ 350-28. Sign plazas.
§ 350-29. Gasoline filling and service stations.
The following signs, customary and necessary to the operation of filling and
service stations:
or the United States of America. No sign located on public property
or on a public right-of-way shall bear any commercial advertising or
the name of any commercial business unless otherwise specified in this
article.
F. Signs painted on, attached to, or supported by a tree, stone, cliff, or
other natural object, except for temporary "For Sale" signs where no
other means of suspension is possible in agricultural and residential
zones.
G. String lights and strip lighting, other than those associated with
religious and charitable organizations for a period not to exceed 10
days, other than holiday decorations, to be removed within 14 days
after such holiday.
H. Searchlights, pennants, spinners, banners and streamers, other than
those associated with events of religious and charitable organizations
for a period not to exceed 10 days.
I. Projecting signs over 16 square feet in area, and extending more than
five feet from the wall to which they are attached.
J. Roof signs erected on or extended above the building roof or roof eaves.
K. Off-site directional signs are not permitted unless otherwise specified in
this article.
A. The Town Council of the Town of Glocester may, upon recommendation
by the Planning Board, establish sign plazas as defined in this article
and may establish fees for the erection of signs in such plazas. With
approval of the Planning Board and Town Council, such plazas may be
owned and operated by private civic organizations such as the Chamber
of Commerce, Lions Club, etc.
B. The Planning Board may establish regulations regarding the content,
size, shape, color, material, texture and the like of signs to be erected in
the plaza, and shall have the right to approve or disapprove the layout
and design of the plaza itself.
A. Lettering on buildings displayed over individual entrance doors
consisting of the words "washing," "lubrication," "repairing," or words
of similar import, provided that there shall be not more than one such
sign over each entrance, and that the letters not exceed 10 inches in
height;
§ 350-27 YARD SALES § 350-29
279:451
§ 350-30. Safety and maintenance.
Every sign and all parts thereof, including framework, support, background,
anchors, and wiring systems, shall be constructed and maintained in
compliance with the applicable building, electrical and fire prevention
codes of the Town of Glocester. All signs and all parts thereof shall be kept
in a good state of repair and maintenance.
§ 350-31. Residential signs.
All signs in residential and agricultural zones shall conform to the following
regulations:
B. Lettering or other insignia, which are a structural part of a gasoline
pump, consisting only of a brand name, lead warning sign and other
signs as required by law;
C. A credit card sign not exceeding two square feet in area, affixed to the
building or permanent sign structure of the sign next referred to;
D. One sign bearing the brand or trade name of the station, of a design
specified by the manufacturer, permanently affixed to the building or its
own metal substructure, said sign not to exceed 30 square feet in area,
which shall be rigidly and securely attached to the ground surface so as
to create no danger to life or limb and shall not exceed 18 feet in height
overall;
E. A sign attached to each gas pump, with the price of the product, as
required by law.
A. Signs in residential and agricultural zones may be wall-mounted or
freestanding. The top of the sign shall not exceed six feet above ground
level.
B. There shall be no more than one residential sign, other than a sign
identifying the name and address of the occupant, as specified in
§ 350-26A, for each residential lot. Such signs shall not exceed four
square feet in area.
C. Illuminated and/or electrical signs shall not be permitted in residential
and agricultural districts, except as specified in this article.
D. Permanent signs at major entrances to residential development
designed to identify such developments shall be permitted, provided
such signs are of a construction approved by the Building Inspector.
Such signs shall bear no commercial advertising and shall not exceed
15 square feet in area. Such signs may be illuminated, but shall be
nonelectric.
E. No sign shall be placed within a distance of three feet from any street
line and 10 feet from any property line.
§ 350-29 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-32
279:452
§ 350-32. Commercial and industrial signs.
A. Commercial and industrial signs may be wall-mounted, or may be
freestanding, provided all buildings on the lot have a setback of at least
20 feet.
B. In Neighborhood Commercial and Highway Commercial Zones, there
may be one wall-mounted sign on each customer's entrance wall and
one on each wall facing a street. The area of each sign shall not exceed
two square feet for each lineal foot of the building frontage on which
the sign is located, and shall not exceed 80% of the width of the
storefront or wall of that portion of the premises occupied by the
business erecting the sign and upon which it is attached. The maximum
height of each sign shall not exceed three feet plus one inch for every
10 feet that the building is set back from the property line, provided
that in no case shall the height exceed six feet. In addition there may be
one freestanding sign for each building or, in the case of a shopping
center, one freestanding sign for the center. Such signs shall be no more
than 15 feet in height with a clearance of seven feet (See § 350-27C),
and shall not exceed over the property line. Such signs may be dualfaced,
with a maximum area of 24 square feet per side or, in the case of
a shopping center, a maximum area of 48 square feet per side. Signs
permitted in these zones may be illuminated or electric.
C. Signs in Industrial Zones.
(1) In Industrial Zones, there may be one wall-mounted sign on each
customer's entrance wall and one on each wall facing a street. The
area of each sign shall not exceed three square feet for each lineal
foot of the building frontage on which the sign is located, and shall
not exceed 80% of the width of the building front or wall of that
portion of the premises occupied by the business erecting the sign
and upon which it is attached. The maximum height of each sign
shall not exceed three feet plus one inch for every 10 feet that the
building is set back from the property line, provided that in no case
shall the height exceed six feet.
(2) In addition, there may be one freestanding sign for each building.
Such signs shall be no more than four feet in height from the
ground to top of sign, and may be dual-faced with a maximum area
of 24 square feet per side. Also, there may be one freestanding sign
for each industrial park indicating the name of the park and a
directory of businesses within said park. Such signs shall be no
more than 15 feet in height from the ground to the top of sign, with
a clearance of seven feet, and shall not extend over the property
line. Such signs may be dual-faced, with a maximum area of 64
square feet per side. Signs in these zones may be illuminated or
electric.
§ 350-32 YARD SALES § 350-33
279:453
§ 350-33. Signs in Historic District.
All signs in the Historic District shall conform to the following regulations:
A. In the Historic District, signs may be illuminated by a stationary white
or off-white steady light only. These lights shall not direct light or shine
off the premises and not spill onto any abutting property or public rightof-
way. The light should be directed primarily onto the sign and
maintained at a sufficiently low intensity and brightness to avoid glare.
Internal illumination or back lighting of signs is prohibited in the
Historic District.
B. All signs within the Historic District are to be made of wood or wood
composite, natural stone materials, or high-density polyurethane foam
board manufactured specifically for the purpose of sign production, be
architecturally integrated with their surroundings and the building, and
be complementary to the overall design of the building. [Amended
9-16-2010, effective 10-27-2010]
C. All proposed signs in the Historic District shall require approval from
the Glocester Historic District Commission in addition to a building
permit. All requests shall be submitted for review as part of an overall
sign proposal for the business and/or property.
D. Nonconforming signs/amortization. Signs which were legally installed
prior to the adoption of this section and do not conform to the
requirements of this section, as adopted on the date of passage, are
considered nonconforming and shall comply with the following
requirements:
(1) Amortization period for nonconforming signs. Signs may remain in
nonconforming state until June 30, 2015. Thereafter, signs shall be
brought into conformance with this section by obtaining a permit
and approval by the Glocester Historic District Commission or be
removed; provided, however, that the amortization period
established by this subsection may be used only so long as the signs
retains their legal nonconforming status. [Amended 8-6-2009,
effective 8-6-2009]
(2) Nonconforming signs shall not be replaced if the sign is damaged
due to a storm or other natural causes to the extent that its repairs
will exceed more than 50% of the cost of replacement. If a lawful
nonconforming sign is damaged, allowed to deteriorate to the point
that repairs exceed 50% of its replacement cost, and/or its use is
discontinued or abandoned for six months, the sign shall not be
repaired, but must be removed and/or replaced in conformance
with this section. [Amended 8-6-2009, effective 8-6-2009]
(3) Subject to the provisions contained above, nonconforming signs
that exist after the passage of this section may be continued as long
as they are in good repair and do not create a hazardous condition.
[Amended 8-6-2009, effective 8-6-2009]
§ 350-33 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-33
279:454
(4) Nonconforming signs that advertise any activity, business, product
or service no longer produced or conducted on the premises where
the sign is located shall be removed within six months of the
inactivity/business vacating the property. Removal shall consist of
total removal of sign faces, frames, supports, structures, poles and
other associated items or parts.
§ 350-33 YARD SALES § 350-33
279:455

ARTICLE VI
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§ 350-34. Findings.
Provision for adequate off-street parking and loading facilities is essential
to the commercial prosperity, enhancement of residential land value and as
an efficient means of alleviating traffic congestion within a community. It is
for this purpose that any structure or use, erected or constructed after the
passage of this chapter, is required to provide off-street parking and loading
facilities in accordance with the following regulations.
§ 350-35. Off-street parking space requirements.
Requirements. For the purposes of this chapter, in all instances the
minimum size of a parking space shall be 270 square feet and may include
access, egress and circulation.
Use
Number of Required Parking
Spaces
Residential dwellings 2 per dwelling unit on the same lot
with the main building
Churches, theaters, restaurants and
other places of public assembly
1 for every 3 seats or for every 3
persons of capacity, plus 1 for each
2 employees
Civic, social, fraternal, golf, country
and similar clubs
1 for each 3 members, plus 1 for
each 2 employees
Funeral homes and mortuaries 1 for each 3 seats, plus 1 for each
employee
Tourist courts, motor inns or hotels,
motels and lodging or
boardinghouse
1 per dwelling unit or room for rent,
plus 1 for each 2 employees
Retail and service establishments 1 for every 90 square feet of floor
area devoted to sales, plus 1 for
every 2 employees
Home occupations and professional
offices or studios
1 for each 90 square feet of floor
area, plus 1 for each dwelling unit
for permanent occupancy
Public and private elementary and
junior high schools
2 for each classroom, plus 1 for each
employee or staff member other
than teachers
Public and private senior high
schools
12 for each classroom, plus 1 for
each employee or staff member
other than teachers
Industrial and wholesale
establishments
2 for every 3 employees and 1 for
each truck operated by the concern
§ 350-34 YARD SALES § 350-36
279:457
§ 350-36. Minimum requirements.
Each parking space shall have a minimum width of nine feet and a minimum
length of 20 feet and shall be served by suitable aisles to permit access and
automobile maneuverability into all parking spaces. Total parking area must
provide a minimum of 270 square feet per parking space, including access,
egress and circulation.
§ 350-37. Location.
All off-street parking facilities required under this chapter shall be
constructed on or adjacent to the site of the main use or on a lot directly
across an adjoining street from the main use.
§ 350-38. Joint use.
Joint use of off-street parking space shall be permitted if the total of such
spaces is not less than the sum of the requirements for the various
individual uses separately computed in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 350-39. Plans, construction and landscaping.
Off-street parking lots of more than five motor vehicles' capacity shall
conform to the following standards:
§ 350-40. Commercial vehicles.
Parking or storage of commercial vehicles of over 1.5 tons of capacity and of
commercial or house trailers shall not be permitted in the residential zone.
§ 350-41. Off-street loading requirements.
All commercial and industrial structures, erected after the adoption of
this chapter, shall provide adequate off-street loading facilities. Plans and
specifications for such loading facilities shall be submitted to the Zoning
Inspector at the time of application for the zoning certificate for the main
A. The area shall be paved, drained and lighted and shall be provided with
bumper guards.
B. Where such area adjoins or lies within a residential zone, a compact
evergreen screen of not less than 5 1/2 feet in height shall be erected
and maintained between such area and the adjoining residential zone.
C. Off-street parking areas located in commercial zones shall provide a
planting strip at least six feet wide between the parking area and the
street.
D. Lighting fixtures used to illuminate the parking area shall be so
arranged as to reflect away from the adjoining residential areas and
away from adjacent traffic arteries.
§ 350-36 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-41
279:458
use. Where a loading facility is adjacent to a residential zone, the
restrictions contained in §§ 350-36, 350-37 and 350-38 of this article shall
apply. Such a loading facility shall be sufficient in size to eliminate the
projection of vehicles into a street right-of-way.
§ 350-41 YARD SALES § 350-41
279:459

ARTICLE VII
Special Regulations
§ 350-42. Yard exceptions.
In the agricultural, residential, commercial and industrial districts the
space in a required front, side or rear yard shall be open and unobstructed
by buildings or structures with the following exceptions:
§ 350-43. Number of structures.
No more than one structure used for residential purposes shall be built
upon any single lot in any A or R District.
§ 350-44. Vision clearance at corners. [Amended 12-20-2012,
effective 1-23-2013]
On any corner lot and at street intersections in all districts, no wall, fence,
structure or building shall be erected, and no hedge, tree, shrub or other
vegetation shall be maintained, between the heights of 2 1/2 and 10 feet
above street level within the triangle formed by the two street lines and a
third line joining points on the street lines 30 feet from the intersection of
street lines.
§ 350-45. Height exceptions.
Church spires, towers or belfries, steeples, flagpoles, chimneys, radio or
television antennas, barns, silos or other similar structures which are in
no way used for living or advertising purposes may be erected above the
maximum height of buildings permitted in each district.
A. Projections of cornices and other ornamental features may extend not
more than three feet into a yard.
B. Landscape features such as trees, fences, poles, shrubs and terraces
may be placed in any yard area, subject to provisions of § 350-45.
C. A structure accessory to a permitted use may cover up to 25% of a side
or rear yard area but may be placed no closer than 10 feet to a lot line.
D. Unenclosed porches or platforms may extend or project into the rear or
side yard not more than 15 feet.
E. In commercial and industrial districts an outdoor telephone booth may
be located in a front yard area, provided it is within 100 feet of an offstreet
parking facility.
§ 350-42 YARD SALES § 350-46
279:461
§ 350-46. Solar energy systems.68 [Amended 12-15-2016, effective
12-15-2016; 11-1-2018, effective 11-1-2018]
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the creation of new
solar energy systems by providing standards for the placement, design,
construction, operation, monitoring, modification and removal of such
systems that address public safety, minimize impacts on scenic, natural
and historic resources, are compatible with the neighborhoods in which
they are located and are consistent with the Comprehensive Plan of the
Town of Glocester.
B. Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to construction,
operation, expansion and/or repair of any solar energy system in the
Town of Glocester.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CONTAMINATED SITE PENDING REMEDIATION — A site at which a
hazardous material contamination that would result in restricted use
of the property has been identified and verified by the Rhode Island
Department of Environmental Management (RIDEM) through issuance
of a "program letter," but which has not yet been remediated to the
satisfaction of RIDEM.
CONTAMINATED SITE SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A solar energy
system located on a contaminated site pending remediation or a
remediated contamination site.
GROUND-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A solar energy
system that is structurally appended to the ground and is not supported
to a structure or building.
LARGE-SCALE SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A solar energy system that
has a solar land coverage of 40,000 square feet up to 200,000 square
feet.
MEDIUM-SCALE SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A solar energy system
that has a solar land coverage of more than 1,750 square feet but less
than 40,000 square feet.
REMEDIATED CONTAMINATION SITE — A site on which a hazardous
material contamination was identified, remediation activities were
performed, and use of the property was restricted, and for which the
RIDEM has issued a "letter of compliance" or an "interim letter of
compliance."
ROOF-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A solar energy system
that is structurally appended to the roof of a building or structure.
SMALL-SCALE SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A solar energy system
that has a solar land coverage of 1,750 square feet or less. This can
68.Editor's Note: Former § 350-46, Sewage disposal system setback from water bodies, was
repealed 10-21-2010, effective 10-21-2010.
§ 350-46 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-46
279:462
also include a solar tracker system provided it meets the same square
footage requirements.
SOLAR CANOPY — A solar energy system that is located on a new
elevated structure that hosts solar panels and provides shelter to a
parking area, driveway or walkway underneath.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — The equipment and requisite hardware
that provide and are used for collecting, transferring, converting,
storing, or using incident solar energy for water heating, space heating,
cooling, generating electricity, or other applications that would
otherwise require the use of a conventional carbon-based source of
energy such as petroleum or natural gas. This shall include photovoltaic
arrays and installations that utilize building-mounted and/or groundmounted
systems.
SOLAR LAND COVERAGE — The total footprint of land occupied by all
components of a solar energy system including but not limited to solar
panels, mounting equipment, ancillary components of the system, interrow
and panel/collector spacing, access, and all other area within the
required perimeter security fencing.
SOLAR TRACKER SYSTEM — Solar panels that are mounted to a
racking system and utilize a small motor allowing the panels to move
and follow the sun.
UTILITY-SCALE SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A solar energy system
that has a solar land coverage of more than 200,000 square feet. Solar
energy systems with a solar land coverage greater than 20 acres are
prohibited.
D. All solar energy systems are strongly encouraged to be located on
rooftops. Rooftop solar energy systems of any size are permitted by
right in all zones and shall not exceed the maximum height for the
applicable zoning district. This does not apply to solar canopies. Solar
energy systems are also encouraged on existing contaminated sites,
gravel banks, quarries, parking lots and in existing industrial zones. To
encourage solar development in the aforementioned locations, the solar
land coverage requirement in Subsection J(3) may be increased to 50%
of the land suitable for development if it can be demonstrated to the
Planning Board that the remaining performance standards can be met
and the modification of the solar land coverage requirement would not
negatively impact adjacent property owners and is consistent with the
Glocester Community Comprehensive Plan. In addition all solar energy
systems shall:
(1) Meet all requirements of the State Building and Fire Codes, obtain
a building permit, and be inspected by a Town building inspector.
(2) Comply with the State and National Electric Code, current edition.
(3) Include a UL listing or equivalent.
§ 350-46 YARD SALES § 350-46
279:463
(4) Be set back at least three feet from the roof edge on all sides, when
roof mounted.
(5) Be prohibited on land held under conservation easement or land for
which the development rights have been sold, transferred, or
otherwise removed from the parcel, unless the conditions of the
easement, deed or other applicable legal document specifically
allow the installation of a solar energy system, or shall receive
approval for the disturbance of such lands by the holder(s) of the
easement or restriction.
(6) Be designed and located to prevent reflective glare toward any
inhabited building or adjacent properties. Glare generated from
solar panels shall not interfere with traffic or create a safety
hazard.
(7) Minimize regrading. No removal of topsoil or unnecessary
disturbance of the ground or grading is permitted as part of the
installation or maintenance of a solar energy system. Any topsoil
that must be removed shall be stored and stabilized on-site for
future use. In no case shall soil be exported from the site.
(8) Minimize clearing of natural vegetation from the site of the solar
energy system. Clearing shall be limited to what is necessary for
the construction, operation and maintenance of the facility.
Vegetative cover shall be maintained to prevent soil erosion.
Pollinator-friendly seed mixes and native plants shall be used to the
maximum extent possible.
E. Solar canopy. A solar canopy is permitted in the B-1, B-2 and I zones
and on all municipally owned property over a parking lot, driveway or
walkway provided such solar energy system meets the following:
(1) Location: Solar canopies shall be located over parking lots,
driveways or walkways.
(2) All solar canopies shall meet all applicable zone requirements
including but not limited to lighting, setbacks and signage.
(3) All medium-scale solar canopies shall meet the following:
(a) Major land development approval from the Planning Board.
(b) Performance standards listed in Subsection J.
(4) All large- and utility-scale solar canopies shall meet the following:
(a) Major land development approval from the Planning Board.
(b) Special use permit from the Zoning Board of Review as
outlined in § 350-8F.
(c) Performance standards listed in Subsection J.
§ 350-46 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-46
279:464
F. Small-scale solar energy system. A small-scale ground-mounted solar
energy system is permitted in all zones as an accessory structure
provided such solar system meets the following:
(1) Location. Ground-mounted solar energy system shall be located in
the side or rear yard of the lot.
(2) Height. Ground-mounted solar installations shall not exceed 12 feet
in height. Roof-mounted systems shall not exceed the maximum
height for the applicable zoning district.
(3) All ground-mounted solar energy systems shall meet all applicable
zone requirements including but not limited to lighting, setbacks,
signage, and total lot coverage.
(4) Screening. Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall maintain a
twenty-foot vegetated buffer from all adjacent properties and
roadways with a minimum height of eight feet at planting.
G. Medium-scale solar energy system. A medium-scale ground-mounted
solar energy system is permitted in all zones except the Village Overlay
District and Village Overlay Center District provided such solar energy
system meets the following:
(1) All medium-scale ground-mounted solar energy systems shall
require major land development approval from the Planning Board.
(2) All performance standards listed in Subsection J.
H. Large-scale, solar energy system. A large-scale ground-mounted solar
energy system is permitted in all zones except the Village Overlay
District and Village Overlay Center District provided such solar energy
system meets the following:
(1) All large-scale ground-mounted solar energy systems shall require
major land development approval from the Planning Board.
(2) All large-scale ground-mounted solar energy systems shall require
a special use permit from the Zoning Board of Review as outlined in
§ 350-8F.
(3) All performance standards listed in Subsection J.
I. Utility-scale solar energy system. A utility-scale ground-mounted solar
energy system is permitted in the A-4, A-3, and I zone provided such
solar energy system meets the following:
(1) All utility-scale ground-mounted solar energy systems shall require
major land development approval from the Planning Board.
(2) All utility-scale ground-mounted solar energy systems shall require
a special use permit from the Zoning Board of Review as outlined in
§ 350-8F.
§ 350-46 YARD SALES § 350-46
279:465
(3) All performance standards listed in Subsection J.
J. Performance standards.
(1) Height.
(a) Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall not exceed 12 feet
in height.
(b) Solar canopies shall not exceed 20 feet in height.
(c) Roof-mounted systems shall not exceed the maximum height
for the applicable zoning district.
(2) Setbacks.
(a) All medium- and large-scale ground-mounted solar energy
systems in the A-4, A-3, and R-2 zone shall maintain a 300-foot
undisturbed setback from any roadway or property line.
(b) All utility-scale ground-mounted solar energy systems in the
A-4 or A-3 zone shall maintain a 500-foot undisturbed setback
from any roadway and a 300-foot undisturbed setback from any
side or rear property line.
(c) All solar energy systems in the B-2, B-1 and I zones shall meet
the setbacks of the applicable zoning district unless the parcel
abuts property zoned A-4, A-3, or R-2, then the 300-foot
undisturbed setback shall be required along the property line
abutting the A-4, A-3, or R-2 zoned property.
(d) The Planning Board may allow encroachment into the setback
area for ground-mounted solar energy systems where panels
will cross the property lines of one or more properties. The
encroachment is permitted only when such design will lead to a
seamless installation of the solar energy system, minimize
clearing, and maximize screening from the roadway and/or
neighboring properties.
(e) Solar canopies shall meet the setbacks of the applicable zoning
district.
(3) Solar land coverage.
(a) In the A-4, A-3 and R-2 zone, the solar land coverage plus any
additional or existing structures on the lot shall not exceed
15% of the land suitable for development of the lot.
(b) In the B-1 and B-2 zone, solar land coverage plus any
additional or existing structures on the lot shall not exceed
25% of the land suitable for development of the lot.
§ 350-46 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-46
279:466
(c) In the I zone, the solar land coverage plus any additional or
existing structures on the lot shall not exceed 30% of the land
suitable for development of the lot.
(d) Solar canopies are exempt from the solar land coverage
requirements.
(4) Screening. Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall be sited
and designed to minimize the aesthetic effect on view sheds within
the community. The design shall incorporate landscaping and
design elements to visually screen the solar energy system from
view from public roads and adjoining properties with dense,
opaque vegetation.
(a) In addition to the required undisturbed setback outlined in
Subsection J(2), all medium-, large- and utility-scale solar
energy systems shall maintain a minimum fifty-foot vegetated
buffer from all adjacent properties and roadways with a
minimum height of eight feet at planting.
(b) While not subject to the setbacks outlined in Subsection J(2),
the driveway accessing a solar energy system shall require the
buffer outlined above when within 100 feet of a property line.
(c) A vegetated buffer plan prepared by a RI licensed landscape
architect shall be required at the preliminary plan review
stage. The landscape architect shall verify that the vegetated
buffer is adequate to thoroughly screen the solar energy
system year round. The vegetated buffer plan shall use plants
to the extent feasible from the RI Native Plant database or
plants used for agricultural purposes that can effectively
screen any visual impacts.
(d) As part of the major land development process, the Planning
Board may alter this width dependent on any unique site
characteristics such as slope, open fields, wetlands, etc.
(e) Solar canopies are exempt from these requirements.
(f) The required screening shall be maintained for the life of the
solar energy system. The property owner shall be required to
replant any section of the buffer found to not meet the
requirements of this section as determined by the Zoning
Official.
(5) Forest impacts.
(a) No more than 30% of the forested area of any lot in the A-4,
A-3, and R-2 zones shall be cleared for the purpose of installing
solar energy systems.
(b) All stumps from the cleared area must be removed, disposed of
off-site or ground on-site after removal. Otherwise clearing of
§ 350-46 YARD SALES § 350-46
279:467
natural vegetation shall be limited to what is necessary for the
construction, operation, and maintenance of the solar energy
system or otherwise prescribed by applicable laws,
regulations, and ordinances.
(c) Solar energy systems are encouraged to utilize shade pruning
rather than clear cutting where feasible.
(d) Any applicant proposing a solar energy system that includes
clearing more than 40,000 square feet of forested area shall
assess the impacts of the forest loss and how the impacts can
be mitigated. At a minimum, the following issues must be
addressed: water quality, habitat, carbon sequestration and
storage and adjacent properties.
(6) Lighting. Lighting of solar energy systems shall be limited to
requirements for safety and operation and shall not shine light onto
abutting properties or shine above in order to minimize light
pollution.
(7) Noise. The Planning Board may require applicants for large- and
utility-scale solar energy systems to submit a noise study as part of
their application. The noise study shall assess the potential impacts
of any off-site noise receptors due to sound emitted by the solar
energy system. The noise study is required to demonstrate that the
system, as designed, does not exceed a 40-decibel noise level at the
property lines.
(8) Distribution lines. To the extent practical, all new distribution lines
to any building or utility connection shall be located below ground.
An executed interconnection service agreement with a utility
company is required prior to final approval of any medium-, largeor
utility-scale ground-mounted solar energy system.
(9) Security fencing.
(a) A minimum six-foot security fence shall surround the perimeter
of the solar energy system.
(b) Barbed wire fencing is prohibited.
(c) The fence shall be at least eight inches off the ground to allow
small animals to pass underneath.
(d) New fences shall be flagged to protect both the fencing and
wildlife for at least six months.
(e) Solar canopies are exempt from this requirement.
(10) Emergency access. Accessibility for emergency services vehicles,
approved by the applicable Fire Department is required.
(11) Signage.
§ 350-46 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-46
279:468
(a) No signage is permitted on solar energy system fencing except
for a sign displaying the facility name, address and emergency
contact information.
(b) Signs such as no trespassing, warning or danger signs are
allowed as needed to ensure the safety of individuals who may
come in contact with the system.
(c) Temporary signage as outlined in § 350-26 is permitted.
(12) Transmission lines. Applicants must provide a thorough
explanation of any transmission line access or upgrade required by
the project, including but not limited to the route starting and
ending points, potential impacts to street trees, and right-of-way
width.
(13) Electrical substations. Applicants must provide a thorough
explanation of any new or proposed upgrades to electrical
substations including but not limited to location, screening,
setbacks and noise impacts.
(14) Erosion and sediment control. Every effort should be made to
minimize changes to existing topography and hydrology. Site
alterations must conform to the most recent edition of the RI
Stormwater Design and Installation Standards Manual and the RI
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control handbook, as well as applicable
town regulations. All applicable erosion and sediment controls
must be in place before construction, including site work, begins.
(15) Subdivision. Any subsequent subdivision of a parcel in the A-4, A-3,
or R-2 zone that contains a solar energy system shall:
(a) Maintain the minimum parcel size for the applicable zoning
district.
(b) Not exceed the maximum solar land coverage requirement
established in Subsection J(3).
(16) Operation and maintenance plan. Medium-, large- and utility-scale
solar energy systems shall submit an operation and maintenance
plan that details how the solar energy system will be operated and
maintained in good condition and, at a minimum, shall address:
(a) Site access maintenance.
(b) Vegetation management to maintain the required vegetated
screen and avoid the use of harmful herbicides to maintain
appropriate pollinator-friendly vegetative ground cover.
(c) Equipment and fence maintenance.
(d) Any other maintenance that may be needed to address Town
requirements imposed due to the unique site conditions.
§ 350-46 YARD SALES § 350-46
279:469
§ 350-47. Lots divided by zoning district boundaries.
Where a lot is divided by a zoning district boundary, the regulations for
either zoning district shall apply at the option of the owner of the lot,
except that no district shall, in effect, be extended more than 50 feet into an
adjoining district, nor be extended beyond the lot boundary.
§ 350-48. Access to state and Town roads.
(17) Abandonment. The solar energy system shall be considered
abandoned when it is disconnected for one calendar year without
prior approval from the Town. Abandoned solar energy systems
shall be removed within 180 days of the date of abandonment.
(18) Decommissioning. Any solar energy system which has reached the
end of its useful life shall be removed within 180 days from the date
of discontinued operations. A decommissioning estimate, prepared
by a RI licensed engineer, must be approved by the Planning Board
during the preliminary plan review. Each element of the
decommissioning cost estimate must include a verifiable source
with contact information. Decommissioning shall consist of:
(a) Physical removal and recycling of all solar energy system
structures, equipment, security barriers, fencing and
transmission lines from the site.
(b) Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with all
federal, state and local laws, regulations and ordinances.
(c) Stabilization and revegetation of the site necessary to
minimize erosion and in compliance with all state and local
laws, regulations, and ordinances, approved by the Glocester
Zoning Official or his/her designee.
(19) Failure to remove. If the owner or operator of an abandoned or
decommissioned solar energy system fails to remove the solar
energy system in accordance with the provisions of this section, the
Town of Glocester may enter the property and physically remove all
elements of the solar energy system. The cost of such removal shall
be the responsibility of the owner and/or operator of the solar
energy system and/or the land owner.
(20) Financial surety. Prior to the issuance of any building permit for a
medium-, large-, or utility-scale ground-mounted or solar canopy
solar energy system, an escrow agreement or escrow funds to
cover 125% of the cost of decommissioning as approved by the
Planning Board, shall be posted with the Town of Glocester. This
surety shall be automatically renewed annually for a minimum of
20 years or for the anticipated life of the solar energy system.
A. No zoning certificate or permit shall be issued by the Inspector for
construction of a building or for use of land requiring an access
§ 350-46 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-48
279:470
driveway onto a state or Town road until the Inspector receives the
approval of the Highway Surveyor or his authorized representative.
B. Driveway access shall include vehicle driveways, or any construction,
removal, or alteration of grade or pitch within the right-of-way of any
state or Town road.
C. All specifications for any such driveway access must conform to the
following requirements:
(1) Any driveway access shall be so graded that it will not be necessary
to change the established grade of the adjacent state or Town road.
(2) No part of any driveway access shall extend beyond the road line in
such manner as to change the grade of the road or obstruct the free
flow of water draining off the road.
(3) Where a driveway approach crosses an open ditch or where such
construction will interfere with the drainage of stormwater along
the side of the road, a culvert of such size and of such material as
determined by the Highway Surveyor or his authorized
representative shall be installed.
(4) The driveway access shall be so constructed that there will be no
drainage from the driveway onto the state or Town road.
(5) If, in the opinion of the Highway Surveyor or his authorized
representative, protection is required for the shoulder and/or edge
of the state or Town road, an apron of bituminous concrete or other
suitable material or treatment shall be installed.
(6) All required construction shall be at the property owner's expense.
D. The Highway Surveyor or his authorized representative of the Town
shall from time to time inspect the construction of such driveway access
to make sure that such construction conforms to the requirements of
Subsection C of this section. Upon completion of such construction, the
Highway Surveyor or his authorized representative shall make a final
inspection and accept or reject, in writing to the Inspector, such
construction. In the event of rejection, the owner shall be given a period
of 30 days to bring such construction into compliance with Subsection C
of this section.
E. The Inspector of the Town of Glocester shall also have the authority to
require repair or reconstruction of any existing driveway access to a
state or Town road that does not conform to the requirements of
Subsections C and F of this section.
F. Driveway access to a state road shall additionally require the approval,
in writing, of the Rhode Island Department of Transportation. Such
approval shall state that the proposed access driveway will not
substantially interfere with traffic flow and any future widening of the
road and will not constitute a safety hazard to traffic on the state road.
§ 350-48 YARD SALES § 350-49
279:471
§ 350-49. Accessory family dwelling unit. [Added 3-15-2007,
effective 3-15-2007]
One accessory family dwelling unit (AFDU) shall be permitted by special use
permit within or attached to a principal single-family residence, provided
that it meets all the following requirements:
§ 350-50. Gasoline stations.
Gasoline stations may be permitted, provided they comply with the
following regulations:
A. The accessory family dwelling unit shall comply with the applicable
district dimensional regulations for the principal structure.
B. The accessory apartment shall be designed and constructed in such a
way as to maintain the appearance of the use of the lot as a singlefamily
residence in agricultural and residential districts.
C. The accessory apartment shall be attached to the principal structure by
means of a permanent foundation system and enclosed habitable or
nonhabitable floor space.
D. The accessory apartment shall remain in the same ownership as the
principal residence.
E. The accessory apartment is intended for permanent residential
occupancy and is required to be occupied for at least six months of the
year.
F. Approval for the proposed AFDU from the Rhode Island Department of
Environmental Management must be submitted prior to the issuance of
a building permit for construction.
G. The owner/applicant for a permit to construct an accessory family
dwelling must sign an agreement restricting occupancy of such
dwelling unit to family members and indemnifying the Town of
Glocester from any cost to said Town incurred in enforcing the terms of
said agreement, which agreement shall be recorded in the Land
Evidence Records of the Town at the expense of the applicant, and
which agreement shall run with the land so as to be applicable to and
binding upon subsequent owners and shall be enforceable against the
applicant, his heirs, devises, successors and assigns.
H. The AFDU shall contain no more than one bedroom, is limited to no
more than 750 square feet, and must be occupied only by members of
the family occupying the principal residence. [Amended 12-20-2012;
effective 1-23-2012]
A. Detailed site plans showing the location and number of fuel pumps, the
depth and capacity of fuel tanks, the number of service bays and the
number of automobiles which may be stored within the principal
§ 350-49 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-50
279:472
§ 350-51. Motels.
Motels may be permitted, provided they comply with the following
regulations:
§ 350-52. Highway Commercial Zones.
The following regulations shall apply in the Highway Commercial Zones:
§ 350-53. Freshwater wetlands.
No freshwater wetlands, as defined by Chapter 213 of the Public Laws
of 1970, as amended, relating to freshwater wetlands, shall be excavated,
drained or filled, nor shall any extraneous materials be placed in or removed
from these wetlands, nor water flow diverted out of same, nor any other
change be made to the natural condition of any freshwater wetland without
prior approval of the RI Department of Environmental Management and the
Glocester Town Council in accordance with the provisions of said chapter.
§ 350-54. Drive-in businesses.
The following requirements shall be met for any drive-in business:
structures shall be submitted to the Zoning Board of Review prior to
approval or disapproval.
B. All fuel tanks shall be installed underground.
C. No gasoline station shall be within 200 feet of any church, school, or
other public and semipublic institution boundary lines.
D. Driveways shall not be more than 16 feet at curbline and they shall be
at least 15 feet away from any side line or from the intersection of street
lines.
E. The entire area of the gasoline station traversed by motor vehicles shall
be hard surfaced.
A. Minimum lot size: seven acres.
B. Maximum number of units per acre: eight.
A. All buildings erected or constructed shall be entirely new and complete
structures designed for and to be used for commercial purposes only.
No structure originally designed as a residence, or as an accessory to a
residence, shall be used for commercial purposes.
B. No residential uses shall be permitted in Highway Commercial Zones.
C. No commercial structure shall be closer than 100 feet to the nearest
residential zone.
§ 350-50 YARD SALES § 350-54
279:473
A. The minimum lot area shall be the minimum required for the zoning
district.
B. A drive-in business window, service area, or vehicular stacking lane
shall not be located within a required front, side or rear yard area.
Where such a window or service area abuts a residential zoning district
or residential land use, the window, service area, or vehicular stacking
lane shall be set back at least 50 feet from the adjacent property
boundary.
C. Plans for any drive-in business shall include provisions for drainage,
lighting, glare prevention, landscaping and screening, and noise
buffers, between the vehicular service or waiting area and adjacent
properties. Outside audio systems such as ordering stations or loud
speakers are prohibited.
D. Plans for any drive-in business shall provide that on-premises vehicular
service or waiting areas will not cause conflict or otherwise interfere
with moving traffic on an adjacent public street, on- or off-premises
pedestrian movement and safety, or emergency access.
E. Site plan requirement. Any business that includes a drive-in use must
submit, as a part of a special use permit application, a site plan to the
Zoning Officer at a suggested scale of one inch to 20 feet, which shall
include the following information:
(1) Lot dimensions and area;
(2) All buildings and structures existing and proposed;
(3) Yards and space between buildings;
(4) Walls, fences, landscaping, and drainage control provisions for
groundwater and stormwater;
(5) Vehicular, pedestrian, and service access;
(6) Automobile stacking spaces from service and ordering station;
(7) Parking spaces, including number of spaces and dimensions of
parking area;
(8) Signs and lighting, including location, height, size, and method of
illumination;
(9) Outdoor storage, including trash, seating, and other outdoor
activities;
(10) The relationship of proposed construction to adjacent properties;
(11) The name, registration number, date, and stamp of the licensed
preparer of the map.
§ 350-54 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-54
279:474
§ 350-55. Special flood hazard areas and flood-fringe lands.
[Amended 2-24-2009, effective 2-24-2009]
F. Unless plans requiring Rhode Island Department of Environmental
Management approvals or permits are accompanied by evidence of
such approvals, any approval of plans by the Zoning Board of Review
shall be conditioned upon such state agency approval.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to ensure public safety;
minimize hazards to persons and property from flooding, to protect
watercourses from encroachment and to maintain the capability of
floodplains to retain and carry off floodwaters.
B. Applicability.
(1) The Town elects to comply with the requirements of the National
Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended). The
National Flood Insurance Program, established in the aforesaid act,
provides that areas of the Town having a special flood hazard be
identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
and that floodplain management measures be applied in such flood
hazard areas. The requirements of this § 350-55 shall apply to any
construction or other development which lies wholly or partly
within an area of special flood hazard, as identified as Zone A, AE,
AH, AO, A1-30, A99, V, V1-30, VE on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) and Flood Hazard Boundary Map prepared by Federal
Emergency Management Agency dated March 2, 2009. Said Flood
Map, including any amendments adopted after the date hereof, is
hereby made part of this section. The exact boundaries of the
District may be defined by the one-hundred-year base flood
elevations shown on the FIRM and further defined by the Flood
Insurance Study booklet revised March 2, 2009.
(2) The degree of flood protection required by the section is considered
reasonable but does not imply total flood protection. If any section,
provision, or portion of this section is adjudged unconstitutional or
invalid by a court, the remainder of the section shall control.
(3) For the purposes of this section, "other development" shall be
defined as any action exclusive of that which requires the issuance
of a building permit under the Rhode Island State Building Code.
Such other development shall include, but not necessarily be
limited to, the following:
(a) Earth, gravel or mineral removal or extraction.
(b) Alteration of the topography by cutting, filling or grading.
(c) Storage of bulk materials outside of a structure.
(d) Construction or placement of facilities or improvements not
normally requiring a building permit.
§ 350-54 YARD SALES § 350-55
279:475
(4) The requirements set forth in this section shall be in addition to any
applicable requirements in this chapter and in any other regulation
which may be applicable.
C. Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used
in this section pertain to floodplain management, have the same
meaning as they have in common usage and as to give this section its
most reasonable application.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure which is on the same parcel of
property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which
is incidental to the use of the principal structure.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — (For a community with AO or AH
Zones only.) A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO Zone on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percent-orgreater
annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three
feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of
flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — See definition for "special flood
hazard area."
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year, also referred to as the onehundred-
year flood, as published by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) as part of a Flood Insurance Study (FIS)
and depicted on a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation of the crest of the
base flood or one-hundred-year flood. The height in relation to mean sea
level expected to be reached by the waters of the base flood at pertinent
points in the floodplains of coastal and riverine areas.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING — See definition for "structure."
COST — As related to substantial improvements, the cost of any
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, alteration, repair or other
improvement of a structure shall be established by a detailed written
contractor's estimate. The estimate shall include, but not be limited to,
the cost of materials (interior finishing elements, structural elements,
utility and service equipment); sales tax on materials, building
equipment and fixtures, including heating and air conditioning and
utility meters; labor; built-in appliances; demolition and site
preparation; repairs made to damaged parts of the building worked on
at the same time; contractor's overhead; contractor's profit; and grand
total. Items to be excluded include cost of plans and specifications,
survey costs, permit fees, outside improvements such as septic systems,
water supply wells, landscaping, sidewalks, fences, yard lights,
§ 350-55 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-55
279:476
irrigation systems, and detached structures, such as garages, sheds,
and gazebos.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to the construction of buildings
or structures; the construction of additions, alterations or substantial
improvements to buildings or structures; the placement of buildings
or structures; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operations or storage of equipment; the storage, deposition, or
extraction of materials; and the installation, repair or removal of public
or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities.
DRY FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and
nonstructural protection measures incorporated in a building that is not
elevated above the base flood elevation that keeps water from entering
the building to prevent or minimize flood damage. Note: For insurance
purposes, a dry floodproofed, nonresidential structure is rated based
on the elevation of its lowest floor unless it is floodproofed to one foot
above the BFE.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED
HOME SUBDIVISION — A manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including,
as a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets,
and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION — The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) — The
federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP).
FINISHED LIVING SPACE — Fully enclosed areas below the base flood
elevation (BFE) that are not considered a basement cannot have
finished living space and needs to be designed to be exposed to flood
forces. These spaces can only be used for parking, building access or
limited storage. Finished living space can include, but is not limited
to, a space that is heated and/or cooled, contains finished floors (tile,
linoleum, hardwood, etc.), has sheetrock walls that may or may not
be painted or wallpapered, and other amenities, such as furniture,
appliances, bathrooms, fireplaces and other items that are easily
damaged by floodwaters and expensive to clean, repair or replace.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — The official map
of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency
§ 350-55 YARD SALES § 350-55
279:477
(FEMA) has delineated the limits of the regulatory floodway and onehundred-
year floodplain.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map of a
community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) has delineated both the special flood hazard areas (onehundred-
year floodplain) and the insurance risk premium zones
applicable to a community. FIRM published after January 1990 may also
show the limits of the regulatory floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official study of a community
in which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has
conducted a technical engineering evaluation and determination of
local flood hazards, flood profiles and water surface elevations. The
Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), which accompany the FIS, provide
both flood insurance rate zones and base flood elevations, and may
provide the regulatory floodway limits.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from either the
overflow of inland or tidal waters, or the unusual and rapid
accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than one foot. For the purposes of these regulations, the term
"regulatory floodway" is synonymous in meaning with the term
"floodway."
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE OR FACILITY — A use or facility
that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried
out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking
facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading
of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities. The
term does not include seafood processing facilities, long-term storage,
manufacturing, sales or service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG) — (Only for community with AO/
AH zones.) The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to
construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historic significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
§ 350-55 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-55
279:478
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement).
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for
use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the
required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers,
recreational vehicles and other similar vehicles or transportable
structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and
intended to be improved property.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two
or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MARKET VALUE — Market value is the price of a structure that a
willing buyer and seller agree upon. This can be determined by an
independent appraisal by a professional appraiser; the property's tax
assessment minus land value; the replacement cost minus depreciation
of the structure; the structure's actual cash value.
MEAN SEA LEVEL (MSL) — Avenge height of the sea for all stages
of the tide, usually determined from hourly height observations over
a nineteen-year period on an open coast or in adjacent waters having
free access to the sea. The National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of
1929 (or other datum where specified) to which base flood elevations
shown on a community Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are
referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced on or after effective date of floodplain
regulations, and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — A manufactured home park or manufactured home
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(b)
(4)
§ 350-55 YARD SALES § 350-55
279:479
on or after the effective date of floodplain regulations adopted by the
community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — See definition for "floodway."
SHEET FLOW AREA — (For community with AO, AH, or VO Zones only.)
See definition for "area of shallow flooding."
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — The land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a one-percent-or-greater chance of
flooding in any given year. SFHAs are determined utilizing the base
flood elevations (BFE) provided on the flood profiles in the Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) for a community. BFEs provided on Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are only approximate (rounded up or
down) and should be verified with the BFEs published in the FIS for a
specific location. SFHAs include, but are not necessarily limited to, the
land shown as Zones A, A1-30, AE, AO, AH, and the coastal high hazard
areas shown as Zones V, V1-30, and VE on a FIRM. The SFHA is also
called the "area of special flood hazard."
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, substantial
improvement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit
date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab
or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or
any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the
erections of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration
(1) Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
(2)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a lightduty
truck; and
(3)
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.
(4)
§ 350-55 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-55
279:480
of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building which is principally above
the ground, including a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage
tank, or other man-made facilities or infrastructures.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure, whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its
predamaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value
of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT —
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by a community from the terms of the
floodplain management ordinance that allows construction in a manner
otherwise prohibited and where specific enforcement would result in
unnecessary hardship.
VIOLATION — Failure of a structure or other development to be fully
complaint with the community's floodplain management ordinance. A
structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor
elevation documentation, floodproofing certificates or required
floodway encroachment calculations is presumed to be in violation until
such time as that documentation is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION — The height, in relation to the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where
specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the
floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
alterations, additions or other improvements to a structure, taking
place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure as determined
at the beginning of such ten-year period. This term includes
structures that have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of
the actual repair work performed. For purposes of this definition,
"substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of
the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the structure.
(1)
The term does not, however, include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
(a)
Any alteration of an "historic" structure, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as an "historic structure."
(b)
(2)
§ 350-55 YARD SALES § 350-55
279:481
WET FLOODPROOFING — Measures designed to minimize damage to
a structure or its contents by water that is allowed into a building.
D. Permit required.
(1) Except where construction is covered by a building permit or by
approval of a subdivision plat by the Glocester Planning Board, any
other development shall require the issuance of a development
permit by the Building Official or his or her designee. Said permit
shall be in a form authorized by the Town Council.
(2) The application for a flood hazard development permit shall be
submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer and shall include:
(a) The name and address of the applicant;
(b) An address or a map indicating the location of the construction
site;
(c) A site plan showing location of existing and proposed
structures, sewage disposal facilities, water supply facilities,
areas to be cut and filled, the dimensions of the lot, and bench
marks used for flood elevation;
(d) A statement of the intended use of the structure;
(e) A statement as to the type of sewage system proposed;
(f) Specification of dimensions of the proposed structures;
(g) The elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor,
including basement, and if the lowest floor is below grade on
one or more sides, the elevation of the floor immediately above;
(h) Base flood elevation data for all new, relocated or substantially
improved structures;
(i) The elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the
structure will be floodproofed;
(j) The description of the extent to which any watercourse will be
altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development.
(k) Any wetlands application(s);
(l) Soils/erosion plan;
(3) Prior to the issuance of a building or development permit, the
applicant shall submit evidence that all necessary permits and
approvals have been received from all government agencies from
which approval is required by federal or state law.
E. Permit fee. A permit fee (based on the cost of the construction) shall be
required to be paid to the Town of Glocester and a copy of a receipt for
the same shall accompany the application. An additional fee may be
§ 350-55 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-55
279:482
charged if the Code Enforcement Officer and/or Board of Appeals need
the assistance of a professional engineer.
F. Review of flood hazard development permit applications. The Building
Official or his or her designee shall:
(1) Review all applications for flood hazard development permits to
determine that all pertinent requirements as described Subsection
G of this section have been or will be met;
(2) Utilize, in the review of all flood hazard development permit
applications, the base flood data contained in the "Flood Insurance
Study--Town of Glocester, Rhode Island, Providence County," as
described in Subsection B.
(3) Make interpretations of the location of boundaries of special flood
hazard areas shown on maps described in Subsection B;
(4) In A Zones, in absence of FEMA BFE data and floodway data,
obtain, review, and reasonably utilize other BFE and floodway data
as a basis for elevating residential structures to or above the base
flood level, and for floodproofing or elevating nonresidential
structures to or above the base flood level.
(5) In review of flood hazard development permit applications,
determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from
those federal, state and local government agencies from which
prior approval is required;
(6) Notify adjacent municipalities, the State Department of
Environmental Management and the State Bureau of Civil
Emergency Preparedness prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse and submit copies of such notifications to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency and maintain carrying capacity of
altered watercourse; and
(7) Maintain, as a permanent record, copies of all flood hazard
development permits issued and data relevant thereto, including
reports of the zoning board of review on variances.
G. Development standards. The following standards shall apply to any
construction or other development located wholly or partly within an
area of special flood hazard as defined in Subsection B. Please also
refer to the current Rhode Island State Building Code, One and Two
Family Dwelling Code, Plumbing Code, Mechanical Code, and Electrical
for state standards or any other applicable codes.
(1) No watercourse may be altered in a manner which will, in the
opinion of the Building Official or his or her designee, result in any
decrease in the capacity of the watercourse, and no land shall be
graded or altered in such a manner as to increase the base flood
elevation within the Town of Glocester. Where any alteration is
§ 350-55 YARD SALES § 350-55
279:483
permitted, the Building Official or his or her designee will notify
the adjacent communities, the Rhode Island Statewide Planning
Program and the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(2) In a regulatory floodway, any encroachment is prohibited which
would cause any increase in the base flood level unless hydrologic
and hydraulic analyses prove that the proposed encroachment
would not increase flood levels during the base flood discharge.
(3) The filling or excavation of land may be permitted only under the
following conditions:
(a) Said action will not encroach upon a watercourse.
(b) Said action will not result in an increase in the potential flood
level. Where it is determined that said action may result in an
increase in the potential flood level, the Building Official or his
or her designee shall require appropriate measures to offset
the potential increase. Adequate drainage shall be provided so
as to reduce the exposure of the site or any other land to flood
hazard.
(4) No outdoor storage of materials or equipment which is likely to
cause damage to property, create a potential obstruction to
floodwaters, create a potential fire hazard or pollute the waters
during flood periods shall be permitted in any special flood hazard
area. Such materials or equipment shall include but not necessarily
be limited to lumber and other buoyant materials, water-soluble
materials, volatile or flammable materials, acids or poisons.
(5) Provision shall be made for anchoring facilities, equipment or yard
features which are capable of movement or flotation in floodwaters.
Such items shall include but shall not necessarily be limited to
fences, sheds, animal shelters, tanks, storage boxes, planters,
vehicles, boats and other items normally positioned or stored on a
site outside of a structure.
(6) The use of flood-resistant materials shall be used for structures
within an area of special flood hazard as defined in Subsection B.
(7) Construction methods and practices shall be used that minimize
flood damage.
(8) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located to prevent water entry to accumulation.
(9) On-site waste disposal systems shall be designed to avoid
impairment or contamination of the floodway.
(10)New and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems
shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration.
§ 350-55 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-55
279:484
(11) Base flood elevation data is required for subdivision proposals or
other development greater than 50 lots or five acres.
H. Construction Standards in Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA), Zones
A, A1-30, AE.
(1) Residential construction. All new construction, substantial
improvements, and repair to structures that have sustained
substantial damage shall have the bottom of the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation
(BFE).
(2) Nonresidential construction. All new construction, substantial
improvements, and repair to structures that have sustained
substantial damage which are commercial, industrial or
nonresidential structures shall:
(a) Have the bottom of the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to or above the base flood elevation (BFE); or
(b) In lieu of being elevated, nonresidential structures may be dry
floodproofed to one foot above the BFE, provided that together
with all attendant utilities and sanitary facilities the areas of
the structure below the required elevation are watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and
provided that such structures are composed of structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. A Rhode
Island-registered professional engineer or architect shall
review and/or develop structural design specifications and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and
methods of construction are in accordance with acceptable
standards of practice or meeting the provisions of this section.
Such certification shall be provided to the Building Official or
his or her designee.
(3) Fully enclosed areas below the base flood elevation of elevated
buildings. All new construction, substantial improvements, or
repair of substantial damage to residential or nonresidential
structures that include fully enclosed areas formed by a foundation
and other exterior walls below the base flood elevation (BFE) of an
elevated building shall be designed to preclude finished living
space and be designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters
to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls
(wet floodproofing). Designs for complying with this requirement
must either be certified by a Rhode Island-registered professional
engineer or architect, or meet the following minimum criteria listed
in Subsections H(3)(a) through (g) below:
(a) Provide a minimum of two openings (hydraulic flood vents)
having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding.
§ 350-55 YARD SALES § 350-55
279:485
These hydraulic openings must be located on at least two
different walls. Only the area (square footage) that lies below
the BFE can be used in the calculation of net area of vents
required;
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade. At least one side of the structure's fully enclosed
area must be at or above grade. Fill placed around the
foundation walls must be graded so that the elevation inside
the enclosed area is equal to or higher than the adjacent
outside elevation on at least one side of the building. The
foundation slab of a residential structure, including the slab of
a crawl space, must be set equal to the outside finished grade
on at least one side of the building;
(c) The openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or
other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters in both directions without any
external influence or control such as human intervention,
including the use of electrical and other nonautomatic
mechanical means. Other coverings may be designed and
certified by an engineer or approved by the Building Official or
his or her designee.
(d) The area cannot be used as finished living space. Use of the
enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary and shall only
be used for the parking of vehicles, building access or limited
storage. Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum
necessary to allow for the parking of vehicles (garage door) or
limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection
with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the
living area (stairway or elevator). The enclosed area shall not
be used for human habitation or partitioned into separate
rooms;
(e) All interior walls, floor, and ceiling materials located below the
BFE shall be unfinished and resistant to flood damage.
(f) Electrical, plumbing, machinery or other utility equipment that
services the structure (furnaces, oil or propane tanks, air
conditioners, heat pumps, hot-water heaters, ventilation,
washers, dryers, electrical junction boxes, circuit-breaker
boxes and food freezers) are prohibited in the fully enclosed
area below the BFE. Utilities or service equipment located in
this enclosed area, even if elevated above the BFE in the space,
will subject the structure to increased flood insurance rates.
(g) A residential building with a structurally attached garage
having the floor slab below the BFE is considered an enclosed
area below the BFE and must meet the standards of
Subsections H(3). A garage attached to a residential structure,
§ 350-55 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-55
279:486
constructed with the garage floor slab below the BFE, must
be designed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters in both directions. Flood openings or vents are
required in the exterior walls of the garage or in the garage
doors. The human intervention necessary to open garage doors
when flooding occurs is not an acceptable means of meeting
the openings requirements. In addition to the automatic entry
of floodwaters, the areas of the garage below BFE must be
constructed with flood-resistant materials. Garages attached to
nonresidential structures must also meet the aforementioned
requirements or be dry floodproofed as per the requirements
of Subsection H(2) of this section.
(4) Manufactured (mobile) homes and recreational vehicles (RVs).
(a) In all special flood hazard areas (SFHA), any manufactured
(mobile) homes to be newly placed, substantially improved or
repaired as a result of substantial damage shall be elevated so
that the bottom of the lowest floor is at or above the base flood
elevation (BFE). This includes SFHAs outside a manufactured
home park or subdivision, in a new manufactured home park or
subdivision, in an expansion to an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision, or on a site in an existing park in which a
manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a
result of a flood.
(b) All manufactured (mobile) homes within a SFHA shall be
placed on a permanent foundation which itself is securely
anchored and to which the structure is securely anchored so
that it will resist flotation, lateral movement and hydrostatic
pressures. Anchoring may include, but not be limited to, the
use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
(c) All manufactured (mobile) homes within a SFHA shall be
installed using methods and practices which minimize flood
damage. Adequate access and drainage should be provided.
Elevation construction standards include piling foundations
placed no more than 10 feet apart, and reinforcement is
provided for piers more than six feet above ground level.
(d) Recreational vehicles.
[1] Recreational vehicles placed on sites within a SFHA shall
either:
[a] Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days,
and be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
[b] Be elevated and anchored.
[2] A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by
§ 350-55 YARD SALES § 350-55
279:487
quick-disconnect-type utilities and security devices, and
has no permanently attached additions.
(e) Public utilities and facilities in manufactured (mobile) homes
or subdivisions with a SFHA shall be constructed so as to
minimize flood damage.
(5) Accessory structures. Detached accessory structures in Zones A,
AE, A1-30, AO, and AH (i.e., garages, sheds) do not have to meet
the elevation or dry floodproofing requirement if the following
standards are met:
(a) The structure is no more than 500 square feet and has a value
less than $3,000.
(b) The structure has unfinished interiors and must not be used for
human habitation. An apartment, office or other finished space
over a detached garage is considered human habitation and
would require the structure to be elevated.
(c) The structure is used solely for parking of vehicles and/or
limited storage.
(d) The accessory structure must be wet-floodproofed and
designed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of
floodwater.
(e) The accessory structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
(f) Service facilities such as electrical, mechanical and heating
equipment must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the
base flood elevation.
(g) The structure must comply with the floodway encroachment
provision in Subsection G, Development standards, in this
section.
I. Variance.
(1) The Zoning Board of Review may hear and grant a variance in
accordance with the procedure outlined in § 350-8E. In addition to
applying the criteria and requirements of said section, the Board
shall undertake the following in granting a variance from the
provisions of this section:
(a) Describe in its decision the exact extent of the variance
granted.
(b) Indicate in its decision that the granting of such variance may
affect the flood insurance rates as they apply to the subject
property up to amounts as high as $25 per $100 of insurance
coverage, and further, that construction or other development
§ 350-55 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-55
279:488
§ 350-56. Wireless communications facilities.
below the base flood elevation may increase risk to life and
property.
(c) Forward a copy of its written decision and findings to the
applicant, the Building Official or his or her designee, the
Rhode Island Statewide Planning Program and the Federal
Insurance Administration in the annual report of the Town to
the administration.
(2) No variance may be granted which will result in any increase in
flood levels.
J. Enforcement.
(1) It shall be the duty of the Building Official or his or her designee to
enforce the provisions of this section. If the Code Enforcement
Officer finds that any provisions of this section are being violated,
he shall notify, in writing, the person responsible for such violation
indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action
necessary to correct it.
(2) When the above action does not result in the correction or
abatement of the violation, the municipal officers, upon notice from
the Code Enforcement Officer, are hereby authorized and directed
to institute any and all actions, whether legal or equitable,
necessary to the enforcement of this section. Any person who
continues to violate any provision of this section after receiving
notice of such violation shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter
and subject to a fine of $500 per day for each violation. Each day
such a violation is continued is a separate offense.
A. Intent.
(1) The Town Council finds, pursuant to the authority contained in
R.I.G.L. § 45-23-29, as amended, that it is necessary to provide for
innovative land development practices with respect to the siting
and installation of telecommunications towers, antennas and
accessory structures; and
(2) The Town Council further finds that the preparation, enactment
and implementation of a zoning ordinance relating to
telecommunications towers, antennas and accessory structures, is
necessary to address the protection of public health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of Glocester; and
(3) Therefore, it is the intent of the Town Council that this section
provide guidance and direction with respect to matters affecting
the siting and installation of telecommunications towers, antennas
and accessory structures.
§ 350-55 YARD SALES § 350-56
279:489
B. Purpose.
(1) General purposes. The general purpose of this section is to regulate
the placement of wireless communications towers, antennas and
related facilities, and the addition of wireless communications
equipment to existing structures. The regulations serve to establish
a procedure for application, permits, and for special use permits; to
establish development standards and location requirements; and to
encourage the co-location of equipment onto existing structures.
(2) The specific purposes of this section are to:
(a) Address public safety concerns associated with the siting of
wireless communications facilities; including towers, antennas
and related facilities, equipment and structures.
(b) Preserve the character, appearance, property values, natural
resources and historic sites of the Town;
(c) Minimize the number of new tower facilities by encouraging
and requiring co-location wherever possible;
(d) Limit the height of telecommunications tower facilities; and
encourage maximum setbacks from roads, property
boundaries and existing structures;
(e) Encourage the siting of new wireless communications facilities
on properties owned by the Town or its instrumentalities;
(f) Encourage location of towers and antennas in industrial zoned
and other areas where visual and other impacts on the
community are minimized;
(g) Discourage location of towers and antennas in areas zoned and
used for residential purposes to the extent that they
significantly diminish the character or value of real property in
the residential area.
(h) Provide for the design and siting of wireless communications
facilities so as to minimize their visual impact on neighboring
properties and on the character of the Town.
(i) Discourage the construction of towers that would require
airspace obstruction marking and/or lighting.
(j) Encourage small facility options that will reduce unnecessary
tower structures, but will integrate well into the context and
character of the community.
(3) In addition to the aforementioned, this chapter also intends to
minimize the number of tower structures by encouraging large
towers at strategically spaced intervals that provide optimal
coverage for the maximum number of service providers with the
§ 350-56 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-56
279:490
least impact on the community. This section limits the quantity of
large towers by requiring a two-mile separation between towers
and by requiring performance criteria that minimize the impact on
the community.
C. Applicability.
(1) New towers and facilities. The requirements set forth in this
section shall govern the location of all new telecommunications
facilities and related equipment, including television and radio
transmission towers. Except as provided herein, the general height
limitations of this chapter otherwise applicable to buildings and
structures shall not apply to towers and antennas.
(2) Amateur radio antennas. This section shall not govern any tower, or
the installation of any antenna, that is under 70 feet in height and is
owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station
operator or is used exclusively for receive-only antennas.
(3) Preexisting towers and antennas. Any tower or antenna for which a
building permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date
of this section shall not be required to meet the requirements of
this section. However, any proposed extension beyond 20 feet in
the height of an existing facility, replacement of a facility, or
installation of an additional antenna to a facility, other than a
facility on land owned or leased by the Town and serving Town
communications needs, shall be subject to the requirements of this
section.
D. General conditions. This section makes a distinction between new or
existing tower structures and placement of antenna array on existing
structures in order to reduce or eliminate the impact of towers on the
community.
(1) Principal or accessory use. Antennas and towers may be considered
either principal or accessory uses or structures, as appropriate. A
different existing use or existing structure on the same lot shall not
preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on such lot. For
purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower or
antenna complies with district dimensional regulations, including,
but not limited to setback requirements, lot coverage
requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the
entire lot shall control even though the antenna or tower may be
located on leased parcels within such lots. Towers that are
constructed, and antennas that are installed in accordance with the
provisions of this section, shall not be deemed to constitute the
expansion of a legal existing nonconforming use or structure.
Towers and associated equipment that may be located within or
outside of base facilities may not take away required parking
spaces of an existing building or use.
§ 350-56 YARD SALES § 350-56
279:491
(2) Building codes/safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity
of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is constructed
and maintained in compliance with or exceeds the standards
contained in the applicable State Building Codes and the applicable
standards for towers that are published by the Electronics
Industries Association as amended from time to time and shall
structurally accommodate reasonable co-location. The owner of the
tower shall also ensure that the tower and related facilities comply
with other applicable safety and environmental standards,
including but not limited to safety limits for human exposure to
radio frequency energy. If, upon inspection, the Building Official
concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and
standards, and/or that it constitutes a danger to persons or
property, then the Building Official shall notify the owner of the
tower in writing, and the owner shall have 30 days to bring such
tower into compliance. Failure of the owner to do so shall
constitute grounds for removal of the tower or antenna at the
owner's expense. In addition to other legal remedies available to
the Town, the Building Official may proceed in accordance with
Chapter 27.3 of Title 23 of the Rhode Island General Laws, entitled
“State Building Codes.”
(3) General requirements. All wireless communications facilities shall
be erected, installed, maintained, and used in compliance with all
applicable federal and state laws, rules, and regulations, including
radio frequency emission standards.
(4) Co-location. All owners and operators of land used in whole or in
part for a wireless communications facility, and all owners and
operators of such facilities, shall, as a continuing condition of
installing, constructing, erecting, and using a wireless
communications tower facility, and subject to necessary approvals
hereunder, permit other public utilities or FCC-licensed
commercial entities seeking to operate a wireless communications
tower facility to install, erect, mount, and use compatible
equipment and fixtures on the mounting structure on reasonable
commercial terms. This is provided that such co-location does not
materially interfere with the transmission and/or reception of
communications signals to or from the existing facility, and
provided that there are no structural or other physical limitations
that make it impractical to accommodate the proposed additional
wireless communications equipment or fixtures. Erection of a
replacement facility to address such concerns shall be considered,
where the Zoning Board determines appropriate. Wireless
communications facilities shall be designed to accommodate colocation
to the extent technologically and physically practical given
the limitations of the site and area.
(5) Number of towers. Only one wireless communications tower
structure per site shall be authorized by this chapter, unless the
§ 350-56 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-56
279:492
placement of more than one tower structure on the site results in a
substantially better design that is integrated into the neighboring
uses and meets community standards. An example of this may be
the erection of two flagpole structures located in a recreational
facility. The erection of more than one lattice tower or monopole in
a residential area would not be an example of a better design.
(6) Removal of facilities. All unused telecommunications facilities and
structures, including nonconforming or preexisting facilities which
have not been used for one year, shall be considered abandoned
and shall be dismantled and removed at the owner's expense. The
owner of such facility shall remove same within 90 days of receipt
of notice from the Building Official. Before a permit is issued, and
as a condition thereof, said owner shall post and thereafter
continuously maintain an appropriate surety bond, approved in
amount and form by the Town Solicitor and the Public Works
Director every two years, to cover the cost of removal of all
facilities and restoration of the site. If such antenna or tower is not
removed within 90 days, the Town may take the necessary action to
remove the facility at the owner's expense. The owners of the
property and the facility shall be jointly and individually
responsible for removal of said facilities, restoration of the site and
for all associated costs, expended or incurred in the course of
removal and restoration.
(7) Carrier utilization. Included in an application for a
telecommunications tower or antenna, an applicant must
demonstrate that it has a commitment from one or more licensed
wireless services providers to occupy the facility for the purposes
of transmitting and/or receiving wireless communications. Wireless
communications towers shall be designed to accommodate the
maximum number of co-locators reasonably practicable, taking into
account the size and appearance of the structure in the context of
its location. Tower locations identified as large facilities must meet
this requirement, where small infill tower facilities may to a lesser
extent. Owners of telecommunications towers shall make space
available to wireless communications services, including, when
appropriate, repositioning tenants on the tower, and reinforcing or
replacing the tower. The cost of making space available shall be the
responsibility of the applicant and may be shared by the tower
owner, if agreeable.
(8) Town requirements. At the time of application for any tower, space
shall be made available on telecommunications towers for Town
police, fire, rescue, and public works communications needs
related to public safety, health and welfare, at no cost to the Town.
The telecommunications tower owner and wireless service carriers
shall assist the Town, when deemed necessary, in the enhancement
of existing police and fire communications systems by providing for
the acquisition and installation of related equipment.
§ 350-56 YARD SALES § 350-56
279:493
(9) Development plan review. Applicants shall be subject to the
provisions of development plan review, as outlined in Chapter 300,
Subdivision of Land, § 300-37, as amended, when applying for a
new facility or the expansion of the footprint of an existing facility.
E. Permitted uses.
(1) General. The uses listed in this subsection are deemed to be
permitted uses and shall not require a special use permit.
Nevertheless, all such permitted uses are subject to the
requirements of Subsections D, F(3)(a), G and H (4, 6-C-1, 7 and 8)
of this section.
(2) Specific permitted uses.
(a) Telecommunications facilities including the placement of
towers and additional buildings or other supporting equipment
used in connection with said facility, in an industrial zoning
district; provided, however, that the height of the proposed
facility is less than 125 feet.
(b) Antennas and additional accessory structures or equipment
used in connection with said antennas on land occupied by
existing electric utility transmission towers, provided the
height of such facility is less than 125 feet.
(c) Installing an antenna on any existing tower of any height, as
long as the addition of said antenna adds no more than 20 feet
in height to said existing tower as originally constructed,
provided the total height does not exceed 200 feet.
F. Special use permits.
(1) General. All wireless communications facilities not covered by
Subsection E, Permitted uses, above, shall require a special use
permit. In granting a special use permit, the Zoning Board of
Review may impose conditions, to the extent the Board concludes
such conditions are necessary, to minimize any adverse effect of the
proposed tower on adjoining properties and to carry out the intent
of these regulations.
(2) Factors considered in granting special use permits. Consistent with
the purposes of this chapter, the Zoning Board shall consider the
following factors in determining whether to issue a special use
permit, although the Board may waive or reduce the burden on the
applicant of one or more of these criteria if it finds that the goals
and purposes of this section are better served thereby. These
factors are in addition to findings required for special use permits
as provided in § 350-8F of this chapter:
§ 350-56 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-56
279:494
(a) Generally, that the stated purposes and goals of this section are
achieved to the maximum extent possible, and the adverse
impacts as may be identified are similarly minimized.
(b) Height of the proposed tower or antenna and setbacks in
relation to lot boundaries, existing structures, public streets
and residences;
(c) Nature of uses on the subject parcel and on the adjacent
nearby properties;
(d) The opportunity for natural screening of telecommunications
facilities through a combination of tower height due to site
elevation, lot depth, natural vegetation, or topography;
(e) Design of the tower, with particular references to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating
visual obtrusiveness, including appearance and color;
(f) Proposed ingress and egress;
(g) Availability of suitable existing towers for co-location and for
location on other structures within the search area;
(h) Proximity of and impact upon historic districts or registered
historic properties;
(i) Availability and feasibility of alternative antenna and/or tower
facility sites and configurations that would result in a
substantially better design that is in keeping with the
community character.
(3) Application requirements.
(a) Submission requirements. The following application and
submission requirements are in addition to the general
requirements for special use permit applications as provided in
this chapter:
[1] A narrative report that shall describe the following
relating to the request for the telecommunications tower,
antenna and/or related facility installation:
[a] The technical, economic and/or other reasons that
demonstrate the need for the telecommunications
tower, antennas and related facilities design and
describes the desired objective which the proposed
facility will achieve;
[b] The equipment load and carrying capacity for type of
antennas, and/or receivers/transmitters which are
intended to or may be mounted on the
telecommunications tower;
§ 350-56 YARD SALES § 350-56
279:495
[c] The basis for the calculation of equipment load and
carrying capacity;
[d] Evidence that the proposed telecommunications tower
and/or facility is as visually unobtrusive as possible
given technical, engineering and other pertinent
considerations;
[e] Evidence that the tower height proposed is the
minimum height necessary to accommodate the
antennas; and that the tower setbacks proposed are
the maximum distance possible from adjacent
properties, existing structures, and public and private
roads that can be accommodated by the site design,
notwithstanding the minimum standards required by
this section; and
[f] Evidence of consideration of alternate sites and colocation
on existing towers on which the requirements
of the applicant could be met, and if not, the reasons
why each co-location site is not adequate for the needs
or requirements of the applicant. Consideration will
be given to the use of one or a combination of more
than one alternative site to achieve the applicant's
stated objectives in a manner that results in a
substantially better design in keeping with the
community character.
[2] A certification of structural integrity from a Rhode Island
registered professional engineer, with expertise in the
design of telecommunications towers, attested to by an
affidavit submitted by said engineer, that the
telecommunications tower is designed to withstand all
load requirements for structures as set forth in the Rhode
Island Building Code (R.I.G.L. § 23-27.3-100.0 et seq.).
[3] Where the applicant is not the owner of the site, the
property owner must be a participant in the application.
The applicant shall furnish a copy of the lease or
agreement for the use of the site and the written approval
of the property owners of a bona fide purchase/sale
contract for the property on which the site is located.
[4] A map depicting all existing and proposed wireless
facilities and towers within six miles of the proposed site; a
map accurately depicting the coverage achieved by the
facilities proposed for the site, the coverage existing or
proposed from relevant adjacent sites, and the
combination of existing and proposed. Sufficient technical
documentation shall be supplied which would permit an
individual with expertise in the field to evaluate the basis
§ 350-56 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-56
279:496
for the conclusions the applicant makes about the need for
the facility as proposed.
[5] Failure by the applicant to present evidence of a good faith
effort to utilize existing facilities or research alternative
sites within the search area may be grounds for denial of
the application. The following information shall be
submitted as evidence of an inability to make use of
alternative sites or facilities:
[a] A map showing the location of all potential alternative
sites that may result in a substantially better design in
keeping with the community character, including
potential sites for new towers and existing structures
with potential for use as an antenna platform, such as,
but not limited to, existing communications towers,
structures, electric transmission towers, radio and fire
towers, and municipally owned land;
[b] Specific information about location, height and design
capacity of each site; and
[c] Proof that owners of potential sites within the search
area have been contacted, that permission was sought
to install a device on structures, and that permission
was denied, or that such locations do not satisfy
requirements to provide the service needed.
[6] A site plan prepared by a Rhode Island Registered Land
Surveyor or professional engineer at a suitable scale to
delineate the following:
[a] Site boundaries, dimensions, zoning setback lines, and
wetlands as defined by the Rhode Island Department
of Environmental Management or its successor, within
100 feet of any proposed structure, accessway or any
other proposed site alteration.
[b] Topography at five-foot contour or other suitable
interval.
[c] Tower or pole location, if any, and tower height.
[d] Size and location of accessory buildings, equipment or
structures, parking and access.
[e] Fencing, landscaping, and lighting, if any.
[f] Locus Map.
[g] Areas to be cleared of vegetation and trees, and
erosion and sediment control measures, if applicable.
§ 350-56 YARD SALES § 350-56
279:497
[h] Abutters within 200 feet.
[i] A map showing the applicant's entire property and all
abutting properties and streets, at a convenient scale,
including the approximate location and dimensions of
the applicant's property and all existing and proposed
structures, utility lines, wells, septic systems and
major natural features.
[j] A map or illustration of suitable scale indicating view
lines from nearby properties and streets within onehalf
mile of the proposed tower.
[k] Evidence showing that aircraft marking or lighting
will not be required for the facility, or if required,
evidence showing that there are no viable alternative
sites or designs that would eliminate the need to mark
or light the structure.
(b) Application procedures.
[1] A preapplication review by the Zoning Official and/or Town
Planner is required before submittal of an application. This
conference will serve to familiarize the applicant with the
Town's regulations and procedures, and to assure that all
required documents and information are complete prior to
public notice and referral to the Planning Board, as
required for a special use permit.
[2] Application and notification shall be made as prescribed
for special use permits in § 350-8 of this chapter.
G. Design and development standards.
(1) Setbacks, height and separation.
(a) A wireless communications tower facility shall be set back from
any adjacent property line or street at a maximum feasible
distance, considering the size and physical constraints of the
site, visibility to nearby sites and other visually sensitive
locations, and the proportions and context of the site, in order
to provide opportunity to minimize the adverse visual effects of
telecommunications facilities. At the minimum, any such
facility shall be set back from any property line a distance
equal to 1 1/2 times the height of the facility and set back from
any residential structure on a separate parcel a distance equal
to 1 1/2 times the height of the facility or 250 feet, whichever is
greater. Such facility shall be set back a distance of at least 400
feet from any public or private street or public right-of-way,
and large uncamouflaged facilities must be at least 1,000 feet
from a school facility.
§ 350-56 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-56
279:498
[1] The Zoning Board of Review (ZBR) may waive these
limitations up to a factor of 50% if the facility is
camouflaged or in keeping with the surrounding uses,
such that it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the ZBR
that a substantially better design in keeping with the
community character results. A specific example would be
a small tower facility such as a flagpole, church steeple,
barn or grain silo or a large tower facility that is sited on a
particular lot that is suitable for a tower facility, but may
have such physical constraints or attributes that make a
waiver necessary. Towers and antenna mounts that are
less than 80 feet in height above ground and that are
suitably disguised to the satisfaction of the ZBR are
required only to meet the setbacks for the district in which
they are installed.
[2] When a telecommunications facility is determined by the
Zoning Board to be appropriately sited within an industrial
or B-2 zoned lot, which cannot meet the foregoing
setbacks, and which is within a larger industrially or B-2
zoned area, the Zoning Board may decrease the setbacks
from lot lines and structures within said lot, if the
placement of the facility in said lot is not otherwise
feasible, and the purposes of this section are otherwise
met. However, the Zoning Board may not reduce the
setbacks below the minimum setbacks otherwise provided
for an Industrial or B-2 zoned lot under this chapter.
Telecommunications facilities placed within an Industrial
or B-2 zoned lot shall observe the setbacks set forth in the
preceding subsection from property zoned A-4, A-3, R-2,
residential structures, and public or private streets or
public rights-of-way.
(b) Towers shall not be located within an historic district as
designated by this chapter, unless disguised in a manner that
meets the requirements as recommended by both the Historic
District Commission and the Planning Board.
(c) Excluding towers in the Industrial Zoning District or in
locations where more than one tower has been proposed on a
single site, towers greater than 125 feet in height (large tower
facilities) shall not be located within two miles from each other.
(d) With the exception of the larger tower facility (high-intensity),
the Town encourages smaller facilities that blend into the
existing environment through the use of disguise and
camouflage. In order to minimize the number of tower
facilities, normally, small tower facilities shall be considered to
provide service coverage, as deemed necessary by the ZBR
only after the installation of large tower facilities. These small
tower facilities are not to be construed as an alternative to the
§ 350-56 YARD SALES § 350-56
279:499
large tower facilities, in that it is the design of this section to
allow small tower facilities in places where a gap in coverage
exists between two large tower facilities.
(2) Landscaping and screening. The applicant must demonstrate that
the tower or antennas are located within a given site so as to
minimize the visual impact from nearby properties and roadways.
Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum
extent practicable and may be used as a substitute for the
landscaped screening requirement. Appropriate screening shall be
installed at tower sites to limit views from adjacent properties and
streets. Plantings shall be of such a height and density to ensure
screening. Screening shall consist of plant and/or tree material
appropriate to the habitat. Screening may be waived on those sides
or sections that are adjacent to undeveloped lands. The owner of
the property shall be responsible for ongoing maintenance and
shall replace any dead plantings within 30 days.
(3) Site requirements.
(a) Traffic associated with the tower and accessory facilities shall
not adversely affect abutting ways and access shall be provided
to a site which respects the natural terrain, does not appear as
a scar on the landscape, and is approved by the Director of
Public Works and by the District Fire Chief to assure
emergency access at all times. Consideration shall be given to
design that minimizes erosion, construction on unstable soils,
and steep slopes.
(b) Communications towers shall be enclosed by a fence at least
10 feet in height from finished grade and at least six feet from
the base of the structure. Access shall be through a locked
gate.
(c) Communications towers shall not be artificially lighted except
as may be required for public safety purposes, by the Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA), or by the Town of Glocester.
(d) No signs shall be allowed on any communications tower except
as may be required for safety purposes, by the Federal
Communication Commission (FCC) or by the Town. All signs
shall conform with the sign requirements of this chapter.69
(e) All supports and anchors shall have a minimum ten-foot
horizontal setback from any overhead utility lines.
(f) The tower shall be designed to accommodate the maximum
number of uses technologically practical.
69.Editor's Note: See Art. V, Sign Regulations.
§ 350-56 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-56
279:500
§ 350-57. Development plan review. [Added 9-16-2004, effective
11-2-2004]
(4) Site selection consideration. When considering a site for a
telecommunications facility, the following steps may assist
evaluating the site's suitability:
(a) Evaluate coverage by reviewing existing telecommunications
coverage to determine gaps in coverage, overlay proposed
coverage from the considered tower/facility to establish how
the proposed may improve service in that area.
(b) Consider alternatives that would provide the necessary service
using less intrusive means.
(c) Evaluate the context of the site under consideration,
underlying zoning, uses of property, neighboring uses,
activities, maximization of co-location on the proposed facility
and compatibility of the proposed tower/facility with
neighboring uses.
(d) Consider visibility of the proposed tower/facility in community.
(e) Evaluate methods of camouflaging the structure to fit in with
area.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish a project review and
approval procedure for any proposed development which may impact
land use and the environment. Certain development projects as
specified below may be required to submit additional plans and
information to allow the review of a project in greater detail than
currently required pursuant to this chapter. Project approvals may be
conditioned based upon the reviewing body's assessment of the
information submitted under development plan review. It is not the
intent of this section to alter basic development standards as set forth
elsewhere in this chapter.
B. Requirement for development plan review (applicability). The following
activities shall be subject to development plan review under this
section:
(1) Construction of any residential project that exceeds six dwelling
units and does not require subdivision approval;
(2) Construction or expansion of any commercial or industrial project/
development;
(3) Change in use;
(4) Construction or expansion of any recreational development in
excess of one acre in size;
§ 350-56 YARD SALES § 350-57
279:501
(5) Applications for uses requiring a special use permit, variance (use
and dimensional), Zoning Ordinance amendment, or Zoning Map
change.
C. Reviewing body. Development plan review is conducted by the Planning
Board, or by the Technical Review Committee (TRC). The TRC is made
up of the Town Planner, Building/Zoning Official and the Public Works
Director. The administrative officer for this section is the Town Planner.
D. Review classification.
(1) By-right uses. Uses permitted by right that require development
plan approval shall be reviewed by the TRC. The TRC shall have the
authority to waive the requirements of this section where it
conducts a development plan review for uses permitted by right.
The TRC may consult the Planning Board or any other local board
or agency in conducting its review.
(2) Variance, special use permit, zoning amendment. All projects
requiring a variance, special use permit, Zoning Ordinance
amendment, or zone change shall be reviewed by the Planning
Board as advisor to the permitting authority in accordance with the
process set forth in this section. The Planning Board may request
comments on the application from the local boards and agencies
receiving the application pursuant to this section. Such boards and
agencies may review the application and provide comments and
recommendations to the Planning Board within 35 days of the
request. A failure to respond to the Planning Board's request shall
signify a lack of opposition to the application. See Subsection K for
additional requirements regarding commercial development.
E. Review process.
(1) Preapplication. A preapplication conference (informal review) with
the administrative officer is required prior to submission of a
formal application. The intention of this meeting is to: acquaint the
applicant with the Comprehensive Plan, this chapter and other
ordinances that affect the proposed development; suggest any
improvements to the proposed design on the basis of a review of
the sketch plan; advise the applicant to consult appropriate
authorities on the character and placement of public utility
services; and help the applicant understand the steps to be taken to
receive approval. Discussions are not to be considered approval or
commitment of approval of the project or its elements. There may
be more than one preapplication meeting based upon the outcome
the initial meeting. If no further meetings are required, the
applicant may submit an application and materials for approval of
the development plan.
(a) Sketch plan submission requirements:
§ 350-57 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-57
279:502
[1] A sketch plan shall be drawn to an approximate scale
showing locations and dimensions of structures, parking
areas, ingress and egress, signs, existing and proposed
vegetation, anticipated changes to topography, proposed
water and sewer facilities, storm drainage, public
amenities and other site features.
[2] The administrative officer may waive requirements of the
sketch plan submission where, due to the character, size,
location or special circumstances of the proposal, the
sketch plan submission itself is not required in order for
the Town to properly perform an evaluation of the
proposal.
(2) Formal application submission requirements.
(a) The current owner of record or applicant shall submit the
following number of copies of the development plan review
application and materials (15 copies in total will be required):
10 copies for the Planning Board and one copy each for the
Conservation Commission, Department of Public Works,
Building Official, Police Department, and the Fire District
Chief. [Amended 10-21-2010, effective 10-21-2010]
(b) All development plans shall contain, at a minimum, the
following information:
[1] Locus map showing the location of the proposed
development;
[2] Location, boundaries, and dimensions of each lot being
considered for development;
[3] Property lines, showing directional bearings and
distances, location with reference to identifiable street
intersections, land uses, North arrow, scale, plat and lot
number(s) of the parcel(s) involved, and zoning district(s)
in which the parcel(s) is/are located;
[4] Identification of the names of all abutting property owners
with plat and lot;
[5] Dimensions of property line setbacks to, and dimensions
between, each building, structure, or use;
[6] Location and description of all existing structures and
buildings, including those to be demolished, and proposed
new structures and buildings showing exterior and finish
floor elevation(s);
[7] Location of all existing surface features, including, but not
limited to: stone walls, fences, curbing, and impervious
surfaces;
§ 350-57 YARD SALES § 350-57
279:503
[8] Location of all proposed and existing, as well as adjacent,
public and private ways;
[9] Location of all easements on, over, and adjacent to the site
and the location of all existing and proposed underground
and surface utility lines and fire hydrants;
[10] Existing and proposed topography at two-foot contours;
[11] Location and description of all natural features, including
but not limited to wetlands and applicable buffer zones,
rivers, streams, lakes, ponds, areas subject to flooding,
existing vegetation and proposed removal of vegetation;
[12] Description of watershed boundaries, aquifer locations (as
defined by RIDEM), wellhead protection areas for
community and noncommunity water systems, wastewater
overlay districts and one-hundred-year frequency
floodplain as defined by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency Flood Insurance Rate Maps;
[13] Location and description of proposed open space and
recreation areas;
[14] Location and description of cultural features such as old
trails, agricultural fields, cemeteries and historic buildings
and sites;
[15] Location and description of parking and loading areas,
driveways, walkways, points of access and egress, traffic
safety devices, and general circulation patterns (See
Article VI of this chapter);
[16] Location and description of the proposed wastewater
disposal systems, water supplies, stormwater drainage
systems, temporary or permanent erosion control
structures, utilities, and any solid and hazardous waste
disposal systems;
[17] Proposed landscaping plans showing buffer areas,
screening, fencing and plantings, and schedule for
landscaping pursuant to Article VI of this chapter; and
[18] Location, dimensions, height and characteristics of
proposed signs pursuant to Article V of this chapter.
(c) A narrative report shall accompany the development plan
application describing the scope and intent of the development
and also an environmental report as defined in this chapter.
(d) At the administrative officer's discretion, inclusion of
information irrelevant to a particular application may be
waived.
§ 350-57 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-57
279:504
F. Objectives/Criteria for evaluation. In its evaluation of a development
plan application and in rendering its decision, the Planning Board and/
or Technical Review Committee shall apply the criteria listed below and
shall ensure that other local boards and agencies apply the same
criteria in their comments and recommendations. Any decision that is
made shall be made so as to be consistent with a reasonable use of the
site for the purposes permitted or permissible by the regulations of the
district in which it is located. The Planning Board may request that the
proposed project be modified to conform with these criteria:
(1) If the proposal requires a special use permit, it must conform to the
special use permit requirements as listed in Article I of this
chapter;
(2) The development shall be integrated into the existing terrain and
surrounding landscape, and shall be designed to protect abutting
properties and community amenities. Building sites shall, to the
extent feasible:
(a) Minimize the use of wetlands, steep slopes, floodplains, and
hilltops;
(b) Minimize the obstruction of scenic view from publicly
accessible locations;
(c) Preserve any unique natural or historical features;
(d) Minimize tree, vegetation and soil removal, grade changes and
subsequent erosion;
(e) Maximize open space retention;
(f) Landscape and screen objectionable features from neighboring
properties and roadways pursuant to this chapter; and
(g) Prevent depletion, degradation, or pollution of public drinking
water supplies and of surface or groundwater by employing
best management practices for erosion control, stormwater
management, wastewater disposal and landscaping.
(3) Architectural style shall be in keeping with the prevailing character
and scale of buildings in the neighborhood and the Town through
use of appropriate building materials, screening, breaks in roof and
wall lines and other architectural techniques. Variation in detail,
form and siting shall be used to provide visual interest and to avoid
monotony. Proposed buildings shall relate harmoniously to each
other with adequate light, air, circulation, and separation between
buildings.
(4) The development shall be served with adequate water supply and
waste disposal systems. The applicant shall submit a individual
septic disposal system (ISDS) design prepared by an RIDEMlicensed
ISDS designer, as applicable.
§ 350-57 YARD SALES § 350-57
279:505
(5) The development plan shall maximize the convenience and safety of
vehicular and pedestrian movement within the site and in relation
to adjacent ways (see Article VI and § 350-48 of this chapter). The
plan shall include estimates of average daily and peak-hour vehicle
trips to be generated by the site and traffic flow patterns for
vehicles and pedestrians showing adequate access to and from the
site and adequate circulation within the site.
(6) The development plan shall show adequate measures to prevent
pollution of surface or groundwater, and to minimize erosion and
sedimentation in conformance with Chapter 177, Erosion and
Sediment Control, and to prevent changes in groundwater levels,
increased runoff and potential for flooding. Drainage shall be
designed so that runoff shall not be increased to neighboring
properties, groundwater recharge shall be maximized, and
neighboring properties shall not be adversely affected.
(7) The development shall not place excessive demands on Town
services and infrastructure.
(8) Electric, telephone, cable TV, and other such utilities shall be
underground where physically and environmentally feasible.
(9) Exposed storage areas, machinery, service areas, truck loading
areas, utility buildings and structures and other service uses shall
be set back or screened to protect the abutters from objectionable
features (Article VI of this chapter).
(10) The development plan shall comply with all zoning requirements
for landscaping, parking and loading (Article VI of this chapter),
dimensions (Article III of this chapter), and all applicable
provisions of local and state laws.
G. Decision.
(1) Action by the TRC shall consist of either:
(a) A decision or an advisory recommendation to the Planning
Board that the proposed project will constitute a suitable
development and is in compliance with the criteria set forth in
this chapter;
(b) A decision or an advisory recommendation to the Planning
Board that the proposed project should be approved subject to
any conditions, modifications, and restrictions as it may deem
necessary; or
(c) A decision or advisory recommendation to the Planning Board
that the proposed project be disapproved.
(2) Action by the Planning Board shall consist of either:
§ 350-57 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-57
279:506
(a) A decision or an advisory recommendation to the permitting
authority that the proposed project will constitute a suitable
development and is in compliance with the criteria set forth in
this section;
(b) A decision or an advisory recommendation to the permitting
authority that the proposed project should be approved subject
to any conditions, modifications, and restrictions as it may
deem necessary; or
(c) A decision or advisory recommendation to the permitting
authority that the proposed project be disapproved.
H. Bond. The Planning Board or permitting authority may require the
posting of a bond to assure compliance with the plan and conditions and
may suspend any permit or license when work is not performed as
required.
I. Term of development plan approval. Any development plan approval
issued under this section shall lapse within six months if a substantial
use thereof has not commenced sooner except for good cause as
determined by the Planning Board or permitting authority.
J. Additional standards for commercial development.
(1) Purpose. This subsection is intended to encourage, guide and
direct commercial development, as well as reuse and conversion of
existing structures in order to ensure that the desirable
characteristics of the area are maintained, that new development is
compatible with the existing scale and building fabric, that the
historic integrity is preserved, and that architectural quality is
maintained. These guidelines will serve to assist the applicant by
providing development criteria consistent with the Glocester
Comprehensive Community Plan.
(2) Applicability.
(a) In addition to the review requirements stated above, the
following types of development shall adhere to the guidelines
and regulations of this section:
[1] New construction;
[2] Additions of 200 square feet or greater;
[3] Change of use (i.e., from residential to commercial use,
which may include an increase in number of dwelling
units).
(b) The following incidental improvements shall be reviewed
administratively by the administrative officer, who may refer
the matter to the Planning Board for further review:
§ 350-57 YARD SALES § 350-57
279:507
[1] Proposed new or increase in parking;
[2] Proposed signage, lighting, new curb cuts, landscaping;
[3] Change in commercial or industrial occupancy resulting in
insignificant exterior improvements.
(3) Commercial development objectives/criteria.
(a) Due to the potential impact on the character of the Town,
additional consideration is to be given to commercial
development and will be evaluated according to the following
criteria:
[1] It will not detract from the character of the village or area;
[2] It will not adversely impact adjacent property;
[3] The proposed development or reuse of structure will be in
conformance with the purpose and intent of this section
and the applicable articles of the Comprehensive
Community Plan.
(b) If the Planning Board finds the project to be unusually large, or
if it is likely to become a landmark, or if it is in a visually
prominent area, or if it is located so as to become part of a
gateway, the design must acknowledge the special impact the
project would have on the entire community by addressing the
design solution in an exemplary manner.
(4) Commercial development guidelines. The intent of this section is
not to restrict development to a predetermined style. However, for
approval, new developments must meet the range of criteria within
this section and demonstrate how building design maintains or
enhances the village or character of the area in which it is to be
located.
(a) Architecture.
[1] The height and scale of a new building or structure and
any addition to an existing building shall be compatible
and harmonious with its site and existing surrounding
buildings.
[2] New building development, adaptation, rehabilitation,
reuse, and building conversion must avoid:
[a] The look of franchise architecture, or "big box" design
with excessive bulk and lack of detail;
[b] Buildings which demand visual attention through the
use of bold colors and materials which are not found to
be consistent with maintaining the village or rural
character;
§ 350-57 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-57
279:508
[c] Commercial or industrial structures consisting of
large metal buildings which lack design details or
otherwise do not complement the traditional village or
rural character;
[3] Storefronts. Existing structures which have been designed
for retail use on the first floor shall retain this design to the
greatest extent possible.
[4] Architecture shall be compatible with the character and
scale of buildings in the specific neighborhood in which
the development proposal is located, through the use of
appropriate buildings, screenings, breaks in the roof and
wall lines and other architectural techniques as
demonstrated by existing village and rural architecture in
the area.
[5] Building materials used for principal structures shall be in
character with surrounding buildings.
[6] Concrete block, steel or metal is less desirable than wood,
brick and stone and shall be discouraged as the principal
exterior surface. It shall not be used as the principal
exterior surface on the front of the building surface except
for architectural treatments. Principal exterior surface
shall mean 50% or more of the exterior wall surface.
(b) Landscaping.
[1] Distinguishing original features of a site, such as trees
greater than six inches in diameter, existing plantings,
stone walls, historical structures or markers and
topography, shall be preserved where possible. Plantings
on the street facing the side of buildings, window boxes
and approved planters are encouraged. Benches or other
seating arrangements and walkways within a
redevelopment or new development are encouraged and
should be provided where appropriate.
[2] Roadside trees help define the rural and village character
of Glocester's villages. Their removal must be absolutely
minimized and supported by clear justification during the
development plan review process. The administrative
officer, TRC or Planning Board may request a review of the
existing plantings by the Town Tree Warden.
[3] The installation of other streetscape improvements,
including, but not limited to, benches, bollards, and trash
receptacles, is encouraged and will be reviewed for
applicability by the administrative officer.
(c) Parking.
§ 350-57 YARD SALES § 350-57
279:509
[1] Parking lots shall be designed to accommodate average
usage rather than peak day usage if the parking
requirements set forth in this chapter are not reflective of
the actual parking needed.
[2] Parking will be encouraged along the side or rear of a
building unless such location would have an adverse or
detrimental impact on environmental or visual features of
the site, or is completely infeasible.
[3] Parking with three or more spaces will require a
landscaping plan to visually reduce the adverse impacts
due to the creation of the designated parking area.
[4] When side or rear yard parking is infeasible, front yard
parking, between the building and the public road, will
require an effective landscape setback. This setback shall
be outlined on a plan which clearly identifies the location,
type and maintenance requirements of all plant material.
[5] To the extent feasible, access to businesses shall be
provided via one of the following:
[a] Access via a common driveway serving adjacent lots
or premises;
[b] Access via an existing side street where deemed
appropriate;
[c] Access via a cul-de-sac or loop road shared by
adjacent premises.
[6] One driveway per street frontage shall be permitted by
right. A second curb cut shall be approved by the Planning
Board or any other jurisdictional agency as part of the plan
approval.
[7] Curb cuts shall be limited to the minimum width for safe
entrancing and exiting and shall not exceed 24 feet in
width, except in special circumstances relating to traffic
safety and approved by the Public Works Director.
(d) Storage areas and ancillary amenities.
[1] Open storage areas, exposed machinery, refuse and waste
removal areas, service yards and exterior work areas and
parking lots shall be screened from roads and adjacent
residential areas through fencing and landscaping and
shall be made part of the landscape review.
[2] Commercial vehicles shall be screened from public view to
the greatest extent possible.
§ 350-57 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-57
279:510
(e) Service connections. It is highly desirable to place
underground all new utility services and service revisions
necessitated by exterior alterations and new developments.
(f) Lighting. The intent of the exterior lighting design standards
for the commercial zones is to provide the necessary lighting
for the property while minimizing the intrusiveness to adjacent
properties or the street right-of-way.
[1] No lighting standard shall be taller than 15 feet.
[2] Any newly installed or replaced outdoor lighting fixture
shall be shielded so that it does not direct light beyond
property boundaries.
[3] Light illumination shall be of low intensity with a maximum
wattage of 200 watts.
[4] Lighting fixtures must be compatible with the
architectural design of the new or rehabilitated structure
and the surrounding lighting fixtures.
[5] All exterior lighting shall be designed to minimize impact
on neighboring properties. Night sky light pollution shall
be minimized by down-shaded lighting or shielded
lighting, All lighting shall be based upon a pedestrian scale
appropriate for a setting.
(g) Fences and walls.
[1] Chain-link fencing shall not be permitted between the
street right-of-way and the front facade of any structure.
[2] All proposed fencing for screening or ornamental purposes
shall be approved by the TRC.
[3] Existing stone walls shall be repaired rather than
replaced. Stone walls shall not be replaced with poured
concrete or concrete block walls.
[4] Freestanding stone walls (dry laid) shall be repaired and
retained or reconstructed in kind as close to their original
location as possible.
(h) Signs (See Article V of this chapter for complete regulations.):
[1] All signs which do not conform to this section shall be
brought into conformance no later than five years from the
date of passage of this section.
[2] No interior-lit signs shall be permitted.
(5) Notice to abutters. Notice shall be sent out to all residential
abutters for Planning Board review of a commercial property.
§ 350-57 YARD SALES § 350-58
279:511
§ 350-58. Land unsuitable for development. [Added 11-15-2007,
effective 12-20-200770]
A. Land unsuitable for development means land which has environmental
constraints or physical constraints to development. The following
regulations shall apply to proposed future residential lots in a
conventional subdivision; a conservation development; and a
residential compound.
B. Description.
(1) Land unsuitable for development includes the following areas:
(a) Land under water bodies or surface water area, as defined by
the Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management.
(b) Fresh water wetlands, including that area of perimeter
wetland within 50 feet of the edge of any bog, marsh, swamp or
pond; or any applicable one-hundred-foot or two-hundred-foot
riverbank wetlands, as defined by § 2-1-20 of the General Laws
(1987), as amended.
(c) Existing or proposed streets or rights-of-way, public or private.
(d) Land within any publicly or privately held easement in which
above- or below-ground utilities are existing or proposed,
including but not limited to electric transmission lines less
than 69 kilovolts, gas transmission facilities, drainage
easements, or easements for access, public access, or scenic
areas.
(e) Historic cemeteries as registered with the Rhode Island
Advisory Commission on Historic Cemeteries or as shown on a
map of historical cemeteries maintained in the Glocester Town
Hall. Native American cemeteries, if identified and located on a
proposed subdivision/development site shall also be
considered to be land unsuitable for development.
(f) Areas of steep slope in excess of 20%.
(g) Lands located within special flood hazard areas as defined by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency Flood Insurance
Rate Maps for the Town of Glocester except where the
Planning Board determines that an engineering design for the
proposed development will overcome or mitigate the
constraint without adverse environmental impact.
(2) Land unsuitable for development described in Subsections B(1)(a)
through (g) above may be included as part of any lot in any
subdivision or land development project, including conservation
70.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former §§ 350-58
through 350-97 as §§ 350-59 through 350-98, respectively.
§ 350-58 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-58
279:512
§ 350-58.1. Personal marijuana cultivation. [Added 3-16-2017,
effective 3-16-2017]
Patient cultivation shall be permitted in all zoning districts in the Town
of Glocester. Patient cultivation shall not be allowed unless each of the
following criteria has been met:
developments; provided, however, that the provisions in
Subsections C through E below are met.
C. Lots in a conventional subdivision. Lots in any conventional subdivision,
in any residential zoning district, shall contain a contiguous area of land
suitable for development of not less than 1.5 acres (65,340 square feet)
of land suitable for development. This provision shall not apply to any
nonresidential development.
D. Lots in a conservation development. When calculating the maximum
number of dwelling units permitted in a conservation development, lots
intended for residential use shown on a conventional yield plan as
required by the Subdivision and Land Development Regulations shall
contain at least the minimum lot area of land suitable for development
required by Subsection C above.
E. Lots in a rural residential compound. The number of dwelling units and
the minimum dimensions for lots within a rural residential compound
shall be as provided in Article X of this chapter.
F. Notwithstanding the above, in a B-1 or B-2 Zoning District, land
suitable for development as defined in this chapter shall constitute the
entire minimum lot size of 0.5 acre.
A. Patient cultivation shall only be allowed at the patient cardholder's
primary residence. If the patient cardholder does not own the subject
property, the owner(s) of the subject property shall provide written
acknowledgment and approval of the proposed use which shall be
appropriately notarized prior to review and approval by the Town.
B. The patient cardholder shall apply for the appropriate approvals and
inspections by the local Fire Chief. The Fire Chief shall approve the
application for permits pursuant to R.I.G.L. § 23-28.1 et seq. All permits
applied for in furtherance of the Act shall be sealed and kept
confidential by the local Fire Chief and not subject to review by any
party other than the cardholder.
C. The patient cardholder shall apply for a zoning certificate, and the
patient cardholder or a licensed contractor shall apply for all
appropriate zoning, building, electrical, mechanical and plumbing
permits as required by the Rhode Island State Building Code. The
Building Official shall approve the application for permits pursuant to
R.I.G.L. § 23-27.3. All permits applied for in furtherance of the Act shall
be sealed and kept confidential by the Building Official and not subject
to review by any party other than the cardholder.
§ 350-58 YARD SALES § 350-58.1
279:513
D. In addition to the requirements above, the patient cardholder shall
demonstrate to the Building Official that the following requirements
have been met:
(1) That the area used for growing be secured by locked doors;
(2) That the area used for growing has two means of egress;
(3) That the area used for growing shall not be within 10 feet of a
heating or other ignition source such as an electric, propane,
natural gas or oil fired furnace or heater or as required per
manufacturer specifications of such source;
(4) That the area used for growing shall have proper ventilation to
mitigate the risk of mold;
(5) That the area used for growing shall have carbon filters installed to
reduce odors;
(6) That smoke alarms/detectors are installed in accordance with State
Fire Code and/or to the satisfaction of the Fire Chief.
E. Zoning certificates, Fire Chief inspection and/or review, or building/
trade permits are not required for patient cardholders cultivating
marijuana by natural means that do not make modifications to existing
electrical, mechanical or plumbing services in their place of primary
residence.
F. Possession limits. Patient cultivation possession limits shall be as
follows unless otherwise stated in the Rhode Island General Laws.
Possessor
Mature
Plants
Immature Plants
(Seedlings) and
Unusable
Marijuana
Usable
Marijuana
Patient
cardholder
12 plants 12 plants 1.5 ounces
§ 350-58.1 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-58.1
279:514
ARTICLE VIII
Nonconforming Uses
§ 350-59. Scope.
Legal nonconforming status applies to any use, activity, structure, building,
dwelling units, sign or other improvements, or land area which was in lawful
use at the time of passage of this chapter, but which is not in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 350-60. Continuance.
Any legal nonconforming use shall be permitted to continue until such time
as such use is discontinued, destroyed, demolished or changed to another
use.
§ 350-61. Discontinuance or abandonment.
If a legal nonconforming use is discontinued or abandoned for a period of
12 months, it shall not be allowed to be resumed, and any future use of such
building or land must conform to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 350-62. Destruction.
If a legal nonconforming use is destroyed by accident or by an act of
God, such structure may be restored, provided the total floor space, cubic
content and location on lot are not altered or increased, and provided that
reconstruction of damaged buildings shall commence within eight months
of the date of damage and to be completed within two years from that date.
If such a structure is demolished at the direction of the owner, it may not
be reestablished, and any future use of the site or lot must conform to the
provisions of this chapter. Nothing shall prevent the performance of normal
maintenance work, or work necessary to comply with safety codes, on a
legal nonconforming use.
§ 350-63. Change of use.
§ 350-64. Enlargement of nonconforming use. [Amended
12-15-2011, effective 12-15-2011]
A. A legal nonconforming use may be changed to a use which conforms to
the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.
B. A nonconforming use of land or of a structure shall not be changed to
another nonconforming use that is substantially different in nature and
purpose unless the Zoning Board of Review makes the finding that the
proposed use will have a lesser undesirable impact upon the
surrounding area than the preceding nonconforming use and grants a
variance in accordance with the statutory standard and procedure.
§ 350-59 YARD SALES § 350-64
279:515
§ 350-65. Exemption.
Any use which is nonconforming in dimension but conforms in use shall be
exempt from the provisions of §§ 350-61 and 350-62 of this article, provided
the dimensional use nonconforming is not increased in any way.
§ 350-66. Substandard lots of record.
A. The area of a legal nonconforming land use shall not be enlarged by
acquisition.
B. Expansion of a legal nonconforming use is allowed for up to 50%
expansion of the area dedicated to a legal nonconforming use in either
the primary or secondary structure(s).
A. No lot area shall be so reduced that yards, total area or lot frontage
shall be less than prescribed for the district in which the lot is located.
No required yard or other area of one lot shall be considered as
providing the minimum area or frontage required for any other lot
without a replatting of both lots in such a way that both lots so replatted
conform to the dimensional regulations of the district involved and
approved by the Inspector prior to recording. Such lots must be in
separate ownership and not be contiguous with other lots in the same
ownership unless otherwise provided herein.
B. Substandard lots of record are exempt from the minimum lot sizes of
the district involved as established by this chapter as amended. All
other district dimensions applicable at the time immediately prior to the
lot becoming substandard shall apply, but in no case will less than 30
feet front yard depth, 10 feet side yard, and 10 feet rear yard depth be
allowed.
C. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, if two or more
contiguous lots of record are under the same ownership as of or after
November 9, 1989, and one or more of such lots has an area less than
30,000 square feet, then all such lots that are less than 30,000 square
feet shall be deemed merged into adjacent lots under the same
ownership and the merged lots shall be considered one lot for the
purpose of this chapter. This provision shall not apply to any lots that
are located within a B-1 or B-2 Zoning District or to any recorded lots
which were approved and accepted by the Planning Board before
November 9, 1989, pursuant to Chapter 300, Subdivision of Land. This
Subsection C shall be deemed to have been adopted and effective on
November 9, 1989, in place and instead of the zoning amendment
adopted on that day.
§ 350-64 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-66
279:516
ARTICLE IX
Historic District Zoning
§ 350-67. Authority.
This chapter is adopted in accordance with Title 45-24.1 of the General
Laws of Rhode Island, as amended (1988 amendment), which:
§ 350-68. Legislative intent.
The regulations in this chapter have been adopted to preserve districts and
specific buildings of the Town of Glocester which reflect elements of its
cultural, social, economic, political and architectural history. This chapter is
designed to stabilize and improve property values in such historic districts,
to preserve specific buildings, to foster civic beauty, to strengthen the local
economy and to promote the use of such districts and specific buildings
for the education, pleasure and welfare of the residents of the Town of
Glocester.
§ 350-69. Definitions.
The following terms shall have the following respective meanings:
ALTERATION — An act that changes one or more of the exterior
architectural features or its appurtenances, including but not limited to
the erection, construction, reconstruction, or removal of any structure or
appurtenance.
APPURTENANCES — Features other than primary or secondary structures
which contribute to the exterior historic appearance of a property, including
but not limited to paving, doors, windows, signs, materials, decorative
accessories, fences, and historic landscape features.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — A certificate issued by the
Glocester Historic District Commission indicating approval of plans for
alteration, construction, repair, removal, or demolition of a contributing
structure or appurtenances of a contributing structure within an historic
district. “Appropriate for the purpose of passing upon an application for a
certificate of appropriateness” means not incongruous with those aspects
of the contributing structure, appurtenances, or the district which the
Commission has determined to be historically or architecturally significant.
CONSTRUCTION — The act of adding to an existing structure or erecting
a new principal or accessory structure or appurtenances to a structure,
A. Declares the preservation of structures of historic or architectural
value to be a public purpose;
B. Authorizes historic district zoning and the creation of an historic
district commission for that purpose in each city and town;
C. Provides for definitions of terms used in historical area zoning; and
D. Establishes a uniform procedure regarding historical area zoning.
§ 350-67 YARD SALES § 350-69
279:517
including but not limited to buildings, extensions, outbuildings, fire escapes,
and retaining walls.
CONTRIBUTING STRUCTURE — Any structure constructed or erected
prior to January 1, 1900.
DEMOLITION — An act or process that destroys a structure or its
appurtenances in part or in whole.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — A specific division of a city or town as designated
by ordinance of the Town of Glocester pursuant to this chapter. An historic
district may include one or more structures.
RECOMMENDATION OF COMPATIBILITY — A recommendation by the
Glocester Historic District Commission with respect to plans for alteration,
construction, repair, removal or replacement of any structure other than
a contributing structure, including appurtenances of such structure. A
recommendation shall specifically state those ways in which the plans are or
may be made more compatible with any surrounding aspects of the district
which the Commission has determined to be historically or architecturally
significant.
REMOVAL — A relocation of a structure on its site or to another site.
REPAIR — A change meant to remedy damage or deterioration of a
structure or its appurtenances.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
permanent or temporary location on or in the ground, including but not
limited to buildings, gazebos, billboards, outbuildings, decorative and
retaining walls, and swimming pools.
§ 350-70. Designation of Historic Districts.
§ 350-71. Historic District Commission.
A. For purposes of this chapter, the boundaries of Historic Districts are
established as shown on a map entitled "Historic District Designation
Map," which designation map is filed in the office of the Glocester Town
Clerk. Such designation map is hereby incorporated as a part of this
chapter.71
B. It is the intent of this article that historic property owned by the Town of
Glocester within the boundaries of designated historic districts as
shown on the Historic District Designation Map shall not be exempt
from the provisions of this chapter.
A. Establishment. There is hereby established an Historic District
Commission to carry out the purpose of this article.
B. Membership and appointment.
71.Editor's Note: The Historic District Designation Map is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 350-69 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-71
279:518
(1) The Commission shall consist of seven qualified members, electors
of the Town of Glocester, to be appointed by the Town Council.
Members shall be appointed for three-year terms, except that the
initial appointments of some of the members shall be for less than
three years to the end that the initial appointments shall not
reoccur at the same time. Members shall be eligible for
reappointment.
(2) At least four members of the Commission shall have a
demonstrated knowledge or interest in historic preservation (such
as, but not limited to, architect, owner of an historic home, or
builder versed in historic restoration).
(3) The Town Council shall have the right to name an auxiliary member
to the Commission in addition to the regular members, which
auxiliary member shall sit as an active member, upon the request of
the Chairman of the Commission when and if a regular member of
the Commission is unable to serve at any meeting of the
Commission.
(4) In the event of a vacancy on the Commission, the Town Council
shall make an interim appointment, for the remainder of the
unexpired term. Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled within
60 days.
C. Organization of the Commission.
(1) The Commission shall organize annually and, by election, shall
select from its membership a Chairman, Vice Chairman, and a
Secretary.
(2) The Commission shall:
(a) Adopt and publish all rules and regulations necessary to carry
out its functions under the provisions of this article;72 and
(b) Adopt and publish standards of review (which shall use as a
guide the Secretary of the Interior's Standards and Guidelines
for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings, 36 CFR 671, as
amended), within six months following the adoption of this
article to inform Historic District residents, property owners,
and the general public of those criteria by which the
Commission shall determine whether to issue a certificate of
appropriateness. The Commission may from time to time
amend these standards as reasonably necessary, and it shall
publish all such amendments.
72.Editor's Note: The Commission's rules and regulations are included in Ch. A423 of this
Code.
§ 350-71 YARD SALES § 350-71
279:519
§ 350-72. Certificates and recommendations.
(c) Such rules, procedures and standards and any additions and
amendments thereto shall be submitted to the Council for its
approval and shall, thereon, become part of this chapter.
(3) Conduct of business.
(a) The Chairman shall preside over all Commission meetings and
shall have the right to vote.
(b) The Vice-Chairman shall, in the case of absence or disability of
the Chairman, perform the duties of the Chairman.
(c) All meetings of the Commission shall be subject to the Rhode
Island Public Meeting Act. Any applicant for a certificate of
appropriateness or recommendation of compatibility shall have
the right, upon request, to appear before the Commission in
person or with or by a representative prior to decision on his or
her application.
(d) The Secretary shall keep a record of all resolutions,
proceedings, finding of fact, decisions and actions, and such
record shall be on file for public view at the office of the
Glocester Town Clerk.
(e) Five members shall constitute a quorum and the concurring
vote of a majority, but not less than four of the members
present, shall be necessary for either approval or rejection of
any plans before the Commission for review and for
establishing or amending Commission rules, regulations and
standards of review.
A. Certificate of appropriateness required.
(1) Before a property owner may authorize or commence construction,
alteration, repair, removal or demolition affecting the exterior
appearance of a contributing structure or its appurtenances within
any designated Historic District, the owner must apply for and
receive a certificate of appropriateness from the Commission
approving such construction, alteration, repair, removal or
demolition.
(2) A certificate of appropriateness is necessary only if a building
permit is required for such construction, alteration, repair, removal
or demolition of a contributing structure. The Building Official may
not issue a permit until the Commission has granted a certificate of
appropriateness.
B. Recommendation of compatibility required.
(1) Before a property owner may authorize or commence construction,
alteration, repair, removal or replacement affecting the exterior
§ 350-71 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-72
279:520
appearance of a structure within any designated Historic District
other than a contributing structure, including appurtenances of
such structure, the owner must apply for and receive a
recommendation of compatibility from the Commission with
respect to the plans for such work.
(2) A recommendation of compatibility is necessary only if a building
permit is required for such construction, alteration, repair, removal
or replacement of such structure. The Building Official may not
issue a permit until the Commission has issued a recommendation
of compatibility; however, compliance with the recommendation of
compatibility shall not be a requirement for issuance of a building
permit.
C. Application for certificate of appropriateness and recommendation of
compatibility.
(1) Applications for certificate of appropriateness or recommendation
of compatibility shall be filed with the Commission at the office of
the Building Official, who shall determine if such application is
complete and who shall forward complete applications, together
with all maps, plans, and other data, to the Commission.
Incomplete applications shall be returned to the applicant within
seven working days of receipt by the Building Official.
(2) The Commission shall require the owner to submit information
which is reasonably necessary to evaluate the proposed
construction, alteration, repair, removal or demolition, including
but not limited to site plans, elevation drawings, photographs or
other information deemed appropriate by the Commission and set
forth in the Commission's rules and regulations adopted pursuant
to this article.
(3) In reviewing the applications and plans, the Commission shall give
consideration to:
(a) The historic and architectural significance of the contributing
structure and its appurtenances;
(b) The way in which the structure and its appurtenances, as
existing or planned, contribute to the historical and
architectural significance of the district;
(c) The appropriateness of the general design, arrangement,
texture, material and sitting proposed in the plans; and
(d) The Commission shall pass only on exterior features of a
structure and its appurtenances and shall not consider interior
arrangements.
(4) All decisions and recommendations of the Commission shall be in
writing. The Commission shall articulate and explain the reasons
§ 350-72 YARD SALES § 350-72
279:521
and bases of each decision and recommendation on a record, and in
the case of a decision not to issue a certificate of appropriateness,
the Commission shall include the basis for its conclusion that the
proposed activity would be incongruous with those aspects of the
structure, appurtenances, or the district which the Commission
has determined to be historically or architecturally significant. The
Commission shall send a copy of the decision or recommendation
to the applicant.
(5) The following are special considerations regarding valuable
historic resources and demolition:
(a) In the case of an application for construction, repair, or
alteration, removal, or demolition affecting the exterior
appearance of a contributing structure or its appurtenances,
which the Commission deems so valuable to the Town of
Glocester, state or nation, that the loss thereof will be a great
loss to the Town, state or nation, the Commission shall
endeavor to work with the owner an economically feasible plan
for the preservation of such structure.
(b) Unless the Commission is satisfied that the retention of such
contributing structure constitutes a hazard to public safety,
which hazard cannot be eliminated by economic means
available to the owner, including the sale of the contributing
structure to any purchaser willing to preserve such structure,
the Commission shall file with the Building Official its rejection
of such application.
(c) Unless the Commission votes to issue a certificate of
appropriateness for such construction, alteration, and repair,
removal and demolition, the Commission shall file with the
Building Official its rejection of such application.
(d) In the absence of change in such contributing structure arising
from casualty, no new application for the same or similar work
shall be filed within one year after such rejection.
(e) Contributing structures of architectural or historic value.
[1] In the case of any contributing structure deemed to be
valuable for the period of architecture it represents and
important to the neighborhood within which it exists, the
Commission may file with the Building Official its
certificate of appropriateness for such application if any of
the circumstances under which a certificate of
appropriateness might have been given under the
proceeding subsection are in existence, or if:
[a] Preservation of such structure is a deterrent to a
major improvement program which will be of
substantial benefit to the community;
§ 350-72 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-72
279:522
§ 350-73. Failure of Commission to act.
The failure of the Commission to act within 45 days from the date of a
completed application filed with it shall be deemed to constitute approval,
unless an extension is agreed upon mutually by the applicant and the
Commission. In the event, however, that the Commission shall make a
finding of fact that the circumstances of a particular application require
further time for additional study and information can be obtained within the
aforesaid period of 45 days, then and in said event the Commission shall
have a period of up to 90 days within which to act upon such application.
§ 350-74. Advisory role of Commission.
In order to assist the Town of Glocester, its agencies, boards, commissions,
staff and Council on matters of historic preservation, the Commission may
provide its expertise and advice as appropriate.
§ 350-75. Exceptions.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent painting, routine
maintenance or repair of any structure within the Historic District, provided
that such maintenance or repair does not result in any change of design,
type of material, or appearance of the structure or appurtenances; nor shall
anything in this article be construed to prevent the construction, alteration,
repair, moving or demolition of any structure under permit issued by the
Building Official prior to the passage of this article.
[b] Preservation of such structure would cause undue or
unreasonable financial hardship to the owner, taking
into account the financial resources available to the
owner, including sale of the structure to any purchaser
willing to preserve such structure; or
[c] The preservation of such structure would not be in the
best interest of the majority of the community.
[2] When considering an application to demolish or remove a
contributing structure of historic or architectural value,
the Commission shall assist the owner in identifying and
evaluating alternatives to demolition, including sale of the
structure on its present site. In addition to any other
criteria, the Commission shall also consider whether there
is reasonable likelihood that some person or group other
than the current owner is willing to purchase, move and
preserve such structure and whether the owner has made
continuing bona fide and reasonable efforts to sell the
structure to any such purchaser willing to move and
preserve such structure.
§ 350-72 YARD SALES § 350-76
279:523
§ 350-76. Violations and penalties.
Where there is a violation of any of the provisions of this article or of any
action taken thereunder, the Building Official, through the Town Solicitor,
shall institute an appropriate action to prevent, enjoin, abate, or remove
such violation.
§ 350-77. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Historic District Commission shall
have the right to appeal such decision to the Zoning Board of Review. When
hearing appeals from Commission decisions the Zoning Board of Review
shall not substitute its own judgment for that of the Commission, but must
consider the issue upon the findings and the record of the Commission. The
Zoning Board of Review shall not reverse a Commission decision except on
a finding of prejudicial procedural error, clear error or lack of support by
the weight of the evidence in the record. The Zoning Board of Review shall
put all decisions on appeal in writing. The Zoning Board of Review shall
articulate and explain the reasons and bases of each decision on the record,
and the Zoning Board of Review shall send a copy of the decision to the
applicant and to the Historic District Commission. Any person aggrieved by
a decision of the Zoning Board of Review on a matter appealed under this
article may apply to the Superior Court of Rhode Island.
§ 350-78. Enforcement.
The Building Official, through the Town Solicitor, may bring an action
against any property owner who fails to comply with the requirements of
this article. Such actions shall be brought in the Superior Court having
jurisdiction where the violation occurred or is likely to occur. Plaintiffs may
seek restraining orders and injunctive relief to restrain and enjoin violations
or threatened violations of this article.
§ 350-79. Amendments.
Amendment or additions to the article or to the Historical District shall be
by the same process and procedure as amendments to this chapter.
§ 350-80. Periodic review.
The Town Council or its successor ordinance-creating authority shall be
required at twenty-five-year intervals commencing in the year 2025 to
review the regulations issued by the capital Secretary of the Interior or
other appropriate federal agency for the purpose of changing the date or
dates defining contributory structure and advancing the dates of historic
preservation.
§ 350-76 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-80
279:524
ARTICLE X
Rural Residential Compounds
§ 350-81. Findings.
§ 350-82. Purpose.
This article is designed to provide qualified subdividers an option to develop
a parcel of land under less stringent requirements, where, and only where,
the Planning Board (the Board) determines that such alternative procedures
will promote development of the parcel in the best interests of the Town,
considering the design standards specified in § 350-83 below. The approval
of a rural residential compound is entirely within the informed discretion
of the Board. Denial by the Board of a request for a rural residential
compound, or the denial of a rural residential compound, shall not be
construed as denial of the right to subdivide the property, and the applicant
shall retain all rights to submit a plan under customary procedures set forth
in Chapter 300, Subdivision of Land.
§ 350-83. Conditions for consideration.
Applicants may request that their proposal be considered as a rural
residential compound at the preapplication stage. To qualify for
A. The Town of Glocester has many residents who own large tracts of land
(in excess of the minimum zoning requirement) and wish to subdivide
that land for use as single-family residences. Under the conventional
zoning requirements, this would be allowed only if the land has
sufficient acreage and frontage along a suitably improved Town or state
road.
B. In addition, there are many tree-lined roads that are enjoyed by
residents and visitors alike. When development occurs along these
roads, all too often the visual buffer of trees and shrubs is removed to
make way for the development of roads and housing.
C. The rural residential compound model addresses these issues. It allows
greater design flexibility for landowners with large tracts of land and
creates more opportunities for preservation of open space than the
conventional zoning regulations by allowing a reduction of frontage and
access to lots along a private way. It promotes development in harmony
with Glocester's rural character by reducing density and requiring a
visual buffer between home sites and the existing Town or state roads
Because the development occurs along a private way, the Town benefits
from the reduced road maintenance costs while allowing reasonable
development to occur.
D. Waivers in the rural residential compound are prepackaged to
accomplish these objectives of allowing development of large lots,
protection of open space and maintaining low-density development
throughout the Town.
§ 350-81 YARD SALES § 350-83
279:525
consideration as a rural residential compound, the subdivision must satisfy
all of the following conditions; however, satisfaction of all of the conditions
shall only result in rendering the plan eligible for further consideration as a
rural residential compound and shall not be construed as approval.
A. Lots with existing deeded rights-of-way or easements for access to any
property shall not qualify for a rural residential compound.
B. Lots created after this article is adopted, May 16, 2003, shall not qualify
for consideration as a rural residential compound.
C. No more than one rural residential compound shall be created from a
property or a set of contiguous properties in common ownership as of
May 16, 2003. The subdivision shall result in no more than four lots and
be located entirely in an A-4 and/or A-3 agricultural use district.
D. The original lot shall be at least 20 acres in area and have at least 50
feet of frontage.
E. Each lot so created under these provisions shall have an area of at least
10 acres, of which at least 1.5 acres shall be land suitable for
development. [Amended 11-15-2007, effective 12-20-2007]
F. The subdivision shall result in no more than four lots and be located
entirely in an A-4 and/or A-3 agricultural use district.
G. All lots so created under these provisions shall have ingress and egress
to the common private way. Lots with existing deeded rights-of-way or
easements for access to any property shall not qualify for a rural
residential compound.
H. The common private way shall extend from a suitably improved Town or
state road, and shall end in a cul-de-sac, as described in § 350-86 below.
The common private way shall not extend from any other type of road,
such as private or suitably improved non-Town road.
I. Rural residential compounds cannot be combined with any other
subdivision or development.
J. The development rights of land in excess of the minimum underlying
zoning of each lot (example A-4) shall be deeded in perpetuity to a land
conservation organization, such as the Glocester Land Trust. For the
purpose of this section, “development rights,” as used herein, shall
mean the right to further subdivide or otherwise residentially develop
the land beyond the original approval from the Planning Board.
K. At the discretion of the Planning Board, a provision may be imposed to
require a conservation easement for the preservation/protection of
significant or important features of the subject property.
§ 350-83 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-84
279:526
§ 350-84. Design standards.
In order to be approved as a rural residential compound, the proposed
subdivision must be determined by the Planning Board to promote one or
more of the following design standards in a manner that is superior to a
conventional subdivision of the subject property:
§ 350-85. Application process.
A. Reduce the number of lots having egress onto existing streets;
B. Reduce the number of curb cuts on existing Town or state roads;
C. Be constructed in a manner which will provide a visual buffer between
the new home(s) as well as the public street which will minimize the
visual impact;
D. Produce less irregularly shaped or contorted lot configurations; or
E. Be constructed in a manner that preserves primary and secondary
resource areas on the tract or adjacent to the tract, such as visual
buffer (topography, trees and shrubs) along streets and between
properties, wetlands, watercourses or bodies, open fields, meadows,
wildlife habitat, steep slope, or other significant areas.
A. Preapplication conference. Prior to submittal of a rural residential
compound application, it is required that at least one preapplication
meeting be conducted with the Planning Board. The preapplication
submittal can be a sketch based on existing plat maps, but must
accurately depict the site layout primary and secondary resource areas
on the tract or adjacent to the tract, such as visual buffer (topography,
trees and shrubs) along streets and between properties, wetlands,
watercourses or bodies, open fields, meadows, wildlife habitat, steep
slope, or other significant areas and other features of the property to be
subdivided.
B. Preliminary plan.
(1) Applicants for a rural residential compound shall present a
preliminary plan that complies with the requirements of the
Chapter 300, Subdivision of Land, for a minor subdivision, and
which also accurately depicts the following information:
(a) Center-line profile of proposed common private way;
(b) Location of any rivers, streams or wetlands;
(c) Proposed drainage;
(d) Proposed utilities and road construction design;
(e) Proposed lot lines and building sites;
§ 350-84 YARD SALES § 350-85
279:527
§ 350-86. Conditions for approval.
To be approved as a rural residential compound, the plan shall contain or
refer to recorded covenants and notices regarding each of the following:
(f) Scale and area of vegetative screening separating the common
private way and rural residential compound lots from adjacent
residentially zoned property;
(g) Location, width and other evidence of any recorded easements
or rights-of-way on or adjacent to the subject property.
(2) A registered professional engineer, land surveyor, architect, or
landscape architect must prepare the preliminary plan, unless
specifically waived by the Planning Board.
C. Final plan. The final plan shall comply with the requirements of Chapter
300, Subdivision of Land, for a final plan for a minor subdivision and
must be prepared by a registered professional engineer and/or land
surveyor.
D. Application fee. A filing fee consistent with the schedule in Chapter
300, Subdivision of Land, § 300-38,73 will be submitted by the applicant
with the application, to cover costs of processing and review. In the
event that the Board determines that unusual or exceptional
circumstances necessitate expert technical review that exceeds the
cost of the filing fee, the applicant shall pay the cost of that expertise.
A. Protection of open space, maintenance of a visual buffer of at least 20
feet along property lines restricting tree cutting, land clearing, and
land grading. At the discretion of the Planning Board, deed restrictions
may be imposed to preserve open fields, or forest areas within the rural
residential compound.
B. Development rights for any additional land outside the three- or fouracre
minimum lot area for each lot in the rural residential compound
shall be given "in perpetuity" by deed to the Glocester Land Trust or
other private nonprofit agency engaged in land preservation.
C. The common private way shall remain permanently (in perpetuity) a
private way, and shall not be extended and shall only be used
exclusively for access to properties in the rural residential compound.
D. The common private way shall not be connected to any other way
except where it originates on a Town or state road.
E. The lots shall obtain access from the common private way as created in
this article if, and only if, ownership of the lot provides automatic
membership in the homeowners' association responsible for all
maintenance and snow removal of or from the common private way. The
73.Editor's Note: See Ch. 368, Fees.
§ 350-85 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-86
279:528
§ 350-87. Common private way.
The common private way shall have:
homeowners' association shall retain all rights in the common private
way.
F. The common private way does not meet the standards of the Town for
acceptance for new ways laid in accordance with any applicable
ordinance and shall never be accepted by the Town as a Town-owned
road.
G. The common private way shall be kept in good repair to ensure access
to homes for emergency vehicles, such as police, fire and ambulance.
H. Owners of lots along the common private way are subject to paying or
reimbursing the Town for the cost of any repairs and improvements
necessary to ensure the safe passage of emergency vehicles, even
though the Town shall not accept the common private way.
I. The homeowner's association shall indemnify, hold harmless and
release the Town from liability for any damages resulting from an action
brought by a third party or the association in any court due to the
repair, use, or maintenance of the common private way.
J. At the time of final approval of a rural residential compound, the
Planning Board shall approve the form and content of the following
legal documents to be recorded contemporaneously with the final plat:
[Added 11-15-2007, effective 12-20-2007]
(1) A covenant by the owner of the parcel, binding on his successors
and assigns, that the Town of Glocester shall not be asked or
required to accept or maintain the private streets within the parcel
that do not meet the engineering and design requirements for
Town-accepted streets, for a minimum of 99 years from the date of
recording; or, if only a lesser period is legally enforceable, for that
period with as many automatic renewals as are necessary to total
99 years.
(2) A document or documents establishing the method of ownership,
and providing for maintenance of the streets and drainage
improvements.
A. A design that maximizes the sight distances at the intersection with the
Town or state road;
B. A paved bituminous concrete staging area (apron) of a minimum 20 feet
in width and at least 40 feet in length as it extends from the Town or
state street line, and sloped not more than four-percent grade. Paving
shall be installed to provide a minimum compacted cross-section of
three inches;
§ 350-86 YARD SALES § 350-87
279:529
C. A center-line intersection with the street center line shall not be less
than 60°;
D. A wear surface, on that portion of the common private way extending
beyond the staging area, of a minimum of six inches of graded two-inch
minus crushed gravel, placed over a properly prepared base that is
consistent with Chapter 300, Subdivision of Land, graded and
compacted to drain from the crown, and having a grade of not more
than 8%. In places where the Planning Board deems it necessary, an
applicant may also be required to install bituminous concrete paving;
E. Proper drainage appurtenances, where required, to prevent flooding,
washout and excessive erosion so that water draining onto neighboring
properties or the Town or state road surface from the staging area is
eliminated to the maximum extent feasible;
F. The common private way wear surface may be reduced to a width of 16
feet for its entire length after the staging area, provided that a clear
travel way (including shoulders) of at least 20 feet is maintained;
G. A turnaround shall be provided at the end of dead-end streets and culsde-
sac as provided in the Land Development and Subdivision
Regulations. [Amended 11-15-2007, effective 12-20-2007]
H. Driveway openings shall be constructed at least 40 feet from the private
way intersection with the Town or state road so as to ensure
maintenance of a visual buffer between the road and the driveway.
I. When naming the private way within the rural residential compound,
said private way shall only be designated as "way" or "lane" in order to
distinguish these from public roads. The sign shall include all the house
numbers that can be accessed by the private way.
J. Each private way so created shall have a sign posted at the intersection
of the Town or state road stating that this is a "private way," "no outlet."
§ 350-87 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-87
279:530
ARTICLE XI
Comprehensive Permit for Low- and Moderate-Income Housing
[Amended 12-15-2011, effective 12-15-2011; 1-15-2015, effective
2-25-2015; 12-7-2017, effective 12-7-2017]
§ 350-88. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish project review standards and
procedure for a comprehensive permit proposal to develop low- and
moderate-income housing.
§ 350-89. Applicability of article.
This article shall apply to all applications for a comprehensive permit to
build low- and moderate-income housing, which have not yet been certified
complete in accordance with subdivision regulations by the administrative
officer of the Town of Glocester, Rhode Island, as of December 7, 2017.
§ 350-90. Authority to grant comprehensive permit.
§ 350-91. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PLAN — That component of the Housing Element
of the Town Comprehensive Plan designed to meet the housing needs in the
Town.
CONSISTENT WITH LOCAL NEEDS —
A. In accordance with Title 45, Chapter 53, of the Rhode Island General
Laws, the Low and Moderate Income Housing Act, the Planning Board
shall have the power to issue a comprehensive permit for a qualifying
low- and moderate-income housing project, which relief shall include all
permits or approvals from any local board or official who would
otherwise act with respect to such application, including but not limited
to the power to attach to the permit or approval conditions and
requirements with respect to setbacks, height, site plan, size, shape,
building materials, landscaping and parking, consistent with the terms
of the Act.
B. In the event that Title 45, Chapter 53, of Rhode Island General Laws, or
other applicable statutes, are hereafter amended or enacted, the
provisions of this article shall be construed and amended consistently
herewith.
Reasonable in view of the state need for low-and moderate-income
housing, considered with the number of low-income persons in the
Town affected and:
A.
§ 350-88 YARD SALES § 350-91
279:531
LOW OR MODERATE INCOME HOUSING — Any housing, whether built
or operated by any public agency or any nonprofit organization or by
any limited equity housing cooperative or any private developer, that is
subsidized by a federal, state, or municipal government subsidy under any
program to assist the construction or rehabilitation of housing affordable to
low- or moderate-income households, as defined in the applicable federal
or state statute, or local ordinance, and that will remain affordable through
a land lease and/or deed restriction for 99 years or such other period that
is either agreed to by the applicant and Town or prescribed by the federal,
state, or municipal government subsidy program but that is not less than 30
years from initial occupancy.
§ 350-92. Eligible entities and projects.
Any applicant proposing to build low- or moderate-income housing may
submit to the local review board a single application for a comprehensive
permit to build that housing in lieu of separate applications to the applicable
local boards. This procedure is only available for proposals in which at least
25% of the housing is low- or moderate-income housing.
§ 350-93. Application procedure.
Application and review procedures shall be set forth in the Town of
Glocester Subdivision Regulations, Article V, Major Subdivisions.
§ 350-94. Incentives.
The need to protect the health and safety of the occupants of the
proposed housing or of the residents of the Town;
(1)
The need to promote better site and building design in relation to
the surroundings or to preserve open spaces; and
(2)
If the local zoning or land use ordinances, requirements, and
regulations are applied as equally as possible to both subsidized
and unsubsidized housing.
(3)
Local zoning and land use ordinances, requirements, or regulations are
consistent with local needs when imposed by the Town Council after
hearing in a city or town where low- and moderate income housing is in
excess of 10% of the year-round housing units reported in the Census.
B.
A. Development incentives above the density permitted by the underlying
zoning regulations, provided that an on-site wastewater treatment
system and public and/or private well(s) can be accommodated on the
property, are offered as follows:
(1) Twenty-five percent to 50% low- and moderate-income housing:
density bonus of 20%.
(2) Fifty-one percent to 99% low- and moderate-income housing:
density bonus of 25%.
§ 350-91 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-94
279:532
§ 350-95. Notice and hearing requirements.
Upon receipt of a completed application, the Planning Board shall:
§ 350-96. Decisions.
(3) One-hundred percent low- and moderate-income housing: density
bonus of 30%.
B. Any development proposing to use the above density bonus incentives
must remain affordable by employing a land lease and/or deed
restriction for 99 years.
A. Notify each local board, as applicable, including but not limited to the
Zoning Board, the Town Council, and the Conservation Commission, of
the filing of the application along with a copy of the completed
application. A consulting engineer may be engaged at the applicant's
expense to assist in the review of application materials related to
stormwater, erosion and sediment control, proposed new
infrastructure, and any other area the Planning Board deems
appropriate.
B. All other notice and hearing requirements shall be as set forth in the
Town of Glocester Subdivision Regulations, Article V, Major
Subdivisions.
A. Criteria for approval. In approving an application for a comprehensive
permit, the Planning Board shall make positive findings, supported by
legally competent evidence on the record which discloses the nature
and character of the observations upon which the fact finders acted, on
each of the following standard provisions, where applicable:
(1) The proposed development is consistent with local needs as
identified in the local comprehensive community plan with
particular emphasis on the community's affordable housing plan
and/or has satisfactorily addressed the issues where there may be
inconsistencies.
(2) The proposed development is in compliance with the standards and
provisions of the municipality's zoning ordinance and subdivision
regulations, and/or where expressly varied or waived local
concerns that have been affected by the relief granted do not
outweigh the state and local need for low- and moderate-income
housing.
(3) All low- and moderate-income housing units proposed are
integrated throughout the development; are compatible in scale
and architectural style to the market rate units within the project;
and will be built and occupied prior to, or simultaneous with, the
construction and occupancy of any market-rate units.
§ 350-94 YARD SALES § 350-96
279:533
§ 350-97. Voting and appeal.
All decisions on comprehensive permits shall be by majority vote of the
membership of the local review board and may be appealed by the applicant
to the State Housing Appeals Board. Any person aggrieved by the issuance
of an approval may appeal to the Rhode Island Superior Court.
§ 350-98. through § 350-99. (Reserved)
(4) There will be no significant negative environmental impacts from
the proposed development as shown on the final plan, with all
required conditions for approval.
(5) There will be no significant negative impacts on the health and
safety of current or future residents of the community, in areas
including, but not limited to, safe circulation of pedestrian and
vehicular traffic, provision of emergency services, sewerage
disposal, availability of potable water, adequate surface water
runoff, and the preservation of natural, historical or cultural
features that contribute to the attractiveness of the community.
(6) All proposed land developments and all subdivision lots will have
adequate and permanent physical access to a public street. Lot
frontage on a public street without physical access shall not be
considered in compliance with this requirement.
(7) The proposed development will not result in the creation of
individual lots with any physical constraints to development that
building on those lots according to pertinent regulations and
building standards would be impracticable, unless created only as
permanent open space or permanently reserved for a public
purpose on the approved, recorded plans.
B. Criteria for denial. The Planning Board may deny the request for any of
the following reasons:
(1) The Town has an approved affordable housing plan and is meeting
housing needs, and the proposal is inconsistent with the affordable
housing plan.
(2) The proposal is not consistent with local needs, including, but not
limited to, the needs identified in an approved comprehensive plan,
and/or local zoning ordinances and procedures promulgated in
conformance with the comprehensive plan.
(3) The proposal is not in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan.
(4) The Town has met or has plans to meet the goal of 10% of the yearround
units being low- and moderate-income housing.
(5) Concerns for the environment and the health and safety of current
residents have not been adequately addressed.
§ 350-96 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-98
279:534
ARTICLE XII
Conservation Developments
[Added 11-15-2007, effective 12-20-2007]
§ 350-100. Purpose.
A. The purposes of this article, entitled "Conservation Developments," are:
(1) To conserve open land, including those areas containing unique
and sensitive natural features such as woodlands, steep slopes,
streams, floodplains, wetlands, reservoirs and their drainage areas,
and agricultural lands, by setting them aside from development;
(2) To preserve historical, cultural, agricultural and archaeological
resources;
(3) To provide greater design flexibility and efficiency in the siting of
services and infrastructure, including the opportunity to reduce
length of streets, utility runs, and the amount of paving required for
residential development;
(4) To provide for a diversity of lot sizes and layouts;
(5) To provide for a diversity of housing choices to accommodate a
variety of age and income groups and residential preferences, so
that the population diversity of the community may be maintained;
(6) To implement adopted municipal policies to conserve a variety of
irreplaceable and environmentally important resources as set forth
in the Comprehensive Plan;
(7) To provide reasonable incentives for the creation of a greenbelt/
trails system within the Town;
(8) To implement adopted land use, environmental and open space
policies as set forth in the Comprehensive Plan;
(9) To protect areas of the Town with productive agricultural soils for
continued or future agricultural use by conserving blocks of land
large enough to allow for efficient farm operations;
(10) To create neighborhoods with direct visual and/or physical access
to open land, with amenities in the form of neighborhood open
space, and with a strong neighborhood identity;
(11) To provide for the maintenance of open land set aside for active or
passive recreational use, stormwater drainage or conservation
lands;
(12) To conserve and create scenic views and preserve the rural
character of the Town; and
§ 350-100 YARD SALES § 350-100
279:535
§ 350-101. Applicability.
(13) To provide a buffer between new development and existing
neighborhoods, delicate natural features and habitats.
A. The Planning Board may require a proposed land development project
or subdivision to be developed in the form of a conservation
development only in the following zoning districts: A-4 Agricultural-
Residential; A-3 Agricultural-Residential and R-2 Residential.
B. In accordance with the standards set forth in this article, the Planning
Board shall have the authority to determine whether a major or minor
subdivision or land development project, whether a subdivision or not,
shall be developed as a conservation development or a conventional
subdivision, as further provided in Subsections C, D, E and F, below.
C. If an applicant requests approval of a major or minor conventional
subdivision, the Planning Board shall first require the applicant to
submit a plan(s) of a conservation development for the property
proposed for development, following the requirements and procedures
for conservation developments provided in this section. As a
comparison, the applicant shall also submit plan(s) for the conventional
type of development requested. If the Board finds that the conventional
subdivision meets the general purposes of the Land Development and
Subdivision Regulations, and after consideration of the purposes of
conservation developments set forth in § 350-100 herein, the Board
may permit the application to be reviewed in a form other than
conservation development. For major subdivisions or land development
projects, the Board may make this determination at the preapplication
meeting, but no later than the master plan stage of review. For minor
subdivisions or land development projects, the Board shall make this
determination at the informal concept review meeting.
D. If an applicant requests approval of a major or minor conservation
development, and the Planning Board determines that a conventional
subdivision may be preferable, the Board may require the applicant to
submit a plan(s) of both a conservation development and a conventional
development. If the Board finds that the conventional subdivision meets
the general purposes of the Land Development and Subdivision
Regulations, and after consideration of the purposes of conservation
developments set forth in § 350-100 herein, the Board may require the
application to be reviewed in a form other than conservation
development. For major subdivisions or land development projects, the
Board may make this determination at the preapplication meeting, but
no later than the master plan stage of review. For minor subdivisions or
land development projects, the Board shall make this determination at
the informal concept review meeting.
E. Administrative subdivisions and subdivisions that create lots which are
not for the purpose of present or future development (e.g., open space
§ 350-100 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-101
279:536
§ 350-102. Permitted uses.
lots) shall not be required to be developed as a conservation
development.
F. The Planning Board may not require an application for a rural
residential compound to be submitted as a conservation development or
conventional subdivision. Applications for approval of a rural
residential compound shall be at the discretion of the applicant, subject
to the provisions of Article X of this chapter, and in accordance with the
procedures and standards set forth in the Land Development and
Subdivision Regulations for minor land development projects.
A. Permitted residential uses in a conservation development are the
following:
(1) Single-family dwelling.
(2) Two-family dwellings or duplexes are permitted by the granting of a
special use permit by the Zoning Board of Review.
(3) Accessory family dwelling units are permitted by the granting of a
special use permit by the Zoning Board of Review. These units do
not count towards the maximum number of dwellings allowed in a
conservation development.
B. Open space uses. The open space in a conservation development shall
be devoted only to conservation purposes; for park and recreation uses;
or for the preservation and management of agricultural, habitat or
forestry resources. The following provisions shall apply:
(1) In the A-4 Agricultural-Residential and A-3 Agricultural-Residential
Zoning Districts only, the following uses shall be permitted within
the open space areas:
(a) Any use listed in Article II, § 350-11, Table of Use Regulations,
in Section 1, Agricultural Uses. Uses marked with a "YES" are
permitted by right; uses marked with an "S.P." are permitted by
special use permit.
(2) In all zoning districts where conservation developments are
permitted, including A-4, A-3 and R-2, the uses listed below shall be
permitted within the open space areas.
(a) Reservations for the production or protection of wildlife,
including conservation lands, wildlife preserves, forest
management activities and woodlots.
(b) Passive recreation, hiking trails and walking trails.
C. In all zoning districts where conservation developments are permitted,
the following uses may also be allowed in open space areas subject to
§ 350-101 YARD SALES § 350-102
279:537
§ 350-103. Maximum number of units.
The maximum number of dwelling units permitted in a conservation
development shall not exceed the number of single-family lots (or dwellings)
which could reasonably be expected to be developed upon the conservation
development site under a conventional yield plan as defined in § 350-5
herein, and as further described in § 300-35H (Basic maximum number of
dwelling units) of the Land Development and Subdivision Regulations.
§ 350-104. Lot dimensional requirements.
the approval of the Planning Board in accordance with the applicable
provisions of the Land Development and Subdivision Regulations:
(1) Stormwater drainage areas.
(2) Placement of privately owned and maintained wells for individual
uses within the conservation development.
(3) Placement of privately owned and maintained community wells for
uses within the conservation development.
(4) Placement of privately owned and maintained individual or
common sewage disposal systems for uses within the conservation
development.
D. Buildings, structures, parking areas or other impervious improvements
which are accessory to and subordinate to a permitted open space use
may be located on any open space lot, provided that, in all cases, they
occupy no more than 2% of the total open space area of the
conservation development for any permitted open space uses.
E. The required amount of open space in a conservation development shall
be as provided in § 350-105 of this article, below.
A. The dimensional regulations provided in Table 1 below shall apply to all
lots in a conservation development proposed as building lots for single
or two-family dwellings.
§ 350-102 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-104
279:538
§ 350-105. Open space in conservation developments.
Table 1
Dimensional Requirements in a Conservation Development
Use
Minimum
Lot
Area*1
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
and
Width
(feet)
Minimum
Front
Yard
Depth
(feet)
Minimum
Rear
Yard
Depth
(feet)
Minimum
Side
Yard(each
side)
(feet)
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet)
Singlefamily
dwelling
43,560 150 25 30 25 8% 35
Twofamily
dwelling
60,000 175 40 60 40 8% 35
*NOTE: See § 350-104.
B. The Planning Board may allow a building lot for a single-family dwelling
to be a minimum of 43,560 square feet in a conservation development
only. In such cases, the building lot must be directly abutting open
space area(s) which shall be suitable for the placement of a future ISDS
and/or a drinking water well if needed to serve the dwelling on the lot.
In making this determination, the Board shall consider the physical
characteristics of the open space with regard to its suitability for future
ISDS/wells, including but not limited to soil characteristics, topography,
presence of land unsuitable for development, vegetation, or other
natural or man-made features. If the Board finds that the abutting
common open space area is not suitable for these purposes, the lot area
for the single-family dwelling shall be not less than 1.5 acres (65,340
square feet).
A. Every conservation development shall provide protected open space in
accordance with the following requirements and standards:
(1) The open space shall be established as a lot or lots separate and
distinct from the lots intended for residential and accessory uses,
and from land dedicated as street rights-of-way.
(2) The minimum amount of required open space area shall be based
on a percentage of the land suitable for development in the entire
conservation development as provided in the table below. None of
the minimum required open space area shall be devoted to land
unsuitable for development as defined in § 350-58 of this chapter.
§ 350-104 YARD SALES § 350-105
279:539
Zoning District
Minimum Percentage of
Land Suitable for
Development to be Dedicated
as Open Space
A-4 70%
A-3 60%
R-2 50%
(3) Open space provided by a conservation development for public or
common use, shall either be conveyed to and accepted by the Town
for park, open space, agricultural, or other permitted use or uses;
or be conveyed to and accepted by a nonprofit organization, the
principal purpose of which is the conservation of open space or
resource protection; or be conveyed to and accepted by a
corporation or trust owned or to be owned by the owners of lots or
units within the development or owners of shares within a
cooperative development. If such a corporation or trust is used,
ownership shall pass with conveyances of the lots or units; or
remain in private (noncommon) ownership if the use is limited to
agriculture, habitat or forestry. In accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan and this Zoning Ordinance, it is determined
that private ownership may be necessary for the preservation and
management of the agriculture, habitat or forest resources. In such
cases, the Planning Board, as part of its review of a conservation
development, shall make positive findings as part of the record,
setting forth the basis for such ownership.
(4) The Planning Board may limit or restrict the amount of open space
that may remain in private ownership where necessary to
contribute to a connecting greenway system or to provide public
access to open space, as provided in the Comprehensive Plan.
(5) In any case where the land is not conveyed to the Town, a
restriction, in perpetuity, enforceable by the Town and by any
owner of property in the land development project in which the
land is located shall be recorded providing that the land shall be
kept in the authorized condition(s) and not be built upon or
developed.
(6) All open space land provided by a conservation development or
other land development project shall be subject to a communityapproved
management plan that will specify the permitted uses for
the open space.
(7) All open space, regardless of whether it is conveyed to the Town,
shall be protected against further development and unauthorized
alteration in perpetuity by appropriate deed restrictions, and by
the grant of a conservation or preservation restriction pursuant to
Title 34, Chapter 39, of the Rhode Island General Laws, as
§ 350-105 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-105
279:540
amended, to at least three separate entities, one of which entities
shall be the Town, one of which shall be a nonprofit organization,
the principal purpose of which is the conservation of open space
or resource protection, and one of which shall be an association of
owners of lots or units within the development. If no such owners'
association is created, then at least two entities shall be nonprofit
conservation organizations.
(8) The perpetual maintenance of all open space shall be guaranteed
by appropriate deed restrictions and by the grant of a conservation
or preservation restriction to the Town, pursuant to Title 34,
Chapter 39, of the Rhode Island General Laws, as amended. The
Planning Board or administrative officer shall approve the form and
content of all deed restrictions at the time of final approval of the
subdivision. Every deed restriction providing a maintenance
guarantee shall contain the following provision:
"If the owners, or their successors or assigns fail to maintain the
open space or any improvements thereon, the Town may perform
any necessary maintenance and enforce the payment for such
costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, by an action at law or
in equity against the owners or their successors or assigns."
§ 350-105 YARD SALES § 350-105
279:541

ARTICLE XIII
Village Overlay District
[Added 3-15-2012, effective 4-11-2012]
§ 350-106. Findings.
§ 350-107. Purpose.
A. The Town of Glocester finds that the revitalization of our village centers
will promote the general health and welfare of the Town by working to
fulfill the existing economic, housing, and transportation needs of the
Town.
B. Current zoning in Chepachet Village falls within the B-1 Neighborhood
Commercial, A-4 Four-Acre Agricultural Zone, and R-2, Two-Acre
Residential Zones. These zoning designations have limited uses that in
most cases allow a use in one zone, but it is prohibited in the other. This
does not provide the village an opportunity for expansion and new
businesses, new housing and the greatest flexibility for redevelopment.
The Town endeavors to create a new overlay district that encourages
compact development which will establish new housing and economic
opportunities in Chepachet Village.
C. As part of this redevelopment, the Town aspires to maintain the
traditional development pattern and village character by employing
design elements that mimic and complement existing historic
architecture, reuse existing buildings and develop unused and
underused parcels.
A. The proposed Village Overlay District is to provide flexibility for
housing, new business and business expansion with the need for
minimal variances or special use permits. The creation of a Village
Overlay District unifies under one district the current zoning in the
existing commercial, agricultural and residential districts and will
provide for revitalization of the village center. The Village Overlay
District amendment is also intended to promote pedestrian travel
within the village and the development of vacant land as mixed uses
with a pedestrian scale and walkablity that would complement the
existing village fabric. Lots within the Village Overlay District shall be
developed to be a walkable connection to the existing village.
B. The Village Overlay District is intended to:
(1) Build upon and complement the historic development patterns in
the Village of Chepachet to enhance and create attractive walkable
neighborhoods;
(2) Encourage the adaptive reuse of abandoned, vacant or
underutilized properties and structures, where appropriate;
§ 350-106 YARD SALES § 350-107
279:543
§ 350-108. Applicability.
All parcels within the Village Overlay District are allowed to utilize the
overlay zoning. Existing underlying zoning is still applicable to all existing
and future parcels within the district, except as identified as prohibited
herein.
§ 350-109. District boundaries.
See the map attached.74
§ 350-110. Subdistricts.
The Village Overlay District is broken down into two subdistricts, based on
the scale of development and types of uses that are generally promoted in
these areas. The first subdistrict, "Center District," is characterized by a
dense development pattern that is focused on walkability and is generally
identified as the Chepachet Main Street area associated with denser mixeduse
development. The second subdistrict, "Village District" area, is outside
the Center District and is also designed to be walkable but allows
automobile-oriented businesses and businesses which may include a drive
through window. The Village District is an area where larger planned
developments may occur that enhance the character of the surrounding
parcels while providing housing and commercial opportunities.
§ 350-111. Land uses.
(3) Allow for a mix of land uses that are appropriate to the needs of the
community and the uses and scale of surrounding properties in the
village;
(4) Provide incentives to develop larger parcels in a coordinated,
planned approach that is in keeping with the village scale and
enhances the walkability;
(5) Maintain a high level of design quality throughout the district.
(6) Encourage the strategic placement of usable green space in the
village to augment existing open space and parks and to improve
walkability.
A. The Village District.
(1) The following uses are allowed as a matter of right within the
Village District: professional office; bank, credit union or office;
lunchroom/restaurant; tavern or nightclub; theater or concert hall;
personal convenience services; veterinary office or animal hospital;
pet shop; general retail; package store; antique sales and used
furniture; multifamily housing and apartments located above or
behind a nonresidential use; bed-and-breakfasts; child day-care
74.Editor's Note: The Village Overlay District Map is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 350-107 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-111
279:544
§ 350-112. Dimensional regulations.
§ 350-113. Mix of commercial-residential.
The district strives to create a 50/50 mix of commercial and residential
within the district and each structure. It is a goal to have a mix of uses
within each building in the village.
centers; indoor/outdoor cafes; outdoor seating associated with
restaurants or cafes; art galleries; legal office; medical office and
small-scale medical laboratories; and artists' live/work space.
(2) The following uses are allowed only by special use permit within
the Village District: off-street parking lots as a primary use; outdoor
markets; apartment complexes, two-family and multifamily
residential, without retail; and gasoline service stations, auto
repair services and garages.
(3) The following uses are prohibited in the Village District: nurseries
and raising of crops; game rooms and arcades; self-serve laundries;
trailer courts; salesrooms for the display of motor vehicles, trailers
and machinery; adult book- and/or video store or amusement
operation; and nursing homes.
(4) Nonconforming uses shall be allowed to continue and are in no way
being singled out for removal from the village. The Town intends to
allow these uses to remain and expand as necessary to keep up
with demand. This article is intended to encourage businesses that
are in keeping with the goal of creating mixed-use, small-scale
pedestrian-oriented development in the village.
B. Center District.
(1) Due to small lot sizes, encouraging mixed uses, improving
walkability and helping preserve the compact development pattern
of this area, the Center District also prohibits: drive-through
windows; gasoline service stations; auto repair services and
garages; one-story buildings; single-family residential (but allowed
in A-4); and retail establishments over 10,000 square feet in floor
area.
A. Frontage and area required. Frontage may be reduced to 50 feet in
order to encourage mixed uses. Lot size may be reduced to an area of
one acre for mixed uses and commercial in situations where both water
and septic disposals can be accommodated on site or off site nearby.
B. Setbacks. The front setback may be reduced to zero to match the
setback of neighboring buildings only for mixed-use buildings where
neighboring existing buildings have a similar setback.
§ 350-111 YARD SALES § 350-114
279:545
§ 350-114. Development plan review.
Applications submitted under this article may be subject to development
plan review as outlined in this chapter, § 350-57, in the Glocester Code.
§ 350-115. Drive-up and drive-through windows.
§ 350-116. Service roads and service areas.
§ 350-117. Other considerations.
§ 350-118. Design standards.
A. Drive-up and drive-through windows shall be limited to banks and
pharmacies as an allowed use. Food and drink establishments are
allowed only with a special use permit granted by the Zoning Board of
Review.
B. Drive-through windows shall be placed in the rear of the building. In
places where they cannot be in the rear of the building, placement can
be on the side of the building. Vehicle stacking shall not be in the front
of the building and is desired to be to the rear of the building. The
stacking driveway is encouraged to wrap around the building, utilizing
on-site driveway(s).
A. Service roads. The creation of shared service roads and entrances is
encouraged in order to reduce on-street traffic.
B. Service areas. All service areas shall be designed, relocated or
redesigned to consider negative impact on surrounding properties.
Pickup and delivery times, dumpster emptying times, and other
services which can generate noise and other nuisances shall be
coordinated to avoid negative neighbor impacts.
A. Any uses not specifically identified in the Village Overlay Zoning
District which are allowed in 350 Attachment 1, Table of Use
Regulations, are allowed.
B. Structures and other developments that are larger than 10,000 square
feet of floor area are allowed only by special use permit or land
development project. Developments of this size are encouraged to be
designed to fit in with the existing village character and add to the
walkability and desirable physical and economic attributes of the
village.
A. Special considerations shall be implemented for building design that is
in keeping with and enhances the historic look and feel of the village.
Design standards shall be considered in terms of scale, massing, roof
shape, spacing and exterior building materials. The design standards
shall promote quality buildings and renovations that are similar to and
compatible with the traditional historic architecture of the Village of
Chepachet. These design standards will ensure development that is
§ 350-114 GLOCESTER CODE § 350-118
279:546
§ 350-119. Outdoor displays.
Approval of outdoor displays of products for sale by the merchant can
be obtained by application to the Building Official. Granting of outdoor
displays shall be made based on demonstrating appropriate space, without
obstructing pedestrian or automobile traffic. Displays are temporary and
are allowed only when the business is open. Displays can only be placed
within the subject property boundaries. (See the zoning amendment that
is incorporated into the Code under Chapter 350, Article VII, Special
Regulations.)
consistent with the Town's sense of history and promote a human scale
and pedestrian-oriented village character.
B. A mix of uses which complement each other and the character of the
village are encouraged in the Village Zone. By placing emphasis on
compatibility with neighboring architecture and current uses, a balance
can be maintained that is sustainable and economically viable for the
village. Additionally, the strategic installation of outdoor seating and
small park areas, which may include benches, green spaces and
connecting pathways, are encouraged to help facilitate pedestrian
access to and from businesses and residential properties.
C. The size and scale of buildings shall resemble surrounding buildings,
businesses, houses or barns. The look of shopping centers and big box
retail centers shall be avoided. Appropriate architectural details that
add visual interest at the street level are required to reduce building
scale. Blank and flat walls shall be addressed to either be screened or
dressed up with windows, covered walkways, columns, or raised
surfaces to break up the wall and add visual interest.
D. Buildings shall be placed in a manner that is complementary to the
existing development pattern and architecture of the village. Massing,
height and setbacks from the street and other buildings should be
consistent or complementary with surrounding buildings.
E. New construction or substantial reconstruction should consider
alterations that incorporate traditional pitched roof forms, gables and
other attributes that contribute to the historic character of the village.
The use of flat roofs, concrete block and large panels of glass as part of
the facade or street-facing portions of the building is discouraged and
represents architectural design not in keeping with the village.
F. All service areas, inclusive of mechanical, loading utilities and
equipment storage shall be as unobtrusive or sufficiently screened so
that they may not be seen from the street, public common areas and
neighboring residential uses. These areas shall also be designed and/or
incorporate techniques to buffer noise to adjacent uses.
§ 350-118 YARD SALES § 350-119
279:547
Part 5: Policies
Chapter 355
CAPITAL PROJECTS POLICY
§ 355-1. Formation of Building/Project Committee for major capital
construction projects.
Whenever a major capital construction project shall be planned, a Building/
Project Committee shall be formed consisting of five qualified electors
appointed by the Town Council to be responsible for the planning and
supervision of all such construction. The Building/Project Committee shall
be formed for no other purpose and shall assume its duties immediately
after the appropriation or acquisition of funds for the preliminary planning
of a project, and shall continue in office during its construction and until
formal acceptance by the Town, or until discharged by the vote of the
Council.
§ 355-2. Solicitation of members; rules of conduct.
The Board, by consensus, suggests to the Council that members of any
such committee be sought through advertising in local papers; that the
committee be required to follow Town Procurement Policy; that the Council
be kept informed of progress; and that the Finance Director be kept up-todate
on project scheduling.
Chapter 361
EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY POLICY
§ 361-1. Findings and purpose.
A. Equal employment opportunity (EEO) is a well-known household phrase
throughout our community and the nation. The Town Council totally
supports the concept of EEO. In addition, we are constantly reminded
by the media of the importance and the urgency of our responsibilities
in this vital matter. To change the many words spoken and printed on
the subject to an active and effective EEO program requires
imagination, a true sense of fair play and the will of a dynamic
management team to make the program work. The EEO program goal
in Glocester is a total dedication by all concerned to equitably consider
qualified personnel for employment, promotion, training and any other
personnel action which offers immediate or future opportunity to any
individual for a better job or improvement in his or her well-being. The
Council, without reservation, encourages all levels of management to
be constantly aware of their responsibilities and opportunities to
become personally involved in an equal employment opportunity
program which will show measurable results. It is not enough to
§ 350-119 GLOCESTER CODE § 361-1
355:548
§ 361-2. Policy statement.
The Town of Glocester declares and reaffirms a policy of equal employment
opportunity, and of nondiscrimination in the provision of all services to the
public.
demonstrate a willingness "to go along" with the program; it is
imperative that we, as a team, achieve tangible results. People are
our most important resource, regardless of race, color, creed, age, sex
or national origin. We must think and act positively to support this
important program; the full and effective utilization of the potential of
our community's manpower resources depends on it.
B. It is the firm and forthright policy of the Town of Glocester to promote
the full realization of equal employment opportunity through a
continuing affirmative program. This policy does not simply involve the
consideration of women and minority group persons (primarily
American Indians, Negroes, Orientals and Spanish Americans) who
apply to the Town for employment, but it requires that the Town
conduct special recruitment efforts to seek out and hire minority group
members and women with career potential. It also encompasses
training and development programs to eliminate underutilization of
employees presently in the Town. Discrimination against any employee
or qualified applicant for employment because of race, creed, age,
color, sex or national origin is prohibited.
C. Also prohibited is discrimination because of politics, marital status and
physical handicap. All discrimination complaints will be promptly, fairly
and impartially considered, and no reprisals will be allowed against a
complainant or any representative testifying in the complainant's
behalf. Complainants, in turn, must accept their obligation to support
their allegation of discrimination in a temperate and factual manner.
A. Equal employment opportunity. The Town of Glocester will make all
decisions regarding recruitment, hiring, promotions, and other terms
and conditions of employment without discrimination on grounds of
race, color, creed or religion, sex, national origin, age, physical or
mental handicap, or other factors which cannot be lawfully used as the
basis of employment decisions.
B. Affirmative action in employment. The Town of Glocester undertakes a
program of affirmative action, to which good faith efforts will be
directed to:
(1) Determine the extent to which minorities and women are
underutilized in major categories;
(2) Identify and eliminate the specific causes of such underutilization;
(3) Identify and eliminate all employment practices which have an
adverse impact on minorities, women and others protected by
applicable law;
§ 361-1 EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY POLICY § 361-2
361:549
§ 361-3. Compliance with other laws.
(4) Replace such practices by others which are based on merit and
valid job qualifications;
(5) Develop substantial applicant pools of validly qualified minorities
and women, by recruitment efforts and other means to ensure that
sufficient numbers of these groups are included to help reduce
their underutilization;
(6) Develop, through recruitment efforts and other measures,
applicant pools in which handicapped persons and Vietnam-era
veterans are represented equitably;
(7) Project goals and timetables to include estimates of the
representation of minorities and women likely to result from the
operation of this affirmative action plan; and
(8) Establish organizational structures and monitoring systems which
will assure effective operation of the affirmative action program,
achievement of its goals, and means for modification of the plan as
needed.
C. Nondiscrimination in public service.
(1) The Town of Glocester reaffirms its policy on nondiscrimination, on
the basis of minority status, sex or other impermissible grounds, in
the provision of all services provided to members of the public by
all agencies and facilities of the Town.
(2) The Town commits itself to a continuing program to assure that
unlawful discrimination does not occur in the service it renders to
the public and that those sectors of the public most affected by this
policy be kept informed of its contents.
A. Through the policies and programs set forth in this plan, the Town
undertakes to comply fully with all applicable federal and state laws
relating to equal employment opportunity, affirmative action and
nondiscrimination in public services.
B. This plan specifically addresses the obligations of the Town under the
following laws and regulations:
(1) Title VI and VII, Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended;
(2) Executive Order 11246, as amended;
(3) Revised Order #4;
(4) The Equal Pay Act of 1963;
(5) The Rehabilitation Act of 1973;
(6) The Vietnam Era Veterans Rehabilitation Act of 1974;
§ 361-2 GLOCESTER CODE § 361-3
361:550
Chapter 364
FAIR HOUSING POLICY
§ 364-1. Policy statement.
Discrimination in the sale, rental, leasing, financing of housing or land to be
used for construction of housing or in the provision of brokerage services
because of race, color, religion, sex or national origin is prohibited by Title
VIII of the 1968 Civil Rights Act (Federal Housing Law). It is the policy of
the Town of Glocester to implement programs to ensure equal opportunity
in housing for all persons regardless of race color, religion, sex or national
origin. Therefore, the Town of Glocester does hereby pass the following
resolution.
§ 364-2. Assistance in filing complaints of discrimination.
Within available resources, the Town of Glocester will assist all persons who
feel they have been discriminated against because of race, color, religion,
sex or national origin to seek equity under federal and state laws by filing
a complaint with the Rhode Island Civil Rights Commission or the US
Department of Housing and Urban Development.
§ 364-3. Publication of policy.
The Town of Glocester shall publish this resolution and through this
publicity shall cause owners of real estate, developers and builders to
become aware of their respective responsibilities and rights under the
Federal Fair Housing Law and any applicable state or local laws or
ordinances.
§ 364-4. Contents of program.
Said program will at a minimum include, but not be limited to:
Chapter 368
FEE SCHEDULE
(7) Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972;
(8) R.I.G.L. Chapter 28-5-5.
A. The printing and publishing of this policy and other applicable fair
housing information through local media and community contracts;
B. Distribution of posters, flyers and any other means which will bring to
the attention of those affected the knowledge of their respective
responsibilities and rights concerning equal opportunity in housing.
§ 361-3 FAIR HOUSING POLICY § 368-1
364:551
§ 368-1. Fees enumerated.
Fees for services, permits and licenses in the Town of Glocester shall be as
follows:
Item/Service Amount
Animals75
Dog license fee $7
Reclamation of impounded dogs $10, plus $5 for every day the animal
is kept beyond the legal detention
period; plus an additional $10 if the
owner is unable to show that the dog
has a current rabies shot
Adoption deposit (per R.I.G.L.
§§ 4-19-17 and 4-19-18)
$20
Vicious dogs Per R.I.G.L. Title 4, Chapter 13.1
Billiard, Bagatelle, Pool, Scippio
Table and Game Room Licenses
Pool, maximum of 2 tables (term:
February 1 to January 31)
$200
Building Permits76 [Amended
9-4-2008, effective 10-2-2008;
8-2-2018, effective 9-5-2018]
Valuation
Minimum fee $65
$1 to $10,000 $13 per $1,000
$10,001 to $50,000 $130, plus $11 per $1,000 exceeding
$10,000
$50,001 to no limit $570, plus $9 per $1,000 exceeding
$50,000
Electrical permit $50 minimum fee for values $0 to
$1,000, plus $10 per $1,000 cost or
fraction thereof
Plumbing permit $50 minimum fee for values $0 to
$1,000, plus $10 per $1,000 cost or
fraction thereof
Mechanical permit $50 minimum fee for values $0 to
$1,000, plus $10 per $1,000 cost or
fraction thereof
Demolition or moving permit $40 flat fee
Wood stove permit Based on mechanical permit fee
75.Editor's Note: See Ch. 139, Animals.
76.Editor's Note: See Ch. 145, Building Permits.
§ 368-1 GLOCESTER CODE § 368-1
364:552
Item/Service Amount
Sign permit $45, plus $2 per square foot in
excess of 10 square feet
Reinspection $35 per reinspection
Gasoline stations
Each gas pump $100
Each tank for petroleum products $50
Late filing
First offense Double the standard building fees
enumerated above and/or up to a
$500 fine
Second offense Triple the standard building fees
enumerated above and/or up to a
$500 fine
Business Licenses
Antique shop (term: July 1 to June
30)
$25
Bingo, per session $5
Camping and travel trailer parks77
(term: April 15 to October 31)
Application for permit $25, plus costs of advertising
License application $1/site
License renewal $1/site
Transfer of license $10
Winter camping (term: November
1 to April 14)
$1/site
Commercial antenna (television;
term: July 1 to June 30)
$500
Detectives78
License application $25
License $150
Entertainment license79 (term:
December 1 to November 30)
Per day $50
Per week $75
Per year $200
77.Editor's Note: See Ch. 151, Camping and Travel Trailer Parks.
78.Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Licensing of Private Detectives.
79.Editor's Note: See Ch. 173, Entertainment Licenses.
§ 368-1 FAIR HOUSING POLICY § 368-1
364:553
Item/Service Amount
Firearm dealer license (term:
January 1 to December 31)
$5
Gatherer's license (term: January 1
to December 31)
$25
Kennel license (term: April 1 to
March 31)
$25
Hawkers and peddlers80
Per day $10
Per week $15
Per year $35
Hotel, motel, rooming house (term:
July 1 to June 30)
Up to 4 $10
Up to 8 $15
Over 9 $25
Units with kitchens $25
Liquor licenses81 (term: December
1 to November 30)
Class A (retail stores) $400
Class B-V $500
Class B-T $500
Class B-Limited $200
Transfer of license $25, plus costs of advertising
Mobile homes82
License for individual mobile
home (term: January 1 to
December 31)
$5
Renewal of license for individual
mobile home
$5
Mobile home park license
application
$25
License for mobile home park
(term: January 1 to December 31)
$200/park, plus $30/trailer
Renewal of license for mobile
home park
$200/year
80.Editor's Note: See Ch. 190, Hawkers and Peddlers.
81.Editor's Note: See Ch. 134, Alcoholic Beverages.
82.Editor's Note: See Ch. 208, Mobile Homes and House Trailers.
§ 368-1 GLOCESTER CODE § 368-1
364:554
Item/Service Amount
Transfer of mobile home park or
trailer park license
$25
Trailer placement permit $10/trailer
Rubbish removal license (term:
January 1 to December 31)
$25
Holiday license83 (term: January 1
to December 31)
$35
Trade name $10
Victualing84
Victualing license (term:
December 1 to November 30)
$50
24-hour victualing license (term:
December 1 to November 30)
$75
Yard sale85 $5
Earth Removal86
License $200, plus costs of notice
License renewal Not to exceed $50, plus costs of
notice
Subdivision Fees87
Administrative subdivision $50
Minor subdivision (1 to 3 lots with
no public improvements)
Preliminary plan $100, plus $20/lot
Final plan $50, plus $20/lot
Minor subdivision (all others)
Preliminary plan $200, plus $20/lot
Final plan $100, plus $20/lot
Major subdivision
Master plan $200, plus $20/lot
Preliminary plan (master plan not
combined)
$200, plus $20/lot
Preliminary plan (master plan
combined)
$300, plus $20/lot
83.Editor's Note: The name of this license was changed from "Sunday business" to "holiday"
pursuant to a change in state law. See R.I.G.L. § 5-23-1 et seq.
84.Editor's Note: See Ch. 266, Victualing.
85.Editor's Note: See Ch. 279, Yard Sales.
86.Editor's Note: See Ch. 166, Earth Removal.
87.Editor's Note: See Ch. 300, Subdivision of Land.
§ 368-1 FAIR HOUSING POLICY § 368-1
364:555
Item/Service Amount
Final plan $100, plus $20/lot
Extension of deadline (The Planning
Board may waive all or part of the
extension of deadline fee where the
Board determines that the need for
such extension of time is beyond
the control of the applicant.)
$20/lot
Zoning Fees88 [Added 8-21-2008,
effective 10-2-2008; amended
11-1-2018, effective 9-5-2018]
Zoning application (appeals,
variance, zoning amendments or
special use permit)
$200, plus any costs incurred as a
result of the application, including,
but not limited to, advertising,
notice, and copies of plans and
transcripts
Chapter 373
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS RESPONSE POLICY
§ 373-1. Purpose.
§ 373-2. Situation and assumptions.
A. This Hazardous Material Response Annex for the Town of Glocester has
been prepared to meet statutory planning requirements of the federal
Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986 (SARA Title
III), and to provide for a higher degree of preparedness to deal with
incidents involving hazardous materials.
B. The plan has been specifically designed to serve as an annex to the
Town's Emergency Operation Plan (EOP) and supplements that
document. Every effort has been made to integrate the Hazardous
Materials Annex with the EOP. In that regard, the plan is consistent
with existing authorities, planning assumptions, systems, and
procedures.
A. Situation. Extremely hazardous substances are being transported
through the Town of Glocester and have the potential for hazardous
material incidents. The transportation routes for these chemicals are:
Route 44, Route 102, Snake Hill Road, and Chestnut Hill Road.
B. Assumptions.
(1) Potentially dangerous materials are transported through the Town
of Glocester. These materials do not present a threat in their
88.Editor's Note: See Ch. 350, Zoning.
§ 368-1 GLOCESTER CODE § 373-2
373:556
§ 373-3. Concept of operations.
controlled environment; however, an accidental release could
result in hazardous situations.
(2) Town government along with the three Fire Districts (Harmony/
Chepachet/West Glocester) is responsible for safety measures or
precautions that may be required for public protection until a
hazardous situation has been corrected and the material is again in
its controlled environment.
(3) State and federal government is responsible for providing needed
services and resources which are unavailable to, or not within, the
capabilities of local government.
A. Notification of procedures.
(1) This procedure reflects the belief that state response personnel
must be immediately notified of a release.
(2) When a hazardous materials incident occurs, notification of the
incident can be received in several ways. Most incidents will be
reported through the E-911 System to the Glocester Police
Department.
(3) Upon notification of a hazardous material emergency, the Dispatch
Center shall record all emergency notification information on the
Rhode Island SERC Release Report Form (Attachment 3).89
(4) The Dispatch Center shall immediately alert and inform the local
area Fire Department of the emergency notification information.
(5) At the request of the Incident Commander, the Dispatch Center
shall immediately alert and inform the State Emergency Response
Commission (SERC) of the emergency notification information via
the State Spill Hotline, (401) 274-7745. (The State Spill Hotline is
operated by the Rhode Island Emergency Management Agency. Its
purpose is to provide a statewide reporting system for hazardous
materials spills and to initiate the appropriate state response.)
B. On-scene response operations.
(1) The first arriving units must assess the situation for its potential
danger to the safety and health of the population in the immediate
area. The area will be restricted immediately by law enforcement
agencies until the danger or potential danger can be assessed. If
evacuation of surrounding areas is warranted, this limited
evacuation procedure should be initiated. A command post will be
established. All agency representatives called to the scene should
report to this point. The Incident Commander on scene shall
89.Editor's Note: Attachment 3 is on file in the Town offices.
§ 373-2 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS RESPONSE POLICY § 373-3
373:557
declare a response level, which may be increased or decreased as
more senior officers arrive. A description of response levels follows:
(a) Response Level 1- Controlled Emergency Condition:
[1] Incident can be controlled by the primary first responders;
[2] Single jurisdiction and limited agency involvement;
[3] Does not require evacuation, except for structure or
facility;
[4] Confined geographic area;
[5] No immediate threat to life, health, or property.
(b) Response Level 2 - Limited Emergency Condition:
[1] Potential threat to life, health, and property;
[2] Expanded geographic scope;
[3] Limited evacuation of nearby residents or facilities;
involvement of more than one jurisdiction;
[4] Specialist or technical team called to the scene;
[5] Combined emergency operations such as fire fighting and
evacuation, or containment and emergency medical care;
[6] Requires the establishment of a command post.
(c) Response Level 3 - Full Emergency Condition:
[1] Serious hazard or severe threat to life, health and
property;
[2] Large geographic impact;
[3] Major community evacuation;
[4] Multi-jurisdictional involvement;
[5] State and federal involvement;
[6] Specialists and technical teams deployed;
[7] Extensive resource management and allocation;
[8] Multiple emergency operations;
[9] Requires on-scene command post and activation of the
community Emergency Operations Center (EOC).
(2) Incident Command System:
§ 373-3 GLOCESTER CODE § 373-3
373:558
(a) The Senior Officer of the Fire District having jurisdiction or his
designate on scene will act as the Incident Commander (IC)
and direct the on-scene operations and coordinate the efforts
of all agencies involved in on-site emergency operations
related to the incident. The IC will act through the respective
agency representatives, who will maintain control over their
respective forces.
(b) Because of the nature of most hazardous material incidents, a
unified command structure will be used. Under a unified
command structure in the Incident Command System (ICS),
the implementation of the action plan will be done under the
direction of a single individual, the operations chief. The
operations chief will normally be from the agency that has the
greatest jurisdictional involvement and will be assigned by the
Incident Commander.
(c) The concept of unified command simply means that all
agencies who have a jurisdictional responsibility at a
multijurisdictional incident contribute to the process of:
[1] Determining overall incident objectives;
[2] Selection of strategies;
[3] Insuring that joint planning for tactical activities will be
accomplished;
[4] Insuring that integrated tactical operations are conducted.
(d) The proper selection of participants to work within a unified
command structure will depend upon:
[1] The location of the incident; which political jurisdictions
are involved;
[2] The kind of incident; which functional agencies of the
involved jurisdictions are involved.
(e) In Glocester, the unified command structure table of
organization will consist of:
[1] The Fire Department;
[2] The Police Department;
[3] The principal responsible party (PRP) facility
representative;
[4] Civil Defense.
(f) Under this plan, the person in charge of plant personnel and
resources will be part of the unified command structure, in an
advisory capacity.
§ 373-3 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS RESPONSE POLICY § 373-3
373:559
(g) Additional agencies may be included in the decision-making
process as their involvement in the mitigation effort increases.
At that time they will become part of the unified command staff
and be co-located at the command post (CP).
(h) The Fire Department (Incident Commander), the Police
Department, and ranking officer of requested/required
responding agencies will be co-located at the CP with direct
access to the Incident Commander.
(i) The IC will coordinate the mitigation of the hazardous
materials incident, and the RI Department of Environmental
Management shall oversee the clean-up process.
(j) When activities are judged by the safety officer to be unsafe
and/or to involve an imminent danger condition, the safety
officer shall immediately inform the IC of the existing condition
and by mutual agreement take appropriate action.
(k) There will be one command post located at the incident scene.
This will be the command post (CP) in close proximity to the
incident where the initial control will be exercised by the IC.
An access control point located a safe distance from the
incident at the best access point to the scene will be controlled
by the Police Department.
(l) A staging area, if implemented, will be located a safe distance
away with good access to the incident and where equipment
and personnel can be assembled for deployment by the IC. All
responding agencies will report to the staging area where the
Liaison Officer (LO) will monitor the responding organizations
and advise the Incident Commander of the availability of
apparatus, equipment, and personnel.
C. Public warning and emergency information.
(1) General.
(a) The purpose of this subsection is to provide for timely, reliable
and effective warning to the public in the event of a hazardous
material emergency and to provide emergency information
pertaining to the need for protective actions and provide
information on the emergency situation to the media.
(b) A release of a hazardous material into the environment could
quickly bring harm to the public. The public, however, can be
protected through the implementation of protective actions. In
order for protective actions to be effective, the public must be
first warned, or alerted, that an emergency exists and,
secondly, instructed on what to do.
(2) Emergency information procedures.
§ 373-3 GLOCESTER CODE § 373-3
373:560
(a) Door-to-door route alerting.
[1] Altering and notifying the population by going door to door
is usually the first procedure initiated immediately after an
incident. Sometimes, especially in transportation
emergencies, this procedure may be the only means
available for notifying segments of the public. However,
door-to-door route alerting can be very time consuming, a
problem in rapidly developing hazardous material
incidents.
[2] Responders who do not have the proper protective
equipment must not place themselves at risk by entering a
toxic atmosphere in an attempt to alert the population.
(b) Area route alerting. In this method, motor vehicles equipped
with public address systems travel routes identified by the
Incident Commander to notify people of the emergency
situation. The Incident Commander shall determine the
appropriate protective action (sheltering in-place evacuation)
and, in the event an evacuation is necessary, the general
direction toward which evacuees should proceed.
(c) Emergency Broadcast System (EBS).
[1] Normally, EBS activation will occur for Level 3
emergencies (actual or potential) and in the event the
entire Town or adjacent communities may be affected.
[2] In most cases, it would not be necessary to activate the
statewide EBS to notify the entire state of a hazardous
material emergency. However, the statewide EBS may be
utilized to inform listeners to tune to a particular radio
station for further information. Community officials are
encouraged to and may develop an agreement with a local
radio station to broadcast local emergency information.
[3] Activation of the EBS.
[a] The Incident Commander shall request that the Civil
Defense Director or his alternate communicate with
the RI Emergency Management Agency (during
normal office hours) or the RI State Police to contact
radio station WLKW-AM to stand by for a statewide
EBS announcement.
[b] The Incident Commander shall select the appropriate
protective action, and EBS message, and
communicate this to the radio station, through an
appointed communications officer. All
communications to the radio station shall be approved
by the IC.
§ 373-3 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS RESPONSE POLICY § 373-3
373:561
[c] Communications should be kept open between the
radio station and the Incident Commander at all times
for further updates. During a serious emergency that
would require the use of EBS, updates might be
required frequently (at least every 10 minutes).
[d] Sample EBS messages have been prepared to assist
Incident Commanders. The pertinent details are to be
filled in to deal with the actual situation. See
Attachment 2 to this annex.90
D. Protective actions.
(1) General: to implement actions that would reduce or eliminate
public and emergency worker exposure to hazardous materials
release into the environment. A release of a hazardous material
into the environment could quickly bring harm to public health and
can immediately pose life-threatening dangers to emergency
workers. In-place sheltering and evacuation are protective actions
that the public could take to reduce or eliminate its exposure to a
hazardous material.
(2) Implementing public protective action. The Incident Commander
shall be responsible for ordering initial protective actions. In a
large-scale protective action, representatives of the Town Council
shall be notified. To be effective, protective actions must be started
as soon as the hazard is recognized by the Incident Commander.
Windborne chemical plumes travel the speed of the wind. For
example, if a light breeze of five miles per hour is blowing, the
plume will travel approximately five miles in one hour or one mile
in 12 minutes.
(a) In-place sheltering. Evacuation during incidents involving
chemicals is sometimes, but by no means always, necessary.
Airborne toxicants can be released and move downwind so
rapidly that there would be no time to evacuate residents. For
short-term releases, often the most prudent course of action
for the protection of the nearby residents would be to remain
inside with the doors and windows and the heating and air
conditioning systems shut off. An airborne release will
frequently move past quickly. Additionally, vulnerable
populations, such as the sick and elderly, may sustain more
injury during evacuation than they would by staying inside and
putting simple countermeasures into effect.
(b) Evacuation. Accidental releases of hazardous materials may
require the evacuation of the population. These areas can
include those directly affected by toxic fumes and those that
may be potentially affected during the course of the incident.
90.Editor's Note: Attachment 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 373-3 GLOCESTER CODE § 373-3
373:562
§ 373-4. Organization and responsibilities.
Evacuation is a complex undertaking. The considerations to
the evacuation plan include:
[1] The specific area to evacuate;
[2] Protective gear to be worn to conduct evacuation/alert;
[3] Instructions to be given to evacuees;
[4] Transportation of evacuees who are without private
transportation;
[5] Assistance to special populations;
[6] Shelter locations;
[7] Security for evacuated areas;
[8] Traffic and pedestrian control;
[9] Communication procedures.
(3) Terminating protective actions. The Incident Commander shall
authorize persons to reenter affected or threatened areas when the
RI Department of Health and/or RI Department of Environmental
Management advises that reentry is safe.
A. The Town Council President.
(1) The Town Council President serves as the spokesperson for the
Town of Glocester. The Town Council President shall inform the
public of what has happened and what the Town is doing about it.
The Town Council President is also the spokesperson on behalf of
the Town of Glocester to the Governor, congressional and
statehouse representatives.
(2) The Town Council President is responsible for making emergency
policy decisions, and has the authority to:
(a) Declare a state of emergency for the Town of Glocester;
(b) Compel the evacuation of all or part of the Town of Glocester;
(c) Suspend rules and regulations;
(d) Additional powers may be found in R.I.G.L. Chapter 30-15.
(e) If the incident is severe, the Town Council President will
summon department heads to the Town Hall, to review and
develop an appropriate plan of action.
[1] Calling and conducting media briefings at the Town Hall.
§ 373-3 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS RESPONSE POLICY § 373-4
373:563
[2] Implementing the emergency policy decisions of the Town
Council.
[3] Directing the emergency operational response of the
Town's services.
[4] Requesting state or federal assistance.
B. The Town Council.
(1) The line of succession in Glocester is as follows:
(a) Town Council President.
(b) Town Council.
(2) There is no formally prescribed role for an individual Council
member in a major hazardous material incident. However, Council
members and management must develop an understanding of what
their respective contributions may be in emergency situations.
C. The Town Solicitor.
(1) During a major emergency, the Town Solicitor shall be represented
at the Town Hall and provide guidance on formulating emergency
policy decisions.
(2) Keeping the Town's future legal interests in mind, the Glocester
Town Solicitor shall ensure that actions taken by the Town Council
are based upon adequate legal foundations.
(3) The Town Solicitor shall assist in the writing of emergency
executive orders.
D. Fire service. Upon response to a hazardous material incident, the
officer in charge shall determine the incident category and ensure that
dispatch makes the appropriate notifications.
(1) Determine or verify the type of material involved and, if possible,
the nature of the hazard. Keep up wind, up-grade, and at a safe
distance.
(2) Give the fire dispatch center a situation report describing in brief
terms what they see, what information they have been given, and
what action they are taking. The situation report should be updated
every 15 minutes or if the situation changes dramatically. The
amount of product involved or the department's ability to handle
the situation does not alter the fact that a hazardous material
incident exits. When there is any doubt about the identity of a
product it shall be considered hazardous until it has been identified
and proven to be otherwise.
§ 373-4 GLOCESTER CODE § 373-4
373:564
(3) Take appropriate action to mitigate the hazards, stabilize the
situation, rescue any injured or trapped persons (without exposing
first responders to hazardous chemicals) or evacuate the area.
(4) Ensure that the following agencies are notified: Glocester Police
Department, RI Department of Environmental Management (DEM),
and the State Emergency Response Commission (SERC); request
additional support agencies as needed.
(5) Provide Incident Commander to coordinate initial response and
take action to stabilize the situation. Set up unified command with
Police Department, EMS, DEM, and EMA. At a fixed site, the
Incident Commander will coordinate the emergency services
efforts and work jointly with the Facility Emergency Coordinator.
(6) Establish a command post, staging area, agency response area,
security perimeter, hot zone. The location of these areas will be
passed on to other responding agencies.
(7) Provide a Liaison Officer (LO) to set up the agency response area.
(8) Provide a Public Information Officer (PIO) or appoint a person to
coordinate the press and electronic media at the scene.
(9) Standby scene as long as situation exists.
(10) Conduct decontamination as required upon the advice of the state
Department of Environmental Management or Health Department.
(11) When the situation is stabilized, transfer the situation over to the
State Department Of Environmental Management for clean-up
operations. Fire Service personnel will standby and assist as
required.
E. Dispatch Center.
(1) Dispatch the appropriate department based upon the information
received.
(2) As soon as it has been determined that a hazardous material
incident exists, contact the State Spill Hotline at 274-7745 to
initiate the appropriate state response when authorized by the
Incident Commander.
(3) Take necessary steps to warn municipalities and the public in the
area affected when directed to do so by the Incident Commander.
(4) Have on hand an up-to-date evacuation plan and list of shelters and
special populations for facilities with extremely hazardous
substances.
F. Police.
§ 373-4 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS RESPONSE POLICY § 373-4
373:565
(1) In coordination with IC, establish perimeter around incident,
allowing no unauthorized persons into area.
(2) In coordination with IC, establish access coordination point for all
to enter and exit.
(3) As necessary or as direct by the IC, conduct evacuations of the area
at risk. Law enforcement officers will not be used in areas where
the atmosphere is contaminated. They do not have the protective
clothing and equipment to operate safely in these areas.
(4) Provide a person to the command post who can commit personnel
to the situation and make decisions toward mitigation of the
incident.
(5) Develop traffic flows for area and provide this information to the
Liaison Officer.
G. Planning Department (Town Planner or his designee).
(1) Serve on the LEPC.
(2) Collect information necessary for the development of site-specific
contingency plans, such as population demographics, sensitive
environmental data, and topography.
(3) Provide maps, aerial photographs, and demographics to the
Incident Commander for use in decision making during an actual
emergency.
H. Department of Public Works.
(1) Determine and evaluate the effects of the incident on public
properties and roads.
(2) When required, provide a person to represent Public Works and act
as a link to the IC during the incident.
(3) Coordinate the containment effort by damming, diking, ditching or
other means necessary to prevent spread of contamination, as
directed by the IC.
(4) Assist in the decontamination of personnel, equipment, and the
environment as required.
(5) Provide barricades for traffic control.
(6) Transport fuel for emergency vehicles at the scene of a long-term
incident.
I. Glocester Emergency Management Agency (Civil Defense).
(1) Identify special needs people within the community that might
require special assistance during an emergency.
§ 373-4 GLOCESTER CODE § 373-4
373:566
(2) Staff the emergency operations center (EOC), and ensure staffing
by other appropriate agencies.
(3) Obtain resources as requested by the Incident Commander.
(4) General situation reports for the Chief Executive Officer (Town
Council President), or state or federal authorities.
(5) Maintain close coordination with the Red Cross and/or shelter
managers regarding shelter operations; assist with the
procurement of shelter resources.
(6) Prior to an emergency, identify disabled citizens that might require
special assistance during an emergency.
(7) Ensure that the community's emergency operating plan is reviewed
and updated annually.
J. School Department.
(1) Upon request and in conjunction with the Red Cross/and/or IC,
open congregate-care shelters for evacuees when required.
(2) Establish feeding for evacuees in conjunction with congregate-care
shelters.
(3) Establish procedures within every school to rapidly implement
sheltering in place protective actions.
K. Bus Transportation Company.
(1) When requested by the Incident Commander, provide school bus
transportation for evacuees.
L. Community Emergency Coordinator. SARA Title III Section 303
requires the appointment of a Emergency Coordinator. The Community
Emergency Coordinator shall:
(1) Be notified, when available, of all hazardous material emergencies
within the Town, of a severe nature.
(2) Receive notifications from adjacent communities that a hazardous
material incident has occurred which might impact Glocester.
M. Red Cross.
(1) Open and operate shelter(s) for evacuees should residents in the
community need to be evacuated.
(2) Upon request, provide canteen service for on-scene working
personnel should incident be of long duration.
(3) Upon request, provide individual with radio to Incident
Commander to represent and act as a link to Red Cross during the
incident.
§ 373-4 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS RESPONSE POLICY § 373-4
373:567
N. RI Department of Environmental Management. A representative of this
agency is part of the unified command at hazardous material incidents.
(1) Determine degree of hazard to personnel and environment; provide
this information to the IC.
(2) Determine degree and evaluate short- and long-term hazards to
surrounding community, personnel, and the environment.
(3) When notified by the Fire Department that the incident is
stabilized, approve the clean-up, salvage, decontamination and/or
disposal operations.
(4) Ensure that the local, state, and federal law, codes, and regulations
have been complied with prior to and during the incident.
(5) Determine and evaluate the airborne hazards caused by the
incident.
O. RI Emergency Management Agency.
(1) Provide technical expertise.
(2) Provide wind speed and direction to the Incident Commander.
(3) Operate the state's mobile hazardous material response vehicle;
provide communications and coordination among adjacent
jurisdictions.
(4) Provide evacuation recommendations based upon computer air
modeling programs and chemical reference library.
(5) Coordinate response from other state and federal agencies, such as
the State Police, National Weather Service, FEMA, EPA.
(6) Request assistance from the Federal Regional Response Team
when incident exceeds capabilities of state and local resources.
(7) The RI EMA can provide an extensive library of technical
information from on-board books and computer databases, cellular
computer modem linkages, and receipt of cellular fax from
manufacturers.
P. Industry.
(1) Facilities storing any of the 360 extremely hazardous substances
above the threshold planning quantity must name an employee as a
"facility emergency coordinator."
(2) The facility emergency coordinator must participate in the
community's planning process.
(3) Under Sections 311 and 312 of SARA Title III, facilities must submit
chemical inventory information annually, to the State and Local
Emergency Planning Committees, and the local Fire Department.
§ 373-4 GLOCESTER CODE § 373-4
373:568
§ 373-5. Administration and logistics.
Logistics is the function that acquires and maintains the necessary
resources to resources to support the overall incident management. The
Town of Glocester should use those resources under its control prior to
accessing outside supplies. State agencies will provide logistical support to
responding agencies within the capabilities of their resources. For major
incidents, the RI EMA may activate the state's disaster response mechanism
(i.e., the state emergency operations center) to address resource shortfalls.
§ 373-6. Authorities and references.
(4) Facilities that do not have any extremely hazardous substance on
site as defined by SARA Title III, but may present a risk to the
community if there is a release of some other hazardous material,
are requested to participate in the community planning process.
(5) A facility that is not involved in an incident may, at the request of
state or local government, provide assistance or advice in
mitigating the effects of an actual or threatened release of a
hazardous material (i.e., equipment or technical knowledge). The
hazardous waste cleanup good Samaritan act (R.I.G.L. § 23-19.8)
provides that any person or facility that provides such assistance
shall not be subject to civil liabilities or penalties of any type.
Q. Wastewater (Glocester Public Works Department).
(1) Determine and evaluate the effect the incident will have on sewer
and drainage systems and best methods to prevent contamination
or damage to sewer systems.
(2) Take necessary steps to ensure that sewer and drainage systems
are not contaminated and, if contamination occurs, prevent
contamination or damage to sewer systems.
(3) Take necessary steps to ensure that drainage systems are not
contaminated and, if contamination occurs, to oversee
decontamination and cleanup.
(4) Assist in evaluation of potential impact on public health and safety
of any sewer or storm system.
(5) Serve as a member of the Local Emergency Planning Committee.
(6) Ensure that local laws, codes, and regulations with regard to
hazardous materials and environment have been complied with
prior to and during an incident.
A. Authorities.
(1) As outlined in the Basic Plan of the EOP;
§ 373-4 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS RESPONSE POLICY § 373-6
373:569
Chapter 387
PUBLIC RECORDS ACCESS
§ 387-1. Policy and procedure.
§ 387-2. Fees.
(2) Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986, SARA
Title III;
(3) Executive Order Number 87-6.1, Governor, State of Rhode Island.
B. References.
(1) NRT-1. National Response Team Hazardous Materials Emergency
Planning Guide, March 1987.
A. The Town of Glocester is an advocate for open government and has
implemented a procedure per the Rhode Island Attorney General's
office guidelines. (R.I.G.L. 2012, amendments included)
B. Unless you are seeking prepared documents or documents readily
available at the time of request, you will be asked to complete a public
records request form, or you may submit your request in writing. You
are not required to provide identification or the reason you seek the
information.
C. All public records request forms or written requests shall be received
and time-stamped in the office of the Public Records Officer. The Public
Records Officer will then forward a copy of this request form to the
appropriate department for action.
D. The Rhode Island Access to Public Records Act (which can be found at
http://www.riag.ri.gov) allows a public body 10 business days to
respond to the request, which can be extended an additional 20
business days for "good cause."
E. If the individual making the request wants only to view the records, the
department director will make an appointment for the citizen to come
to his/her office during normal business hours within the time frame
prescribed.
F. If you feel that you have been denied access to public records, you
should contact the Public Records Officer for further assistance. If you
are not satisfied with the results, you should contact the Rhode Island
Attorney General at the above website or at his/her office.
A. Subject to the provisions of R.I.G.L. § 38-2-3, the cost per copied page of
written documents provided to the public shall not exceed $0.15 per
page for documents copyable on common business or legal-size paper. A
§ 373-6 GLOCESTER CODE § 387-2
373:570
Chapter 392
RULES OF PROCEDURE FOR BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, commissions and committees — See
Part 2 of this Code.
§ 392-1. Purpose.
The Town of Glocester adopts these rules of procedure to:
§ 392-2. Office and member duties.
public body may not charge more than the reasonable actual cost for
providing electronic records.
B. A reasonable charge may be made for the search or retrieval of
documents. Hourly costs for a search and retrieval shall not exceed $15
per hour, and no costs shall be charged for the first hour of a search or
retrieval.
C. A public body shall provide an estimate of the costs of a request for
documents prior to providing copies, upon request.
A. Establish procedures for the execution of the responsibilities of various
Town boards, commissions and committees, hereinafter referred to as
"boards," as established and delegated by the Glocester Town Council;
B. Facilitate processing and review of applicable permits, licenses,
applications, certifications and other documents as may be required by
the various Town boards;
C. Promote a better understanding of decisions and opinions issued by the
various Town boards;
D. Provide a mechanism for reviewing permits, licenses, applications,
certificates and other documents with respect to maintaining the
objectives of the current Comprehensive Community Plan, as updated
and amended, and other goals and objectives ordained by the Town
Council.
A. Members of all various Town boards shall be appointed as provided for
in the Town ordinance.
B. The Chairperson of the Town board shall:
(1) Preside at all meetings, hearings and workshops of the body of
which she/he is Chairperson, ensuring that all meetings are held in
§ 387-2 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS RESPONSE POLICY § 392-2
373:571
an orderly, efficient fashion, and that all interested parties have the
opportunity to be heard;
(2) Decide all points of order and questions of procedure, subject to
these rules, unless a majority of the members in session directs
otherwise;
(3) Appoint any subcommittees, from the membership of his or her
own board, necessary to investigate any matter before the board;
(4) Be responsible for the development of a proposed budget for the
board, submitted in accordance with procedures developed by the
budget committee and approved by the Town Council;
(5) Be responsible for the preparation of an annual report of the
activities of the board during the preceding calendar year,
including, but not limited to, a record or catalogue of all decisions
and opinions issued by the board regarding the granting or denial
of all applications made, proposed and adopted rules of procedure
and standards of review, the effect of the year's activities in the
Town, the attendance of members, any training sessions attended
by any of the membership, financial statements, and any other
pertinent data. This report shall be distributed to the Town Council
for its review no later than March 1, and shall be placed on file in
the Town Clerk's office for public viewing within a reasonable time
period thereafter;
(6) In the event of the absence of the Recording Clerk, arrange for a
substitute to perform duties under Subsection E; and
(7) Conduct all meetings, hearings and workshops in accordance with
Rhode Island Open Meetings Laws.
(8) No Chairman of a board that accepts applications for
consideration, per state law or the Glocester Code of Ordinances,
shall serve as Chairman of any other Town board or commission.
[Added 5-19-2011, effective 6-22-2011]
C. Vice-Chairperson. The Vice-Chairperson shall serve as the Chairperson
of the Town board in the absence of the Chairperson. At such times, the
Vice-Chairperson shall have the same powers and duties as the
Chairperson.
D. Secretary (optional). Duties as determined by the board.
E. Recording Clerk (appointed by the Town Council). The Recording Clerk
shall:
(1) Prepare, under the direction of the Chairperson, the recording of
written opinions, approvals, disapprovals, findings and conditions
for each application, preapplications or consultations;
§ 392-2 GLOCESTER CODE § 392-2
373:572
§ 392-3. Meetings.
(2) Ensure that the appropriate Town board(s) and/or staff are notified
in a timely manner of all opinions, approvals, disapprovals, findings
and conditions for applications, preapplications and consultations;
(3) Ensure that applicants receive written notification in advance of
meeting dates and of written opinions, approvals, disapprovals,
findings and conditions for applications, preapplications and
consultations;
(4) Prepare meeting agendas in consultation with the Chairperson and
appropriate staff, and ensure that the public notice of each meeting
is properly advertised and posted in accordance with RI Open
Meetings Laws;
(5) Prepare and maintain records of meetings, hearings, workshops
and reviews; and
(6) Ensure, as far as reasonably possible, that records are readily
available for public viewing, in accordance with RI Open Meetings
Laws.
F. Conflict of interest. No member shall take part in any process, hearing,
opinion or decision of any application, preapplication or consultation in
which the member has or appears to have a personal, professional or
financial interest. In a situation where a conflict of interest arises, it
shall be the responsibility of that member having the conflict of interest
to disclose such conflict for the record. That member shall withdraw
from proceedings during any and all discussion of the item presenting
the conflict.
G. Attendance at meetings. If any member fails to attend three consecutive
duly scheduled meetings of the board, or is absent from one-half or
more of such meetings in a calendar year, the Chairperson shall:
(1) Request that the Town Council declare the position vacant; and
(2) Request that the Town Council act to fill the position at the next
Town Council meeting.
A. Notification and cancellation.
(1) All various Town boards shall establish a schedule of regular
meetings for the entire calendar year following the month in which
annual election of officers occurs. Annually, each board shall post
the schedule of regular meetings in Town Hall, in accordance with
RI Open Meetings Laws. The agenda of each meeting of the board
shall be posted in the Town Hall at least 48 hours prior to such
meeting. The agenda shall contain, for each item, the owner's and
applicant's names, AP and lot number(s), citation of the ordinance
and a brief description of what the board is being asked to act upon
§ 392-2 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS RESPONSE POLICY § 392-3
373:573
or discuss. When the board has no matters pending, the
Chairperson may cancel a regularly scheduled meeting by notifying
all members not less than 48 hours prior to the time set for the
meeting and shall post a notice of cancellation in the Town Hall at
least 48 hours in advance of the time of the meeting.
(2) The Chairperson may call a special meeting of the board at any
time, provided that a regular quorum of the members so consent,
not more than two weeks, nor less than one week prior to the time
of such meeting. Special meetings of the board shall be posted in
the same manner as regularly scheduled meetings of the board.
(3) Agendas shall be mailed to applicants appearing on such agendas
at least seven days prior to the time of such meeting. The
Recording Clerk shall mail the agendas as a courtesy and to ensure
that applicants are notified in writing of such meetings at which
their attendance (or that of their representative) is required. The
agenda shall indicate that the order of business may be altered by a
majority vote of the board.
B. Voting. For the purposes of decision-making, each member of the board
shall have one vote. A board member may (and must) abstain from a
vote in the case of a conflict of interest.
C. Quorum. An affirmative vote of a simple majority of the board members
shall be required to make any decision or formally conduct any
business, except where otherwise specified by law. In the event that
there are not sufficient members present to make decisions at a
meeting, any member present shall announce such to the public
audience and so inform the audience that a special meeting will be
called to hear the items on the agenda. No new items will be added to
the agenda for the special meeting. Such meetings will be advertised
and conducted in accordance with the provisions of Subsection A of this
section.
D. Order of business. The board shall hold all meetings open to the general
public. Regular and special meetings of the board shall utilize the
following order of business as appropriate:
(1) Call to order by the Chairperson;
(2) Roll call, or some means of introduction of members in attendance;
(3) Reading, by request of any member, and amendment, if necessary,
and acceptance of the minutes of the previous meeting(s);
(4) Committee or relevant reports (other than project review);
(5) Old business, including continued applications;
(6) New business, including new formal applications and petitions;
(7) Informal or preapplication consultations;
§ 392-3 GLOCESTER CODE § 392-3
373:574
(8) Open forum;
(9) Adjournment;
E. Records.
(1) The board shall keep written records of its meetings, deliberations
and decisions. The Recording Clerk of the body shall have the
primary responsibility for keeping the records. The board may also
require a verbatim, recorded or stenographic record.
(2) The board shall maintain written minutes available for public
inspection in Town Hall, in accordance with RI Open Meetings
Laws. Minutes shall show the vote of each member on each
question, and shall indicate, as well, abstentions and absences. At a
minimum, minutes shall also contain:
(a) Listing of members present and absent;
(b) Listing of others present, specifically, staff, Town Solicitor,
public agency staff, applicants and/or their representatives;
(c) Reading and approval of minutes of the previous meeting(s);
(d) Summary of the agenda items, including a general description
of relevant features/considerations;
(e) Summary of arguments and materials presented for each item,
including supporting documents, objections and corrections;
(f) Summary of deliberations for each application, including a
detailed reference to the standards or review criteria used;
(g) Findings of fact made, conclusions reached, and actions taken
or motions made on each application or item of consideration.
(3) The board shall forward a written summary of its deliberations,
opinions, motions and actions to the applicant, the Building Official,
Zoning Enforcement Officer, the Town Planner, and other
applicable boards, and shall enter necessary information into the
land evidence books, within 14 days following the meeting at which
such deliberations were made, unless specifically required earlier
to meet the requirements for meetings, hearings or workshops of
other boards or the Town Council.
(4) Unofficial minutes shall be available within 35 days of that meeting
or at the next regularly scheduled meeting, whichever is earlier,
unless the board, by majority vote, extends the time period for the
filing of minutes and publicly states the reasons, in accordance with
the Rhode Island Open Meetings Laws.
F. Order of business for formal applications.
§ 392-3 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS RESPONSE POLICY § 392-3
373:575
(1) The Town board's consideration of each formal application shall
utilize the following order of business:
(a) Chairperson's preliminary statement concerning the
application, as read from the application form. In this
statement, the Chairperson shall describe any special features
to be considered;
(b) Applicant's presentation of the project, arguments and
material in support of the application. Applicant shall begin by
stating his/her name and address, address of the land in
question, and shall introduce any engineer, attorney or other
representative present. This presentation shall be made to the
board and public audience. Every effort shall be made to
present the material in such a way that both the board and the
public audience may hear, see and understand the verbal and
graphic description of the proposed application and the impact
of that application on the community;
(c) Staff reports and comments, as applicable;
(d) Comments from interested parties, abutters, etc.;
(e) Public or private groups' comments or recommendations
concerning the application;
(f) Town board members' questions of the application, staff or
review subcommittee (if applicable) concerning the application
may be made throughout the process;
(2) The Chairperson's summary of the application, arguments and
materials presented, including findings of fact, objections and
corrections of any party;
(3) The board's deliberations over a motion to grant an application
shall be based upon relevant goals and objectives of the
Comprehensive Community Plan, Town ordinances and other
standards of review, including, but not limited to, promoting the
public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the Town of
Glocester. Motions to grant an application shall include a specific
reference to the standards of review under which the proposal has
been judged, and may establish a reasonable time period for
project completion.
G. Order of business, informal, for preapplication consultations or
conceptual reviews. The board shall use the following order of business
when considering information or preapplication consultations or
conceptual reviews:
(1) The same order of business as in reviewing formal applications,
with the exception that no motions are made on informal
applications;
§ 392-3 GLOCESTER CODE § 392-3
373:576
§ 392-4. Applicability.
These rules shall apply to all Town boards, notwithstanding binding state
legislation.
Chapter 399
SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY
§ 399-1. Policy statement; administration.
§ 399-2. Scope.
This policy applies to all employees, elected officials, and appointees of the
Town of Glocester.
§ 399-3. Responsibility for administration and enforcement.
(2) The applicant shall be given a clear understanding of the board's
consideration of the appropriateness of the proposal, whether or
not the proposal meets the board's standards of review that will be
employed and any suggestions or modifications that the board feels
appropriate.
A. It is the policy of the Town of Glocester to maintain a working
environment that is entirely free of sexual harassment in any form.
Supervisors, managers and all other employees, elected officials and
appointees are absolutely prohibited from engaging in sexual
harassment of Town of Glocester employees, elected officials,
appointees, visitors, and members of the general public. Sexual
harassment is unlawful. Because sexual harassment can be destructive
to morale as well as to the Town of Glocester's reputation and because
it can be extremely costly to the Town of Glocester in terms of lost
productivity, lost employees, and out-of-pocket expense, no act of sexual
harassment can serve the Town of Glocester or be incidental to any
service on account of which any employee has been employed. Thus,
any act or pattern of sexual harassment by any employee, elected
official or appointee of the Town of Glocester is beyond the scope of his
or her authority as an employee, agent, supervisor or servant of the
Town of Glocester, which may include the termination of employment or
appointment. Such conduct will subject the employee or appointee to
discipline up to termination of employment or appointment.
B. The Town of Glocester will administer all provisions of this policy
without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, age,
national origin, handicap, Vietnam-era veteran status, or disabled
veteran status.
A. The Glocester Town Council has overall responsibility for this policy.
§ 392-3 SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY § 399-3
399:577
§ 399-4. Definition and examples of sexual harassment.
B. The Finance/Personnel Director is responsible for the implementation
and daily administration of this policy.
C. Supervisory employees at all levels are responsible for implementing
and enforcing this policy, and for assisting in investigating and
processing complaints with the utmost priority and consideration for
the rights of all concerned.
D. Every employee, elected official, and appointee is responsible for
reporting to his/her supervisor or the Finance/Personnel Director or, if
appropriate, the Town Council, any incident of sexual harassment that
he/she witnesses or learns of. The Town of Glocester will maintain the
highest degree of confidentiality possible with respect to such reports,
consistent with its obligation to investigate thoroughly all such reports.
A. Unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other
verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature constitute sexual
harassment when:
(1) Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a
term or condition of an individual's employment or appointment;
(2) Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used
as the basis for employment or appointment decisions affecting
such individual;
(3) Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering
with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating,
hostile, or offensive working environment.
B. Some examples of conduct towards employees, elected officials, or
appointees prohibited by this policy include:
(1) Physical assaults of a sexual nature, such as:
(a) Assault, rape, sexual battery, molestation or threats or
attempts to commit these acts; or
(b) Unwelcome intentional physical conduct, or threats of such
conduct, which is sexual in nature, such as touching, pinching,
patting, grabbing, brushing against another person's body, or
poking another person's body.
(2) Unwanted sexual advances, propositions or other sexual
comments, such as:
(a) Sexually oriented gestures, noises, remarks, jokes or
comments about a person's sexuality or sexual experience;
§ 399-3 GLOCESTER CODE § 399-4
399:578
§ 399-5. Issuance and circulation of policy statement.
§ 399-6. Employee report and investigation procedure.
(b) Giving rewards or promises of rewards for submitting to sexual
conduct, or reprisals or threats of reprisal for refusal to submit
to sexual conduct;
(3) Sexual or discriminating displays in the workplace such as:
(a) Displaying or otherwise publicizing in the work environment
materials that are sexually revealing, suggestive, demeaning
or pornographic; or
(b) Displaying signs or other materials purporting to segregate an
employee, elected official, or appointee by sex in any area of
the workplace (other than restrooms and similar semi-private
lockers/changing rooms).
(4) Retaliation against an employee, elected official, or appointee for
making a complaint under this policy or for assisting or cooperating
in an investigation of a complaint under this policy;
(5) Failure to cooperate fully with investigation of harassment
complaints.
A. The Finance/Personnel Director is responsible for publicizing this policy
to all employees, elected officials, and appointees by inclusion in the
Town of Glocester's Employee Handbook.
B. The Finance/Personnel Director or his/her designee is responsible for
developing a bulletin board notice to all employees, elected officials,
and appointees for posting at the time that this policy is adopted by the
Town of Glocester. The notice will emphasize the importance of the
policy to the Town of Glocester, the obligation of every employee,
elected official, or appointee to report any incident of sexual
harassment, the availability of supervisors and administrative staff to
receive such reports and the confidentiality with which these reports
will be treated.
C. A copy of the policy will be given to all current employees, elected
officials, and appointees, and new employees, elected officials, and
appointees will be given a copy upon hire or commencement of duties.
Employees, elected officials, and appointees will provide written
acknowledgment that they have received the policy and understand its
terms.
A. Employees, elected officials, and appointees may report sexual
harassment to any supervisor or manager, or directly to the Finance/
Personnel Director, 1145 Putnam Pike, Chepachet, RI 02814,
401-568-3342, or, if the Finance/Personnel Director is involved in the
§ 399-4 SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY § 399-6
399:579
§ 399-7. Range of consequences.
§ 399-8. Enforcement agencies.
allegation of sexual harassment, to the Glocester Town Council, 1145
Putnam Pike, Chepachet, RI 02814, 401-568-1102.
B. The supervisor or manager will promptly inform either the Finance/
Personnel Director or, if the Finance/Personnel Director is involved in
the allegation of sexual harassment, the Glocester Town Council of any
report of sexual harassment.
C. The Finance/Personnel Director or the Glocester Town Council or his/
her/their designee will thoroughly investigate the report of sexual
harassment as promptly as possible, keeping the matter as confidential
as is practicable. After investigation, he/she/they will take appropriate
action in response to a proven instance of sexual harassment and the
complaining employee, elected official, or appointee will be notified of
the action taken. If, after investigation, the Finance/Personnel Director
or the Glocester Town Council is unable to conclude that any act of
sexual harassment has occurred, he/she/they will meet with the
complaining employee(s), elected official(s), appointee(s) and with the
complained-against employee(s), elected official(s), or appointee(s)
individually to explain both the results of the investigation and the Town
of Glocester's policy on sexual harassment.
D. It is the responsibility of every employee, elected official or appointee to
cooperate fully with any investigation under this policy.
A. Sexual harassment.
(1) Employees and appointees are subject to discipline, up to and
including discharge, for any act of sexual harassment which is
proven to the satisfaction of the Town of Glocester.
(2) The appropriate measure of discipline will be determined on the
basis of the Town of Glocester's assessment of the nature and
severity of the misconduct, along with any other relevant factors.
(3) For any act of sexual harassment or retaliation by an elected official
the Council may take such remedial and other action as it considers
appropriate, and within the scope of its authority. Such action may
include referral of charges of sexual harassment to other agencies.
B. Retaliation. It is unlawful to retaliate in any way against an individual
who has complained of sexual harassment or cooperated in an
investigation of a complaint of sexual harassment. An employee or
appointee may be disciplined, up to and including discharge, for any
such act of retaliation. The appropriate measure of discipline will be
determined on the basis of the Town of Glocester's assessment of the
nature and extent of the retaliation and any other relevant factors
brought to the attention of the Town of Glocester.
§ 399-6 GLOCESTER CODE § 399-8
399:580
Chapter 406
TOWN HALL, POLICY FOR USE OF
§ 406-1. Conditions for use by outside groups.
A. State and federal employment discrimination agencies are: the Rhode
Island Commission for Human Rights, which may be contacted at 10
Abbott Park Place, Providence, RI 02903; and the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, which may be contacted at the Boston Area
Office, One Congress Street, Suite 1001, 10th Floor, Boston, MA 02114.
B. State and federal agencies generally expect that employees, elected
officials, and appointees will have first recourse to the procedures
under an employer's sexual harassment policy in order to put a stop to
sexual harassment or retaliation. It is the purpose of this policy that
normally no employee, elected official, or appointee should ever have to
go to an outside agency in order to resolve any situation involving
sexual harassment.
A. The Town Hall Building is a general purpose, public building used to
conduct the usual and regular business of the Town of Glocester as
directed and ordered by the administrative body of the Town of
Glocester, the Town Council.
B. Use by other groups than Town departments, boards and commissions
and other officially recognized governmental bodies is prohibited
except as follows. The Town Council may grant permission if the
following stipulations are met:
(1) The group is a nonprofit, chartered group with community
acceptance and applies at least one month in advance of the event.
(2) The purpose of the use is related to the common welfare of the
Town and/or its citizens and so stated in writing.
(3) Use is limited to the common areas; i.e., hallways, Council
Chamber, bathrooms and conference room.
(4) No food and or beverage may be sold, served, or consumed on the
premises during the event.
(5) The group pays for an on-duty custodian and clean-up costs.
(6) The Town Hall is a "smoke free" facility.
(7) If the event is held during Town Hall business hours, the event must
not prevent the use of the Town Hall for citizens' business.
(8) Security/Liability insurance may be required.
(9) The Town Council may impose such additional conditions as it may
deem appropriate.
§ 399-8 TOWN HALL, POLICY FOR USE OF § 406-1
406:581
Appendix
Chapter A420
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. A420, Wastewater Management District Rules and
Regulations, adopted 2-11-2004, was repealed 12-15-2011, effective
12-15-2011.]
Chapter A423
HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION RULES AND
REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning violations and penalties — See Ch.
350, § 350-7.
Historic district zoning — See Ch. 350, Art.
IX.
§ 406-1 GLOCESTER CODE § 406-1
406:582
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ A423-1. Authority.
These rules and regulations are adopted by the Glocester Historic District
Commission ("HDC") in fulfillment of the requirements of Section 5C 2a of
the Historic District Zoning Ordinance of Glocester, Rhode Island.91
§ A423-2. Purpose.
The purpose of these rules and regulations is to establish procedures for
processing applications for certificates of appropriateness or
recommendations of compatibility and for the internal management of the
HDC.
§ A423-3. General rules.
The HDC shall be governed by the terms of R.I.G.L. § 45-24.1, Historical
Area Zoning and by the Historic District Zoning Ordinance of the Town of
Glocester.92
§ A423-4. Jurisdiction.
Within any historic district in the Town of Glocester as designated in
accordance with Chapter 350, Zoning, and shown on the Historic District
Designation Map the HDC shall have the authority to:
A. Regulate the construction, alteration, repair, removal or demolition of a
pre-1900 structure or its appurtenances.
B. Provide recommendations concerning the construction, alteration,
repair, removal or replacement of any other structure or its
appurtenances.
91.Editor's Note: See Ch. 350, Zoning, § 350-70C(2)(a).
92.Editor's Note: See Ch. 350, Zoning, Art. IX.
§ A423-1 TOWN HALL, POLICY FOR USE OF § A423-4
406:583

ARTICLE II
Organization
§ A423-5. Membership.
The HDC shall be constituted in accordance with the Glocester Historic
District Zoning Ordinance and R.I.G.L. § 45-24.1-3.
§ A423-6. Records.
The Secretary shall have the responsibility of keeping the HDC's records.
The HDC may also require verbatim recorded or stenographic records.
A. Chairman.
(1) A Chairman shall be elected by the HDC from its membership. The
Chairman shall preside over all HDC meetings and shall decide all
points of order and procedure unless directed otherwise by a
majority of the HDC in session at the time. The Chairman shall have
the right to vote.
(2) The Chairman shall appoint any committees found necessary to
investigate any matter before the HDC.
(3) The Chairman shall review items proposed for each meeting and
determine the agenda for each meeting.
B. Vice-Chairman. The Vice-Chairman shall, in the absence or disability of
the Chairman, perform the duties of the Chairman.
C. Secretary.
(1) The Secretary shall ensure that public notice of each HDC meeting
is properly posted.
(2) The Secretary shall ensure that applicants receive written
notification in advance of pertinent meeting dates and shall provide
written notification of findings, approvals, and disapprovals for
applications for certificates of appropriateness or
recommendations of compatibility.
(3) The Secretary shall keep a record of all resolutions, proceedings,
findings of fact, decisions and actions.
(4) The Secretary shall ensure that the Building Official and any other
appropriate official or agency of the Town is notified of the issuance
of a certificate of appropriateness or a recommendation of
compatibility.
A. All records of the HDC shall be on file for public view at the office of the
Glocester Town Clerk. A fee may be charged for copies of any records.
§ A423-5 TOWN HALL, POLICY FOR USE OF § A423-6
406:585
§ A423-7. Legal counsel.
The Town Solicitor's office shall be requested by the HDC to assist in all
legal matters.
B. Minutes. Minutes of HDC meetings shall show the vote of each member
present on each question, including abstentions. Minutes shall also
contain:
(1) A listing of HDC members present and absent;
(2) A listing of others in attendance whose presence may be significant
to the proceedings, including but not limited to the Building
Official, Town Solicitor, members of any public body and applicants
and/or representatives;
(3) Approval of the minutes of the previous meeting;
(4) Summary of applications for certificates of appropriateness,
recommendations of compatibility and the preservation issues
presented, including a description of the structures or
appurtenances which will be affected;
(5) Summary of arguments and materials presented in connection with
each application, including supporting documents, objections and
corrections;
(6) Summary of HDC deliberations for applications for a certificate of
appropriateness or recommendations of compatibility, including
references to the HDC standards and guidelines used; and
(7) Findings of fact, conclusions reached, and actions taken on
applications or other general business before the HDC.
§ A423-6 GLOCESTER CODE § A423-7
406:586
ARTICLE III
Meetings
§ A423-8. Regular meetings.
The HDC shall establish a schedule of regular meetings at the beginning of
each calendar year and shall post this schedule in the Town Clerk's office
and the Harmony Library. Supplemental written public notice of any regular
meeting shall be given no less than 48 hours before the date.
§ A423-9. Emergency meetings.
An emergency meeting may be held upon an affirmative vote of the majority
of the members of the HDC. The meeting notice and agenda shall be posted
as soon as practicable.
§ A423-10. Cancellation of meetings.
Regular meetings may be cancelled with the approval of a majority of HDC
members. Notice of cancellations shall be given to all members and all
applicants scheduled for the meeting not less than 24 hours prior to the
time set for the meeting and posted as soon as practicable.
§ A423-11. Attendance.
The HDC shall advise the Town Council President of any member of the
HDC who is absent without proper excuse more than five consecutive
regular meetings. The HDC shall request that the position be declared
vacant and that a new member be appointed. Absences due to illness or
emergency may be recognized as excused absences. The Chairman shall
notify a member when he/she is approaching the maximum number of
unexcused absences.
§ A423-12. Conduct of meetings.
All meetings shall be open to the public. The order of business at regular
meetings shall include:
A. Call to order.
B. Roll call.
C. Approval of the minutes of previous meetings.
D. Committee reports.
E. Old business.
F. New business.
G. Adjournment.
§ A423-8 TOWN HALL, POLICY FOR USE OF § A423-13
406:587
§ A423-13. Executive session.
For purposes authorized by the Open Meeting Law, the HDC may, on a
motion duly adopted and for reasons stated on the record, adjourn to
Executive Session.
§ A423-13 GLOCESTER CODE § A423-13
406:588
ARTICLE IV
Procedures
§ A423-14. Quorum; vote required for action.
Five members of the HDC shall constitute a quorum and the concurring
vote of a majority, but not less than four, of the members present shall be
necessary for either approval or rejection of any plans before the HDC for
review and for establishing or amending HDC rules and regulations and
standards of review.
§ A423-15. Conflicts of interest.
No HDC member shall take part in the consideration or determination
of any case for a certificate of appropriateness or recommendation of
compatibility in which he/she is a party or has a financial interest except
as noted in the Rhode Island Ethics Commission Advisory Number 8, dated
November 30, 1989. It shall be the responsibility of the HDC member
having a potential conflict of interest to disclose such conflict to the HDC
and to recuse himself/herself from participation in the discussion or the
vote. Minutes shall state that the member has recused himself/herself from
consideration of the matter.
§ A423-16. Conduct of members.
Members of the HDC shall be discouraged from expressing individual
opinions concerning any application with any persons prior to the
determination of that application, except in accordance with these rules.
§ A423-17. Site visits.
The HDC shall be available to meet on site with the applicant or his/her
representatives at any time in the design process in order to advise them
informally concerning the HDC's procedures and guidelines, the nature
of the area where the proposed construction is to take place, and other
relevant factors. The applicant shall agree, by signing the application, to
allow the HDC, as a group or individually, to make site visits from time to
time as deemed necessary.
§ A423-18. Advisory opinions.
Other than at a regular or emergency meeting, the HDC shall refrain from
any indication of approval or disapproval of applications but shall not,
for that reason, be barred from a reasonable discussion of the applicant's
proposals. No advice or opinion given, or reported as having been given, by
any member of the HDC at a preapplication conference, at a site visit, or at
an informal meeting shall be in any way official or binding upon the HDC.
Only the official vote of the HDC shall be binding.
§ A423-14 TOWN HALL, POLICY FOR USE OF § A423-18
406:589

ARTICLE V
Applications for Certificate of Appropriateness or Recommendation
of Compatibility
§ A423-19. Application for certificate of appropriateness.
§ A423-20. Application for recommendation of compatibility.
An application for a recommendation of compatibility is required for any
change necessitating a building permit which affects the exterior
appearance of any other structure or its appurtenances located in an
historic district, including construction, alteration, repair, removal or
demolition. Appurtenances are features other than primary or secondary
structures, including but not limited to paving, doors, windows, signs,
materials, decorative accessories, fences, and landscape features.
§ A423-21. Filing of applications.
Applications for certificates of appropriateness or recommendations of
compatibility must be filed in person or by certified mail to the Building
Official. Applications must be signed by the property owner and applicant.
Applications must be accompanied by all documentation reasonably
necessary to evaluate the proposal, including photographs, drawings, plans,
or other information as requested by the HDC or Building Official. Three
sets of all application documents, including the application form and all
plans and other data, must be filed.
§ A423-22. Acceptance of applications.
Applications shall be reviewed for completeness by the Building Official.
Incomplete applications shall be returned to the applicant by the Building
Official within seven working days of receipt. Complete applications,
together with all maps, plans and other data, shall be accepted by the
Building Official and forwarded to the HDC. Acceptance of an application
does not preclude the HDC from requesting additional information which it
determines to be necessary.
A. An application for a certificate of appropriateness is required for any
change necessitating a building permit which affects the exterior
appearance of a pre-1900 structure or its appurtenances located in an
historic district, including construction, alteration, repair, removal or
demolition. Appurtenances are features other than primary or
secondary structures which contribute to the exterior historic
appearance of a property, including but not limited to paving, doors,
windows, signs, material, decorative accessories, fences, and historic
landscape features.
B. An applicant seeking a certificate of appropriateness may request a
preapplication conceptual conference with the HDC.
§ A423-19 TOWN HALL, POLICY FOR USE OF § A423-22
406:591

ARTICLE VI
Action on Applications
§ A423-23. Review criteria.
In reviewing applications for certificates of appropriateness or
recommendations of compatibility the HDC shall use the criteria set forth
in R.I.G.L. § 45-24.1 et seq. and Chapter 350, Zoning. In addition, the
HDC may apply such other design standards and guidelines as it deems
necessary.
§ A423-24. Consideration of applications.
Complete applications shall be considered by the HDC within 30 days after
acceptance. The order of business for consideration of applications for
certificates of appropriateness or recommendations of compatibility shall be
determined by the Chairman and shall include the following:
§ A423-25. Determinations.
A. A preliminary statement by the HDC concerning the application.
B. A presentation by the applicant or designated agent, including
arguments and material in support of the application.
C. Comments by any official, commission, agency of the Town of Glocester,
state agency, or any historical, preservation or neighborhood
organization.
D. Comments and/or questions from other interested parties.
E. Comments and/or questions from HDC members.
F. A summary of the application, including arguments and material
presented.
G. After closing the hearing to public comment, HDC shall deliberate
regarding a certificate of appropriateness or recommendation of
compatibility based upon evidence submitted; and the impact of the
project on the structure(s) and appurtenances.
H. Findings of fact and vote on applications for certificates of
appropriateness or recommendations of compatibility. Such vote may
be tabled for further consideration and subsequent action.
A. An application for a certificate of appropriateness may be approved,
denied, or approved with conditions. Motions to approve or deny a
certificate of appropriateness shall include findings of fact and a
specific reference to the criteria under which the proposal has been
judged.
B. An application for a recommendation of compatibility may be approved
or not approved as submitted. If the latter, the HDC shall make
§ A423-23 TOWN HALL, POLICY FOR USE OF § A423-25
406:593
§ A423-26. Failure to act.
§ A423-27. Modifications to application.
A pending application for a certificate of appropriateness may be modified
by a written request from the applicant to the HDC. Such request shall
include a description of the proposed change and additional and/or revised
documentation. If an application is modified, it shall be considered a new
application for a certificate of appropriateness.
§ A423-28. Modifications to certificate of appropriateness.
Changes to a project after a certificate of appropriateness has been issued
shall require a new application for a certificate of appropriateness. The new
application shall be submitted before construction of the changes begins,
recommendations specifically stating ways in which the plans may be
made more compatible with any surrounding aspects of the district
which the HDC has determined to be historically or architecturally
significant. Recommendations of compatibility are not binding.
C. Resolutions. All decisions of the HDC regarding issuance of a certificate
of appropriateness or a recommendation of compatibility shall be in
writing. The HDC shall state the reasons and basis for each decision in
the form of a resolution.
D. Issuance of a certificate of appropriateness. Upon granting a certificate
of appropriateness, the HDC shall:
(1) Stamp three sets of all application documents, including the
application form and all plans and other data. The stamped
documents shall indicate the issue date and be signed by the HDC
Chairman.
(2) Return two sets of stamped, dated and signed documents to the
applicant with a copy of the resolution. It is the responsibility of the
applicant to file one set of these documents and a copy of the
resolution with the Building Official.
(3) Retain one set of stamped and signed documents for the HDC files
at the office of the Building Official.
A. Automatic approval. The failure of the HDC to act within 45 days from
the date of acceptance of a completed application for a certificate of
appropriateness shall be deemed to constitute approval.
B. Extensions. Within this forty-five-day period the HDC may make written
findings of fact stating that the application for a certificate of
appropriateness requires further time for study and/or to obtain
additional information. In such case the HDC shall have a period of up
to 90 days from the date of acceptance of a completed application
within which to act on such application.
§ A423-25 GLOCESTER CODE § A423-28
406:594
unless the HDC determines at a new preapplication conference that a full
application is not required. Any changes not so approved shall be deemed a
violation.
§ A423-29. Expiration of certificate of appropriateness.
Any certificate of appropriateness granted by the HDC shall expire six
months after the date of approval, unless the applicant shall have obtained
a building permit and proceeded with the approved construction. Prior to
the expiration of the initial six-month period upon written request by the
applicant, the HDC may extend the certificate of appropriateness for an
additional six-month period. An applicant's failure to proceed with approved
construction with the six-month extension shall cause the certificate of
appropriateness to become null and void.
§ A423-30. Resubmittal of denied application.
An application for a certificate of appropriateness which has been denied by
the HDC shall not be heard again for a period of one year from the date the
application was denied, unless a majority of the HDC present at a meeting
agrees to waive this requirement.
§ A423-28 TOWN HALL, POLICY FOR USE OF § A423-30
406:595

ARTICLE VII
Enforcement
§ A423-31. Enforcement.
Provisions and requirements of certificates of appropriateness granted by
the HDC shall be enforced by the Building Official.
§ A423-32. Violations and penalties.
Any exterior work to a pre-1900 structure or appurtenance within an
historic district which proceeds, is in progress or is completed subsequent
to the adoption of these rules and regulations without a certificate of
appropriateness from the HDC, or which does not comply with the
provisions of a certificate of appropriateness, shall be deemed a violation of
Chapter 350, Zoning.93
§ A423-33. Procedures.
A. Any person may report an alleged violation to the HDC.
B. If the HDC determines that a violation exists, the Building Official shall
be notified and he/she shall issue a stop-work order and instruct that
the owner or his/her representative file a certificate of appropriateness
within 30 days.
C. The HDC shall review the newly submitted or resubmitted application.
Any reconstruction or modifications required to bring the work into
compliance shall be made conditions of approval, and a deadline for
correction of the violation shall be set.
D. If the HDC-issued conditions of approval for correction of work done in
violation are complied with, the HDC shall inform the Building Official
that the violation no longer exists.
E. If the applicant fails to comply with HDC conditions of approval for
correction of work done in violation, he/she shall be reported to the
Building Official.
F. Written records of all violations shall be kept in the HDC's files.
93.Editor's Note: See Ch. 350, Zoning, § 350-7.
§ A423-31 TOWN HALL, POLICY FOR USE OF § A423-33
406:597

ARTICLE VIII
Amendments and Severability
§ A423-34. Amendments.
These rules may be amended by the HDC subject to approval of the Town
Council.
§ A423-35. Severability.
The provisions of these rules and regulations are severable; if any such
provision or provisions shall be held invalid or unconstitutional by any
decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not
impair or otherwise affect any other provision of these rules and
regulations.
§ A423-34 TOWN HALL, POLICY FOR USE OF § A423-35
406:599
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Adoption
Date
Effective
Date Subject Disposition
2-17-2005 3-16-2005 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
7-7-2005 8-4-2005 Recreation areas amendment
(tobacco use)
Ch. 221, Art. I
7-7-2005 8-4-2005 Recreation areas amendment
(tobacco use violations)
Ch. 221, Art. I
1-5-2006 12-31-2005 Prisoner of war tax exemption Ch. 247, Art. X
9-7-2006 9-21-2006 Zoning Map amendment NCM
3-15-2007 3-15-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 350
11-1-2007 12-3-2007 Zoning Map amendment NCM
11-15-2007 12-20-2007 Subdivision of land amendment Ch. 300
11-15-2007 12-20-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 350
5-15-2008 5-15-2008 Affordable housing Ch. 286
8-21-2008 10-2-2008 Fee Schedule amendment
(zoning application fees)
Ch. 368
9-4-2008 10-2-2008 Fee Schedule amendment
(building permit fees)
Ch. 368
11-4-2008 Charter amendments §§ C4-3; C6-3;
C6-6; C11-4;
C14-15; C14-16
2-24-2009 2-24-2009 Zoning amendment (flood hazard
areas)
Ch. 350
4-16-2009 4-16-2009 Historical and archaeological
burial sites
Ch. 195
4-16-2009 4-16-2009 Stormwater management Ch. 243
7-16-2009 7-16-2009 Pascoag Reservoir/Echo Lake
Dam Management District
Ch. 223
§ A423-35 GLOCESTER CODE § DL-1
DT:600
Adoption
Date
Effective
Date Subject Disposition
8-6-2009 8-6-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 350
9-3-2009 9-3-2009 Recreation areas amendment Ch. 221, Art. I
9-3-2009 9-3-2009 Community Resource
Commission
Ch. 68
1-21-2010 3-10-2010 Community Resource
Commission amendment
Ch. 68
5-6-2010 6-2-2010 Personnel Board amendment Repealed
1-18-2018
8-5-2010 9-8-2010 Glocester Pines, Inc., general
development plan amendment
Ch. 350
(footnote only)
9-16-2010 10-27-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 350
10-21-2010 10-21-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 350
10-21-2010 12-22-2010 Vehicles and traffic: stop
intersections amendment
Ch. 258, Art. I
11-18-2010 11-18-2010 Wastewater Management
District
Repealed
12-15-2011
12-16-2010 12-16-2010 Community Resource
Commission amendment
Ch. 68
3-17-2011 4-21-2011 Records retention schedule
repealer
Ch. 40
(reference
only)
4-21-2011 5-18-2011 Hydronic heaters and wood
boilers, outdoor
Ch. 197
5-19-2011 6-22-2011 Rules of Procedure for boards
and commissions amendment
Ch. 392
8-18-2011 9-14-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
12-15-2011 12-15-2011 Community Resource and
Wastewater Advisory
Commission amendment;
Wastewater Management
District repealer; zoning
amendment; Wastewater
Management District Rules and
Regulations repealer
Ch. 68; Ch.
272, reference
only; Ch. 350;
Ch. A420,
reference only
2-16-2012 9-26-2012 Pascoag Reservoir/Echo Lake
Dam Management District
amendment
Ch. 223
3-15-2012 4-11-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 350
12-20-2012 1-23-2013 Access to public records
amendment
Ch. 387
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:601
Adoption
Date
Effective
Date Subject Disposition
12-20-2012 1-23-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 350
1-17-2013 1-24-2013 Public nuisances on foreclosed
abandoned, vacant properties
Ch. 232
4-18-2013 4-18-2013 Streets and sidewalks: snow and
ice removal
Ch. 242, Art. II
12-5-2013 1-8-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 350
7-16-2015 7-16-2015 Charter amendment Charter
1-15-2015 2-25-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 350
8-6-2015 8-6-2015 Taxation: renewable energy tax
exemption
Ch. 247, Art. XI
8-20-2015 8-20-2015 Taxation: exemption for elderly
and disabled persons
amendment
Ch. 247, Art. III
10-15-2015 10-15-2015 Vehicles and traffic: parking
amendment
Ch. 258, Art. II
12-15-2016 12-15-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 350
1-19-2017 2-15-2017 Entertainment - special events
for liquor establishments
Ch. 174
3-16-2017 3-16-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 350
6-15-2017 6-15-2017 Parks and recreation areas: The
Pavilion at Kent Field
Ch. 221, Art. III
8-17-2017 8-17-2017 Taxation: Exemption for Elderly
and Disabled Persons
Amendment
Ch. 247, Art. III
12-7-2017 12-7-2017 Veterans Advisor Ch. 120
12-7-2017 12-7-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 350
12-7-2017 12-7-2017 Taxation: Renewable Energy Tax
and Exemption Amendment
Ch. 247, Art. XI
1-18-2018 1-18-2018 Personnel Board Repealer Ch. 101,
reference only
5-3-2018 5-3-2018 General Provisions:
Comprehensive Community Plan
Ch. 1, Art. III
5-3-2018 5-3-2018 Comprehensive Community Plan
Coordination Committee
Repealer
Ch. 70,
reference only
6-7-2018 6-7-2018 Solar Energy Systems
Moratorium
Ch. 1, Art. IV,
reference only
§ DL-1 GLOCESTER CODE § DL-1
DT:602
Adoption
Date
Effective
Date Subject Disposition
7-19-2018 7-19-2018 Emergency Appropriation for
Acquisition of Total Building
Generator for Town Hall
Ch. 1, Art. IV,
reference only
8-2-2018 9-5-2018 Fee Schedule Amendment Ch. 368
11-1-2018 11-1-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 350
3-21-2019 3-21-2019 Economic Development
Commission
Ch. 78
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:603