Adopting Ordinance
Chapter AO
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
Municipal Code
Chapter 1
GENERAL
§ 1-1. CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED.
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall
constitute and be designed "The Code of the Town of Little Compton, Rhode
Island, 1981," and may be so cited.
§ 1-2. DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this Code, and in the interpretation and application of
all other ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the context
may otherwise require:
CLERK OR TOWN CLERK — Shall mean the municipal clerk duly elected
pursuant to law.
COUNCIL OR TOWN COUNCIL — Shall mean the "Town Council of the
Town of Little Compton".
COUNTY OR THIS COUNTY — Shall mean Newport County, Rhode Island.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean an organizational unit of the government
established or designated by ordinance or this Code as a department,
together with any agency or instrumentality of the government assigned to
such organizational unit by the Town Council.
LICENSED — Shall mean licensed in accordance with the appropriate
section or chapter of this Code.
MONTH — Shall mean a calendar month unless otherwise specifically
provided.
ORDINANCE — Shall mean any act of local legislation heretofore or
hereafter adopted, and including this Code, so long as it is adopted by
the procedure required for the adoption of an ordinance and so long as it
remains in force and effect pursuant to law.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, natural persons, partnerships, joint
ventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, corporations or
unincorporated groups; or any officers, agents, employees, servants, factors
or any kind of personal representatives of any thereof in any capacity,
AO:1
acting either for himself or for any other person, under either personal
appointment or pursuant to law.
STATE LAW REFERENCES — Whenever reference is made to the "General
Laws" or "Gen. Laws", this shall mean the General Laws of Rhode Island,
1956, as amended. Whenever reference is made to "Public Laws" or "P.L.",
this shall mean the Public Laws of Rhode Island.
STATE OR THIS STATE — Shall mean the State of Rhode Island.
STREET — Shall include a street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway,
boulevard, concourse, driveway, thoroughfare, culvert, sidewalk, and
crosswalk, and every class of road, square, place or municipal parking field
used by the general public.
TOWN — Shall mean the Town of Little Compton in the County of Newport
and State of Rhode Island.
YEAR — Shall mean a calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided.
All words giving joint authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be
construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or persons.
§ 1-3. CONSTRUCTION.
For the purpose of this Code and any other ordinances heretofore or
hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require:
The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future, the
present.
The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
"Chapter" shall mean one of the major divisions of the Code identified by an
Arabic number and divided by subject matter.
"Paragraph" shall mean a subdivision under a subsection, identified by an
alphabetical letter or Arabic number.
"Section" shall mean a major subdivision of a chapter.
"Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding
the first and including the last day and if the last day be a Sunday, a legal
holiday, or a day on which the offices of the town are closed, that day shall
be excluded.
"Writing" and "written" shall include printing, typewriting and any other
mode of communication using paper or similar material which is in general
use, as well as legible handwriting.
§ 1-2 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 1-3
AO:2
Whenever a specific time is used in this Code, it shall mean the prevailing
and established time in effect in the State of Rhode Island during any day in
any year.
Any citation of a statute, law or ordinance contained in this Code shall be
deemed to refer to such statute, law or ordinances as amended, whether or
not such designation is included in the citation.
"Subsection" shall mean a subdivision of a section, identified by a decimal
number.
§ 1-4. SEVERABILITY.
If any chapter, section, subsection or paragraph of this Code shall be
declared to be unconstitutional, invalid, or inoperative, in whole or in part,
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such chapter, section, subsection or
paragraph shall, to the extent that it is not unconstitutional, invalid or
inoperative, remain in full force and effect, and no such determination shall
be deemed to invalidate the remaining chapters, sections, subsections or
paragraphs of this Code.
§ 1-5. PENALTY.
§ 1-5.1. General Penalty.
Except where otherwise provided in this Code, whenever in this Code or
in any ordinance of the town any act is prohibited or is made or declared
to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code or ordinance the
doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be
unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any
such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $20 and cost of prosecution or by imprisonment not exceeding 10
days or by both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 1-5.2. Separate Violations.
Except as otherwise provided, every day in which a violation of any
provision of this Code or any other ordinance of the town exists shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 1-5.3. Application.
The penalty stated in this section is not intended to state an appropriate
penalty for every violation. Any lesser penalty, including a nominal penalty
or no penalty at all, may be appropriate for a particular case or violation.
§ 1-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-6
AO:3
§ 1-6. COMPREHENSIVE PLAN INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE.
[Ord. 1/23/08; Ord. 5/7/09]
The Comprehensive Plan of the Town of Little Compton, as duly updated
and adopted from time to time, and as most recently updated June 11, 2009,
is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety.
This section shall take effect for the purpose of conforming municipal
land use decisions and for the purpose of being transmitted to the Rhode
Island Director of Administration for State review upon public hearing and
passage.
The section shall not become effective for the purposes of guiding State
agency actions until it is approved by the State of Rhode Island pursuant
to Chapter 45-22.2 of the General Laws of Rhode Island a/k/a of the Rhode
Island Comprehensive Planning and Land Use Act.
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION
§ 2-1. TOWN COUNCIL.1
§ 2-1.1. Composition. [Ord. 3/4/93]
§ 2-1.2. Officers. [Ord. 3/4/93; Ord. 2/23/17]
a. The Town Council shall be composed of five members elected at large.
a. The officers of the Council shall be a President and a Vice-President.
b. The President:
1. Shall preside over Council meetings;
2. Shall have at Council meetings:
(a) Code of the Town of Little Compton;
(b) Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised;
(c) Current list of Councilor's assignments;
(d) Current list of Town officers and employees;
(e) Current list of Town boards, committees and commissions,
with terms of office.
3. May call a special meeting of the Council;
1. Editor's Note: Prior ordinances codified herein include portions of Ordinance Nos. 11/8/
73, 12/6/90, 11/19/92 and 12/10/92.
§ 1-6 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 2-1.2
AO:4
§ 2-1.3. Exercise of Powers. [Ord. 3/4/93; Ord. 4/21/11; Ord. 2/23/
17]
§ 2-1.4. Agenda and Notice. [Ord. 3/4/93; Ord. 12/3/09]
4. Shall call a special meeting of the Council at the written request of
two Councilors;
5. Shall have the primary duty of Administration/Finance/Law ex
officio.
6. Shall serve as the Local Emergency Management Agency Director,
unless another is appointed by vote of the Council.
c. The Vice-President:
1. Shall assume the duties of the President in the absence of the
President;
2. Shall have the duty of Administration/Finance/Law ex officio as
assigned by the Council.
d. The Council shall elect officers at its first meeting upon the installation
of all five members pursuant to a general election.
a. Powers of the Council may be exercised only by vote of a formal Council
meeting.
b. A Councilor must be present at a meeting in order to vote.
c. Individual Councilors, including Council officers, may propose acts to
the Council, but except for the calling of special meetings cannot
individually bind the Council or the Town to actions, contracts or
obligations of any kind without specific authorization by the Council.
d. The Council may delegate and assign to individual Councilors and to
other persons the duties of implementing Council votes and conducting
Town business.
e. Council meetings and records are subject to state laws including but
not limited to the Open Meetings Law (Gen. Laws 42-46) and the Public
Records Law (Gen. Law 38), which set forth certain grounds whereby a
meeting or a record may be kept wholly or partly confidential for a
certain period of time. The Solicitor shall advise the Council when it
may lawfully take such action, and the Council shall clearly explain to
the public the legal basis for any such action.
f. The Town Council President shall have the power in a declared
emergency to procure the use of any municipally owned building
without the need of a Memorandum of Understanding.
a. The Clerk shall type and distribute the agenda.
§ 2-1.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-1.4
AO:5
b. The general form and order of the agenda shall be determined by the
Council from time to time.
c. Any person wishing to bring matters before the Council may request, by
written communication to the Town Council, that matters be entered on
the agenda.
d. Written communications placed on the agenda shall be available for
public inspection by any person upon request to the Clerk during
regular business hours. Communications shall be stamped (date and
time) upon receipt in the Clerk's office.
e. The deadline for inclusion of matters on the agenda for a regular
Thursday Council meeting shall be 4:00 p.m. on the Monday preceding
the meeting, except when the Town Hall is closed on Monday,
whereupon the deadline shall be moved up to 12:00 noon on the
following day. However, bills to be paid shall be presented no later than
12:00 noon on the day of meeting.
f. A matter may be submitted at a Council meeting upon a unanimous vote
of all Councilors present.
g. The Clerk shall prepare packets containing (i) the agenda and (ii)
pertinent documents arranged in the agenda's order by 4:00 p.m. on
the Tuesday before the Thursday meeting.
h. Copies of the packet shall be distributed to:
1. Councilors.
2. Town Solicitor.
3. Brownell Library.
i. Copies of the agenda shall be:
1. Posted at:
(a) Town Hall, inside and outside.
(b) Stores where permitted.
(1) By police.
2. Distributed to:
(a) Building Official.
(b) Fire Department.
(c) Planning Board.
(d) Police Department.
(e) Tax Assessors.
§ 2-1.4 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 2-1.4
AO:6
§ 2-1.5. Meetings. [Ord. 3/4/93]
(f) Town Treasurer.
(g) Zoning Board of Review.
3. Mailed to:
(a) State Representative.
(b) State Senator.
4. Available to:
(a) The public and the media, free of charge, at the Clerk's Office
and at meetings.
a. Regular meetings of the Town Council shall be held on the first
Thursday after the first Monday of each month, and two weeks later on
Thursday, at 7:00 p.m. or at such other hours as the Council may
designate; and if any such date shall occur on a legal holiday, the
meeting for that week shall be held on such date as the Council may
determine at the previous meeting.
b. The Clerk shall record by minutes all Council meetings except Open
Forums.
c. The Town Solicitor shall be present at Council meetings as requested.
d. The President while occupying the Chair may make or second and vote
on any motion and also may call a brief recess at any time without a
vote.
e. Any resolution or ordinance containing more than one part or section,
may be passed either part by part, or section by section, at the request
of any Councilor.
f. Consent Calendar.
1. When the President determines that any item of business requires
action by the Council but is of a routine and non-controversial
nature, the President may cause such item to be presented as part
of a Consent Calendar at a regular meeting of the Council.
2. The Consent Calendar shall be introduced by a motion "To approve
the Consent Calendar" and shall be considered by the Council as a
single item.
3. Each item on the Consent Calendar shall be accompanied by a brief
description thereof and of the action proposed by the President.
4. There shall be no reading, debate or discussion by any member of
the Council regarding any item on the Consent Calendar beyond
asking questions for simple clarification.
§ 2-1.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-1.5
AO:7
§ 2-1.6. Assignment of Duties. [Ord. 3/4/93]
§ 2-1.7. Citizens' Access to Government. [Ord. 3/4/93; Ord. 9/7/06]
5. On objection by any Councilor to inclusion of any item on the
Consent Calendar, that item shall be removed from the Consent
Calendar forthwith. Such objection may be recorded at any time
prior to the vote on the motion to approve the Consent Calendar.
Any item so objected to shall be considered elsewhere on the
agenda as determined by the Council.
6. Approval of the motion to approve the Consent Calendar shall be
fully equivalent to taking the proposed action on each item of
business, exactly as if each had been acted on individually.
g. Open Forums.
1. The Council may schedule and hold informal open meetings with
the citizens on a regular basis. Such meetings shall be known as
Open Forums. Citizens are encouraged to attend Open Forums in
order to resolve problems, questions, requests and suggestions, or
just to say hello and get acquainted. Children are welcome at Open
Forums.
2. At least two Councilors shall be present during an Open Forum.
Councilors shall participate in Open Forums on a rotating basis.
a. The Council shall assign duties to the Councilors at the first meeting
following the installation of all Councilors pursuant to a general
election, or as soon as possible thereafter. The Council may reassign
duties at any meeting.
a. The Council shall notify the public of all vacant positions and expiring
terms on Town boards, commissions and committees, and shall invite,
receive and consider written applications from the public at a regular
meeting following a regular meeting where such public notice was
given.
b. Citizens are encouraged to contact Councilors for the purpose of
resolving problems, questions, requests and suggestions, but only after
making a good faith effort to resolve such matters with the appropriate
Town officers and employees.
c. Citizens are encouraged to contact a Councilor whose assigned duties
cover the citizen's problem, question, request or suggestion. However,
citizens may freely contact any Councilor on any matter.
d. Pursuant to Section 413.E of the Charter, it shall be the responsibility of
the Town Council to respond to any complaint from a qualified elector of
the Town alleging a violation of any of the terms or provisions of the
Charter, according to the following procedure:
§ 2-1.5 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 2-1.7
AO:8
§ 2-1.8. Limitations on Office Holding. [Ord. 3/4/93]
1. Any qualified elector of the Town may file a sworn statement in the
office of the Town Clerk specifying (1) the section or the sections of
the Charter which are charged to have been violated, (2) the nature
of the violation, and (3) the person, persons, or Town body charged
with having committed the violation.
2. Upon the Town Clerk's determination that a sworn complaint filed
by a qualified elector fulfills the provisions of Subsection 2-1.7d1
above, the Clerk shall schedule a public hearing before the Town
Council, such hearing to be held not later than 30 days from the
date on which the complaint was filed. If the Town Clerk
determines that the sworn complaint does not fulfill the provisions
of Subsection 2-1.7d1, he or she shall so notify the complainant in
writing, providing the reason or reasons for dismissal.
3. At the public hearing, the Town Council shall receive testimony
from the complainant and from the official, board, or commission,
or the members of the official body, against whom or which the
charges were made, and from such witnesses as either party may
bring forward. Not later than 30 days from the date of the hearing,
the Town Council shall issue a written finding in response to the
complaint. The written finding shall include a determination
whether or not the alleged violation of the Charter has been
substantiated by the testimony and evidence presented. If the
Council determines that the alleged violation of the Charter has
been substantiated, the written finding shall also describe any
measures the Council shall implement, under the authority of state
law and the provisions of this Charter, to remedy any such violation.
4. Nothing in all this section shall prevent a qualified elector of the
Town from pursuing any other recourse available under law to
ensure compliance with and enforcement of the terms ad
provisions of the Charter.
e. The Clerk shall maintain current notices concerning:
1. Names and phone numbers of Town Councilors, officers and
employees; and
2. Councilor's assignment of duties.
a. Term of Office. Councilors shall be elected to serve for a term of two
years, or until their successors are elected and qualified, whichever
shall occur later.
b. No Dual Office Holding. No member of the Town Council of the Town of
Little Compton, Rhode Island, shall hold other paid public office or
employment in the service of the Town of Little Compton, Rhode Island,
except that of notary public, justice of the peace, or volunteer fireman,
and no member of the Council shall be eligible to hold any other paid
§ 2-1.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-1.8
AO:9
§ 2-2. TOWN OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.2
§ 2-2.1. Probate Judge.
§ 2-2.2. Town Clerk. [Ord. 1/8/87]
local Town office during his or her tenure on the Council or for a period
of one year thereafter.
a. Appointment; Requirements. No person shall be appointed or elected as
Judge of Probate unless he shall have been admitted to practice as an
attorney-at-law before the Supreme Court of this state, and shall have
had at least five years experience in active practice of the law in the
courts of this state. [Ord. 4/20/72; Ord. 5/4/78]
b. Term; Salary of Judge. The term of office shall be a two year
appointment and shall run from July 1 until June 30. The Judge shall be
paid on a salary basis and the Town Clerk shall be designated as Clerk
of the Court as provided by law. All fees collected shall be transmitted
to the Town Treasurer to be deposited in the general funds of the Town.
[Ord. 1/8/77; Ord. 8/22/96]
a. Election. There shall be a Town Clerk who shall be elected at each
general election for a term of two years and until his successor is
elected and qualified.
b. Deputy Town Clerk. There shall be a Deputy Town Clerk appointed by
the Town Clerk with approval of the Town Council. The Deputy Town
Clerk shall have all the powers and perform all the duties which are
granted to the office of Town Clerk.
c. Powers and Duties. The Town Clerk shall be the Clerk of the financial
Town meeting, Clerk of the Town Council, Clerk of the Probate Court,
and the Recorder of Deeds. It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to:
1. Make a permanent record of all proceedings and certify by his
signature all actions of the aforesaid bodies;
2. Be custodian of the Town seal and of the official documents and
records of the Town;
3. Direct and supervise the recording of deeds, mortgages, vital
statistics, licenses and permits and such other records as shall by
ordinance and law be required to be kept by the Town Clerk;
4. Issue marriage licenses, burial permits and such other licenses and
permits as are required by ordinance and law to be issued by Town
Clerks;
2. Editor's Note: See § 10-2 for Indemnification of Town Officers and Employees.
§ 2-1.8 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 2-2.2
AO:10
§ 2-2.3. Town Solicitor. [Ord. 1/7/93]
There shall be a Town Solicitor appointed by the Town Council within 30
days following its election, to serve for a term of two years or until his/
her successor is appointed. Any person so appointed shall be a member of
the bar of the State of Rhode Island in good standing. He/she should have
significant experience in municipal law including, but not limited to, labor
arbitration, zoning, planning, land use, Town Meeting form of government,
litigation in the District Court (the prosecution of misdemeanors such as
driving while intoxicated, domestic assault, etc.), Family Court (juvenile
prosecution), Superior Court (zoning appeals and other litigation), Supreme
Court, and Federal Court.
The Town Solicitor need not devote full time to the duties of his/her office.
He/she shall receive such compensation for his/her services as may be
determined by the Council and the Financial Town Meeting. The Town
Solicitor shall provide legal counsel to the Council and other Town boards,
commissions, and departments on all legal matters. He/she shall appear for
and protect the rights of the Town in all actions, suits or proceedings, civil
or criminal, brought by or against the Town or for or against any of its
officers, departments or agencies, and shall perform such other duties as
the Council may require.
§ 2-2.4. Town Administrator.3 [Ord. 4/24/08; amended by Charter
amendment approved by voters at election of November 4, 2014;
Ord. 6/23/16; Ord. 8/23/18; Ord. 12/6/18]
5. Be responsible for receipt and distribution of all correspondence to
the Town and maintenance of a central filing system for all Town
boards, commissions, and committees;
6. Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law pertaining
to Town Clerks, and such other duties appropriate to his office as
the Town Council may require.
d. Salary and Fees. The Town Clerk and Deputy Town Clerk shall receive
such annual salaries as shall be fixed by the financial Town meeting. All
fees collected by either the Town Clerk or the Deputy Town Clerk shall
be transmitted to the Town Treasurer and deposited in the general
funds of the Town unless otherwise directed by the laws of the state.
e. Bonds. The Town Clerk and Deputy Town Clerk shall respectively within
15 days of the time of being sworn into office give bond to the Town
Treasurer with sufficient surety in such sum as the Town Council shall
prescribe for the faithful performance of the duties of said office, the
cost of such bonds to be paid by the Town.
3. Editor's Note: A Charter Amendment approved at the election of November 4, 2014,
changed the position of Business Manager to Town Administrator. See Charter Section
601.
§ 2-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-2.4
AO:11
a. Appointment. In conformance with Section 601 of the Town Charter, the
Town Council may appoint a Town Administrator to assist it in the
discharge of its duties. Prerequisites, compensation and benefits are to
be as defined in the Charter.
b. Relationship to Town Government.
1. The Town Administrator shall supervise and coordinate the
administrative activities of the Fire Chief, the chief of Police, the
Assessor, the director of Public Works, and the Building Official,
and, except for those responsibilities assigned by state statutes, the
elected Treasurer and Town Clerk.
2. The Town Administrator shall supervise and coordinate the
administrative activities of all Town boards and commissions.
3. The Town Administrator works for the Town Council, and is the
Chief Administrative and Financial Officer of the Town. The Town
Administrator reports on a regular basis to the Town Council
President or a Council member designated by the Town Council
President. In the absence of the Town Administrator, the Town
Council shall appoint a temporary Town Administrator.
c. Responsibilities. The following responsibilities are included in the
duties of the Town Administrator:
1. Executive support.
(a) Attend all Town Council and other meetings as requested.
Follow through on all actions required.
(b) Develop required reports for Town Council approval to respond
to external requirements.
(c) Produce quarterly report of relevant state legislation, with
issues and recommendations for Town Council consideration.
(d) Develop and submit a monthly report to the Town Council that
will include, without limitation, all matters of importance to the
Town.
2. Procurement.
(a) Review bills and report status at Town Council meeting.
(b) Draft necessary specifications and requests for proposals
required for services or purchases by the Town.
(c) Monitor cost and schedule performance for contracted work,
identify problem areas and potential solutions and produce
regular status reports.
§ 2-2.4 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 2-2.4
AO:12
(d) As requested, investigate and make recommendations on cost
savings ideas such as combined procurements, shared services
and regional initiatives. Implement as directed.
(e) Monitor and report capital expenditures versus plan.
(f) Oversee all information technology matters, including
purchases, maintenance contracts, systems failures, and other
emergencies.
3. Budgetary.
(a) Coordinate development by department heads of annual
proposed budget for Town Council consideration.
(b) Review proposed budget to ensure compliance with state caps
and reporting requirements. Prepare statements for Financial
Town Meeting.
(c) Work with Budget Committee to analyze year-end performance
and audit reports. Identify trends and issues. Produce yearly
report.
(d) Prepare reports, to be generated by the Town Treasurer, for
Town Council meetings showing budget status, year-end
projections, problems and recommended solutions.
(e) Conduct research to produce budget figures for crossdepartment
items as: payroll withholding, healthcare,
insurance, auditing, and waste disposal costs.
(f) Work with Budget Committee and department heads, boards,
and other appointed officials to maintain Capital Plan and
Three- and Five-year Plans.
4. Grants.
(a) Coordinate all grants entered into between the Town Council
and federal or state agencies.
(b) Maintain list of grants received by Town. As appropriate,
ensure yearly preparation and approval of requests.
(c) Routinely survey grants available and apply for new ones
which support Town needs.
5. Negotiations.
(a) Prepare all contracts and agreements to be entered into
between the Town and other parties so that they may be voted
on by the Town Council.
(b) Prepare Town proposals to be submitted to the respective
Unions after approval of the Town Council.
§ 2-2.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-2.4
AO:13
§ 2-2.5. Town Tax Assessor.4 [Ord. No. 2/23/17]
(c) See that contracts are prepared for signature after sessions
are complete.
(d) In the event of arbitration, coordinate with the Solicitor to
prepare necessary material to be submitted to the arbitrator.
6. Human resources management.
(a) Manage and oversee human resources, support pension
committee in administrative duties and acknowledge that all
hiring authority remains with the Town Council.
(b) Coordinate all arrangements with the department head
involved in regard to the hiring of all new employees. Help
department heads in administering any tests involved in the
hiring process.
(c) As requested, produce comparative analysis of salary and
benefit trends. Make recommendations for cost reductions.
(d) Work with Town and school departments to maintain
centralized personnel database. Submit yearly for pension and
OPEB calculations.
(e) Track sick leave and vacation records. Ensure department data
is being maintained.
7. Make recommendations to the Town Council as may be
appropriate.
d. Terms of Employment.
1. The Town Administrator shall be given a contract of no less than
three years nor more than five years, which shall be renewable.
Such contract will allow for dismissal of the Town Administrator for
cause, after notification and public hearing, if requested.
2. The position of Town Administrator is a full-time position with
health care and pension benefits.
a. Appointment. In conformance with Section 605 of the Town Charter, the
Town Council may appoint a Town Tax Assessor in lieu of a Board of Tax
Assessors. Qualifications are to be as defined in the Charter.
b. Responsibilities. The following responsibilities are included in the
duties of the Town Tax Assessor.
4. Editor's Note: A Charter Amendment approved at the election of November 8, 2016
allowed the Town Council to replace the Board of Tax Assessors with a single Tax Assessor.
See Charter Section 605.
§ 2-2.4 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 2-2.5
AO:14
§ 2-2.6. Finance Director. [Added 9-26-2019]
1. Establishing assessed valuation for the purposes of taxation on all
taxable real estate, tangible property, and motor vehicles.
2. Preparing a tax roll for the Town.
3. Conducting periodic revaluation of the Town.
4. Performing all duties defined for tax assessors in state law.
c. Relationship to Town Government.
1. The Tax Assessor works for the Town Council. The Tax Assessor
reports on a regular basis to the Town Administrator, and takes
direction from the Town Administrator as defined in the Tax
Assessor's contract.
2. The Tax Assessor shall supervise and coordinate the administrative
activities of the Tax Assessor's Clerk.
d. Terms of Employment.
1. The Tax Assessor shall be given a contract of no less than three
years nor more than five years, which shall be renewable. Such
contract will allow for dismissal of the Tax Assessor for cause, after
notification and public hearing, if requested.
2. The position of Tax Assessor is a full-time or part-time position with
health care and pension benefits, as defined in the request for
proposals.
a. Requirements. Pursuant to Section 603 of the Little Compton Home
Rule Charter, there shall be a Finance Director, appointed by the Town
Council upon recommendation of the Town Administrator. The Finance
Director shall have and exercise all the powers and duties now and
hereafter vested by law, charter, and ordinance in the office of Town
Treasurer. The Finance Director shall have charge of the administration
of the financial affairs of the Town and shall have and exercise all the
powers and duties vested by and enumerated in this section.
1. The Finance Director will report to and be under the general
supervision of the Town Administrator. The Town Council may
designate the Town Administrator as Finance Director. By approval
of the Town Council, the Finance Director may serve in the capacity
of Town Treasurer and one or more of the following positions: Tax
Collector, Tax Assessor, and Purchasing Agent.
2. Qualifications: The Finance Director shall be the Chief Financial
Officer of the Town and shall have such training and experience in
accounting, budgeting or management, either in public or private
business, to meet the needs of the position.
§ 2-2.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-2.6
AO:15
3. Compensation: The Finance Director shall receive such annual
compensation as may be recommended by the Town Administrator,
set by a vote of the Council, and ratified by vote of the Financial
Town Meeting.
4. If a vacancy shall occur in the position of Finance Director, the
Town Administrator shall recommend to the Council an interim
Finance Director, to be appointed from among those holding
another Town office or position. The interim Finance Director shall
assume the powers and duties of that office until such time as the
Council shall appoint a successor.
b. Powers and duties:
1. Cooperate with the Council, the Town Administrator, the Town
Clerk, and the Budget Committee in compiling the expenditure and
revenue estimates for the budget.
2. Receive all fees, rents, funds, money receivable by the Town from
the state or federal government, the courts and any department,
office or agency of the Town, except as otherwise provided in this
section or by law.
3. Have custody of all public funds belonging to or under the control
of the Town or any department, office or agency of the Town and
deposit all funds coming into the Finance Director in such
depositories as may be designated by the Council, or, if no such
designation shall be made, in such depositories as may be chosen;
provided, however, that deposits in such depository are insured by
an agency of the United States. All interest received on deposits
shall be the property of the Town and shall be accounted for and
credited to the proper accounts.
4. Have custody of all investments and invested funds of the Town or
in the possession of the Town in a fiduciary capacity, and have the
safekeeping of all bonds and notes of the Town and the receipt and
delivery of Town bonds and notes for transfer, registration or
exchange.
5. Exercise control over all expenditures by reviewing all bills,
invoices, payrolls, or other evidences of claims or charges against
the Town, and verifying that budget appropriations are not
exceeded by disbursements in any department, office or agency of
the Town.
6. Disbursement of funds by check or electronic funds transfer, such
disbursements being made only after compliance with the
provisions of this section and authorization by the Council.
7. Prescribe and maintain an accounting system for the Town and
adopt and require standard accounting procedures for all
departments, offices and agencies of the Town, which accounts
§ 2-2.6 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 2-2.6
AO:16
§ 2-2.7. Tax Collector. [Added 9-26-2019]
shall include the amounts of all appropriations, and the amounts
paid from each, and show in reasonable detail the person to whom
and the purpose for which the payments were made, the unpaid
obligations against each and the unencumbered balance.
8. Prescribe uniform forms of receipts, vouchers, bills and claims to
be used by all departments, offices and agencies of the Town.
9. Prepare a monthly statement of all receipts and disbursements in
such detail as the Council may require.
10. Prepare at the close of each fiscal year a complete financial
statement and report in accordance with state law for submission
to the Town auditors and the Council.
11. Oversee purchasing for the Town pursuant to Section 506 of the
Charter and Rules and Regulations established by ordinance.
12. Cooperate with the Town Administrator in maintaining a current
inventory of Town assets.
13. The Finance Director shall have primary responsibility for human
resources and personnel administration within the Town, provided
that such duties may alternatively be delegated by the Town
Council to the Town Administrator or to another established
position within the Town. Such human resources duties and powers
shall include, but not be limited to, coordination and administration
of all programs and activities of the Town personnel system;
Affirmative Action Officer; Compliance Officer for implementation
of special rules regarding employees with disabilities; and assistant
to the Pension Committee in administration of the Town Pension
Plan.
14. Perform such other duties as the Town Council shall determine by
ordinance.
c. Deputy Town Treasurer. There may be a Deputy Town Treasurer
appointed by the Council upon recommendation of the Finance
Director. The Deputy Treasurer shall have all the powers and perform
all the duties which are granted to the office of Town Treasurer by
resolution, ordinance or law in the Treasurer's absence, with the
exception of administrative responsibilities. In no event shall the
Deputy Treasurer have the power to sign the bonds, notes or other
evidence of indebtedness of the Town except at the direction of the
Council.
a. Requirements. There shall be a position of Tax Collector, who shall be
appointed by the Council by recommendation of the Town
Administrator.
§ 2-2.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-2.7
AO:17
§ 2-3. PLANNING BOARD.
§ 2-3.1. Planning Board Established. [Ord. No. 8/23/73, § 1]
In accordance with Title 45, Chapter 22 of the General Laws of Rhode Island
as amended, there is hereby established a Planning Board for the Town of
Little Compton.
§ 2-3.2. Membership. [Ord. No. 8/23/73, § 2; Ord. 3/21/74; Ord. 3/28/
83, § 1]
The Planning Board shall consist of nine members resident of the Town of
Little Compton. Appointments shall be made by the Town Council for terms
of four years, with no more than three terms to expire each year. A vacancy
in the membership of the board shall be filled by the Town Council for
the remainder of the unexpired term. Any Planning Board member may be
removed by the Town Council for due cause following a public hearing.
§ 2-3.3. Compensation. [Ord. No. 8/23/73, § 3]
Members of the Planning Board shall serve without compensation. The
Planning Board members may be reimbursed within the limitations of funds
appropriated for expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
§ 2-3.4. Organization of the Planning Board. [Ord. No. 8/23/73, § 4]
The Planning Board shall organize annually by electing a chairman, vice
chairman and a secretary. The Planning Board may adopt by-laws for the
performance of the duties prescribed in this section.
§ 2-3.5. Technical Assistance. [Ord. No. 8/23/73, § 5]
Within the limits of the funds appropriated for its use, the Planning Board
may engage technical or clerical assistance to aid in the discharge of its
duties. The Planning Board may, subject to the approval of the Town Council
and within the limits of funds appropriated to it, enter into cooperative
agreements with private, state, regional or federal agencies or other cities
or towns for technical assistance and studies deemed to be in the best
interest of the community.
§ 2-3.6. Duties of the Planning Board. [Ord. No. 8/23/73, § 6]
b. Powers and duties. The powers and duties of the Tax Collector shall
include but not be limited to:
1. Collect and receive all taxes and special assessments for the
collection of which the Town is responsible, and shall have all the
rights, powers and duties prescribed by the laws of the state and by
the Charter and ordinances of the Town.
2. Conduct tax sales in accordance with Rhode Island General Law.
§ 2-2.7 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 2-3.6
AO:18
a. The Planning Board shall prepare and adopt a comprehensive plan for
the future development of the Town of Little Compton. Such plan shall,
among other things, show the general arrangement of and goals,
objectives, and standards for land use, transportation routes and
facilities, public facilities and services, renewal or rehabilitation
programs, housing programs, conservation areas, historic preservation
areas and environmental protection programs, together with
recommended programs of action and improvement deemed necessary
to implement the features of the plan. The Planning Board may hold
public hearings on the comprehensive plan or elements thereof and
shall adopt this plan or elements as a guide to planning board actions
related to the features contained in the plan. The Town Council may,
following a public hearing, adopt a comprehensive plan or any portion
thereof previously adopted by the Planning Board and recommended to
the Town Council by the Planning Board. Adoption of such a
comprehensive plan or portion thereof by the Town Council shall bind
said Council to this plan or portion thereof in any future action related
to features in the plan. The adopted comprehensive plan or any element
thereof may be modified or amended by the Town Council following a
public hearing. At least 30 days prior to the date of public hearing said
modification or amendment shall be referred to the Planning Board for
an advisory opinion. Failure of the Planning Board to forward a
recommendation to the Town Council within this thirty-day period shall
be deemed an approval of the modification or amendment by the
Planning Board. The affirmative vote of at least 2/3 of the Town Council
shall be necessary to enact any modification or amendment to the
comprehensive plan or element thereof where the Planning Board has
rendered an adverse decision. At intervals of no greater than five years,
the Planning Board shall review said comprehensive plan or elements
thereof and make any modifications, amendments or additions deemed
necessary in the light of current and projected community development
trends and needs. Any such modifications shall be recommended to the
Town Council and adopted in the manner prescribed above.
b. The Planning Board shall make studies of the resources and needs of
the Town with reference to its physical, economic, and social growth
and development as affecting the health, safety, morals and general
welfare of the people. Such studies, plans and reports may concern,
among other things, the following:
1. Land use and land use regulations.
2. Transportation facilities.
3. Public utilities.
4. Public facilities and site locations including recreation areas,
schools, fire, police and other principal structures and
developments.
§ 2-3.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-3.6
AO:19
§ 2-3.7. Reports. [Ord. No. 8/23/73, § 7]
The Planning Board shall submit an annual report to the Town Council
summarizing the work of the preceding year and recommending programs,
plans and actions for future development before March 1. A copy of the
annual report shall be forwarded to the Rhode Island Department of
Community Affairs. All studies, plans, and reports of the Planning Board
shall be submitted to the Town Council and to any other designated agency
or official and thereafter, upon approval of the Town Council may be
published for general distribution.
§ 2-4. CONSERVATION COMMISSION.
5. Blighted areas including plans for redevelopment, renewal,
rehabilitation or conservation.
6. Problems of housing and the development of housing programs.
7. Natural resource conservation.
8. Environmental protection.
9. Protection from disaster.
10. Economic and sociological characteristics.
11. Preservation of historic sites and buildings.
12. Economic development.
c. When directed by the Town Council, the Planning Board shall prepare
an annual capital budget and a comprehensive six year capital
improvements program.
d. The Planning Board shall submit an advisory opinion and
recommendation on all zoning matters referred to it or any other matter
referred to it by the Town Council.
e. The Planning Board shall have the authority to call upon other
departments, boards, and committees of the Town of Little Compton
and upon regional, state and federal agencies for assistance in the
performance of its designated functions and shall cooperate with such
city or town, regional, state and federal agencies on matters of
community, regional and state planning.
f. The Planning Board shall carry out such other duties as may be
assigned to said board from time to time by any act of the general
assembly or by any ordinance, code, regulation, order or resolution of
the Town Council.
§ 2-3.6 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 2-4.1
AO:20
§ 2-4.1. Creation, Purpose. [Ord. 5/6/71]
There is hereby created a commission, to be called the Conservation
Commission, the purpose of which is to promote and develop the natural
resources, to protect the watershed resources, and to preserve natural
esthetic areas within the Town of Little Compton. Such Commission shall
conduct researches into local land areas and shall seek to coordinate the
activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar purposes. It may
recommend to the Town Council a program for the better development,
utilization, or preservation of open areas, streams, shores, wooded areas,
roadsides, swamps, marshlands, and natural esthetic areas. It shall keep
accurate records of its meetings and actions, and shall file an annual report
with the Town Council.
§ 2-4.2. Members; Term; Election of Officers; Vacancy. [Ord. 5/6/71;
amended by Charter amendment approved by the voters at the
election of November 4, 2014.]
The Commission shall consist of five members, four appointed by the Town
Council for three year terms, with said terms so arranged that the term
of one member shall expire in one year, the term of the second in the
second year, and the terms of the third and fourth members in the third
year. Duly incorporated and existing wildlife, conservation, sportsmen's
horticultural, or like organizations may present to the appointing authority
a list of qualified citizens from which lists the appointing authority may
select the four Commission members. Terms of members shall end on
the last day of January. The Commission shall also include ex officio the
chairperson of the Little Compton Agricultural Conservancy Trust or his or
her member designee. At the first meeting of the Commission, the members
shall elect a chairman, a vice-chairman and a secretary, and shall organize
such subcommittees as they shall deem necessary for the performance of
their duties. In the event of a vacancy, interim appointments may be made
by the appointing authority to complete the unexpired term of such position.
§ 2-4.3. Meeting Open to Public. [Ord. 5/6/71]
All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public, and any person
or his duly constituted representative shall be entitled to appear and be
heard on any matter before the Commission before it reaches its decision.
All records of its proceedings, resolutions, and actions shall be open to
public view.
§ 2-4.4. Notification of the Board Required on Any Matter
Concerning Natural Resources. [Ord. 5/6/71]
To effectuate coordination of related endeavors, the Town Planning Board,
Zoning Board of Review, and any other board, commission or agency
concerned with resource use shall notify the Conservation Commission of
any proposals concerning natural resources made by or to any of them.
§ 2-4.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-5
AO:21
§ 2-5. LITTLE COMPTON FREE PUBLIC LIBRARY.
§ 2-5.1. Trustees. [Ord. 4/7/94]
The Little Compton Free Public Library shall be governed by a Board
consisting of five trustees appointed by the Town Council. Terms of the
Trustees shall be for three years with no more than two terms to expire each
year on October 15. The Trustees will elect a Chairman and other officers
that they deem necessary. Trustees shall serve without compensation.
§ 2-6. PURCHASING PROCEDURE.
§ 2-6.1. Requirements. [Ord. 2/4/93; Ord. 4/7/94; Ord. 1/7/99]
§ 2-6.2. Bids from Little Compton Persons, Firms or Corporations.
[Ord. 2/4/93; Ord. 4/7/94; Ord. 1/7/99]
In the event that a Little Compton person, firm, or corporation should
submit a bid for an item as defined in Subsection 2-6.1, and the said local
person, firm, or corporation should not be the low bidder, if the said local
person, firm, or corporation makes a bid within 5% of the low bid, said 5%
being based upon the total amount of the bid provided it not exceed $500
above the low bid, the Town Council may, if all other things are equal, award
the bid to the local person, firm, or corporation.
a. The purchasing procedures shall require that all purchases and
contracts executed on behalf of the Town in excess of $1,000 be made
pursuant to a written requisition from the head of the office,
department or agency whose appropriation will be charged and no
contract or order shall be issued until the Treasurer shall have certified
that there is sufficient appropriation balance as of last posting to the
credit of such office, department or agency to pay for the supplies,
material, equipment or contractual services for which the contract or
order is to be issued. The Council shall not authorize final payment in
any such instance until it is satisfied that proper procedures have been
followed and payment is in order.
b. All expenditures of Town funds for any one item, order, or specific job,
in an amount exceeding $5,000, shall be the result of:
1. Competitive sealed bidding.
2. Competitive negotiations.
3. Non-competitive negotiations as set forth in 45-55 of the General
Laws of R.I.
c. All purchases for amounts between $1,000 and $5,000 shall be made on
the basis of the solicitation of three telephone or verbal request bids, a
written record of which shall be forwarded to the Purchasing Agent.
§ 2-5 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 2-6.3
AO:22
§ 2-6.3. Exception. [Ord. 2/4/93; Ord. 4/7/94; Ord. 1/7/99]
The provisions of Subsections 2-6.1 and 2-6.2 of this section need not apply
to professional engineering/architectural services.
§ 2-6.4. Purchasing Agent. [Ord. 2/4/93; Ord. 4/7/94; Ord. 1/7/99]
The Town Council shall be the Purchasing Agent for the Town.
§ 2-6.5. Emergency Procurements. [Ord. 2/4/93; Ord. 4/7/94; Ord. 1/
7/99]
Where there exists a threat to public health, welfare, or safety the Town
Council may make or authorize others to make emergency procurements.
§ 2-7. CONDUCT OF MEETINGS. [Ord. 5/5/83; Ord. 4/7/94]
Unless otherwise provided for in the Code of the Town of Little Compton,
or in the General Laws of Rhode Island, meetings of all officially constituted
boards, commissions, and committees shall be governed by the current
edition of Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised.
§ 2-8. SMOKING IN TOWN BUILDINGS. [Ord. 4/7/94]
There shall be no smoking in any Town building that is under the control of
the Town Council.
§ 2-9. LITTLE COMPTON HOUSING TRUST.
§ 2-9.1. Authorization and Purpose. [Ord. 5/19/05]
There is hereby authorized a nonprofit corporation (to be duly incorporated
by the Rhode Island Secretary of State), to be called the Little Compton
Housing Trust (hereinafter Housing Trust), the purpose of which is to
serve as an advocacy group for any person or group desiring to address
the problem of housing affordability or housing for the elderly, those with
special needs and families of low and moderate income. The Housing Trust
shall generally oversee the implementation of the Affordable Housing Plan
of the community, shall monitor long term housing affordability for the
community, and advise the Town of Little Compton in its efforts and support
the Town's goal of diversifying the housing stock. The Housing Trust shall
also advise the Town in its amendment of the Affordable Housing Plan.
§ 2-9.2. Authority and Bylaws.5 [Ord. 5/19/05]
The Housing Trust shall have the authority to receive state and federal
grant money, contract with housing agencies such as Rhode Island Housing
and Church Community Housing Corporation, contract for consultant
5. Editor's Note: The Bylaws of the Little Compton Housing Trust were amended by an
ordinance of February 9, 2006. A copy of this ordinance may be found on file in the office
of the Town Clerk.
§ 2-6.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-9.2
AO:23
services, and establish a Housing Trust Fund for the community. The
Housing Trust shall also have the authority to receive real estate, by any
manner including grant, gift, bequest or purchase, and to convey or lease
real estate and/or buildings, so long as such conveyances shall be in keeping
with the purposes of the Housing Trust. The Housing Trust shall be
governed by a Board of Directors (also known as Board of Trustees) which
shall adopt Bylaws governing the conduct of the affairs of the Housing
Trust, provided that such Bylaws and any subsequent amendment thereto
shall be subject to the approval of the Town Council.
§ 2-9.3. Board of Trustees; Term; Officers; Subcommittees; Vacancy.
[Ord. 5/19/05]
The Housing Trust shall be administered by the Board of Trustees,
consisting of seven trustees appointed by the Town Council. A minimum of
four of the trustees shall be electors of the Town of Little Compton. One
of the trustees shall be a member of the Town Council, selected by the
Town Council for a two-year term in November of the year of the election
of Town Council members. The remaining trustees shall be appointed for
five year terms, except the initial appointments of the trustees shall be
as follows: two trustees for five years, two trustees for three years and
two trustees for two years. Trustees may hold any other federal, state,
or municipal office. The trustees shall elect a president, treasurer and
secretary for one year terms beginning in the month of July. The Housing
Trust shall organize such subcommittees as it shall deem necessary for the
performance of its duties. In the event of a vacancy, interim appointments
may be made by the Town Council to complete an unexpired term. At
the expiration of a term, the trustees shall present to the Town Council a
list of not less than three qualified candidates for each vacancy, and the
Council shall take into consideration these recommendations when making
appointments. Trustees may be reappointed without limitation.
§ 2-9.4. Meetings and Records. [Ord. 5/19/05]
Decisions of the trustees shall be by majority vote of those present and
voting, and no business shall be transacted without four members present.
The Housing Trust shall comply with all provisions of state and local law
regarding Ethics Commission reporting; open meetings and access to public
records. The trustees shall keep accurate records of their meetings and
actions and shall file an annual report which shall be printed in the annual
Town report.
Chapter 3
POLICE REGULATIONS
§ 3-1. DISTURBING THE PEACE.6
6. Editor's Note: For State Law as to the authority of the Town Council, see Gen. Laws, 1956
as amended, Title 45, Chapters 6-1 and 6-2.
§ 2-9.2 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 3-1.1
AO:24
§ 3-1.1. Statement of Public Policy. [Ord. 4/10/80 § 1; Ord. 1/7/16;
Ord. 9/22/16]
§ 3-1.2. Loudness of Sound Producing Equipment. [Ord. 4/10/80 § 2;
Ord. 1/7/16; Ord. 9/22/16]
a. Excessive noise is a serious hazard to the public health and welfare and
the quality of life in the Town;
b. A substantial body of science and technology exists by which excessive
noise can be substantially abated without serious inconvenience to the
public;
c. Noise-producing equipment associated with farming and fishing is
essential to the quality of life herein and should be allowed to continue
at reasonable levels with moderate regulation; and
d. Each person has the right to an environment reasonably free from noise
which jeopardizes health or welfare or unnecessarily degrades the
quality of life.
e. It is the declared policy of this Town to promote an environment free
from excessive noise, otherwise properly called noise pollution, which
unnecessarily jeopardizes the health and welfare and degrades the
quality of the lives of the residents of this community, without unduly
prohibiting, limiting or otherwise regulating the function of certain
noise-producing equipment which is not amenable to such controls and
yet is essential to the quality of life in the community.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to use, operate, or permit to be
played, used or operated any machine or device whose purpose is the
production or reproduction of music or the human voice in such manner
as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring
inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for
convenient hearing for the persons who are at the site at which such
machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto.
b. Indoors, the operation of any such machine or device between the hours
of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at
a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is
located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
c. Outdoors, the operation of any such machine or device whose purpose
is the production or reproduction of music or the human voice between
the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly
audible at the boundary line of the property on which it is located shall
be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
d. At all hours, in the Residential Zone, the sound produced must not be
disturbing to a person of reasonably sensitive hearing in the accessible
area of their properties. In the event of a dispute of sensibility, the
sound level must not exceed 55 dBA between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
§ 3-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-1.2
AO:25
§ 3-1.3. Mufflers Required. [Ord. 4/10/80 § 3; Ord. 1/7/16]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any noise-creating blower or
power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes
noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from
such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler
device sufficient to deaden such noise.
§ 3-1.4. Penalty. [Ord. 1/7/16]
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be warned (first
offense), fined not exceeding $100 (second offense), $200 (third offense),
or $500, and revocation or suspension of any associated license (fourth
offense) or punished by imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Each
day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense and shall be punishable as such, hereunder. This sequence
will restart each calendar year.
§ 3-2. DISORDERLY CONDUCT.7
§ 3-2.1. Disorderly Conduct Enumerated. [Ord. 4/8/76, § 1]
No person, acting alone or in concert with others, may engage in conduct
which violates any of the following:
(50 dBA between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.) in the accessible area of their
properties.
a. Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward
another whereby any person is placed in fear of safety of his life, limb or
health; or
b. Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward
another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of
being destroyed or damaged; or
c. Any person who shall in a public place use "fighting words" or language
or words which by their very utterance inflict injury to or tend to incite
outrage and immediate turmoil; or
d. Any person who shall use violent and forceful behavior at any time in or
near a public place, such that there is a clear and present danger that
free movement of other persons will be incapacitated in the lawful
exercise of business or amusement; or
e. Any person who shall cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or
riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of
another; or
7. Editor's Note: For State Law as to the authority of the Town Council, see Gen. Laws, 1956
as amended, Title 45, Chapters 6-1 and 6.2.
§ 3-1.2 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 3-2.1
AO:26
§ 3-2.2. Enforcement and Penalty. [Ord. 4/8/76, § 2; Ord. 6/23/77]
Enforcement of the provision of this section and order of prosecution for
any violation thereof is vested in the authority of the Chief of Police. Any
person violating any provision of this section shall be punished by a fine of
not more than $20 or by imprisonment not exceeding five days. This section
is in addition to and, in no way a limitation upon existing Town Ordinances
regulating personal conduct.
§ 3-3. DRINKING AND SLEEPING IN ALL PUBLIC AREAS.
f. Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others
for the purpose of causing, provoking or engaging in any fight or brawl;
or
g. Any person who shall disturb the peace of others by violent, indecent,
offensive or boisterous conduct or language which said conduct or
language was calculated to cause anguish or injury to another; or
h. Any person who shall be found roughly crowding or pushing any person
in any public place; or
i. Any person who shall throw any stone, or any other missile upon or at
any person, vehicle, building or other public or private property; or
j. Any person who shall throw any stone or other missile from any vehicle,
either moving, stopped or parked, upon or at any person, building or
other public or private property; or
k. Any person who shall by acts of violence interfere with another's
pursuit of a lawful occupation; or
l. Any person who shall urinate, or defecate on any public street, alley,
sidewalk or floor of any public building or a building where the public
gathers or has access; or
m. Any person who shall wantonly make a false alarm with reference to the
request of fire fighting apparatus, or cries "fire" in any public place for
the sole purpose of causing turmoil; or
n. Any person who shall prowl or wander upon the private property of
another or peek in the door or window of any inhabited dwelling or
home located upon private property without lawful business with the
owner or occupant thereof; or
o. Any person who shall congregate with another or others in or on any
public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and
refuses to clear such public way when ordered to do so by a peace
officer or other person having authority.
§ 3-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-3.1
AO:27
§ 3-3.1. Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages in Public Places
Prohibited. [Ord. 6/8/78, § 1]
The consumption of alcoholic beverages of any kind or the possession of any
open container thereof is prohibited in all public places, including beaches,
parks and streets in the Town with the exception of those places licensed
for the consumption of alcoholic beverages. It shall be a misdemeanor for
any person to consume alcoholic beverages, or have in his or her possession
any open container thereof, in any public area within the Town.
§ 3-3.2. Sleeping in Public Areas Prohibited. [Ord. 6/8/78, § 2; Ord.
6/29/78]
There shall be no sleeping in any public area of the Town, including
beaches, parks, streets and automobiles parked in any public area, between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. It shall be a misdemeanor for any
person to sleep in any public area of the Town except those places which
provide sleeping accommodations for transient visitors, or except where
special permission has been granted by the Town Council. Requests for
special permission shall be filed in writing in the office of the Chief of Police.
The authority of the Town Council in granting permission under the above
paragraph in reference to the Town Beach at the South Shore is delegated
to the Chairman of the Beach Commission.
§ 3-3.3. Penalty.
Every person found guilty of violating this section shall be fined not more
than $20 or imprisoned not more than five days.
§ 3-4. DAMAGING PUBLIC PROPERTY; FALSE ALARMS.
§ 3-4.1. Damage to Public Property; Penalty. [Ord. 8/11/58, § 1]
Every person who shall willfully injure, damage or deface any public
properties belonging to the Town shall be fined not less than twice the
amount of the damage done, unless that amount shall exceed $20; and if
that amount shall exceed $20, he shall be imprisoned not exceeding one
year.
§ 3-4.2. False Alarms. [Ord. 6/19/03]
Any business, residence, or other property to which the Police, Fire, or
other Town department responds in response to a house false alarm or
security device and:
a. There is a malfunction in the system;
b. A pet activates the alarm or device;
c. The owner or another authorized person activates the alarm or device;
§ 3-3.1 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 3-4.2
AO:28
§ 3-5. HUNTING.
§ 3-5.1. Hunting Prohibited Unless Written Permission Is Secured.
[Ord. 2/5/70, § 1]
No person shall hunt, take or kill any wild bird or animal at any time within
the Town provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall prohibit
an owner or a tenant of land from hunting and killing wild birds or animals
thereon and persons who have the consent in writing of the owner or tenant,
pursuant to the Fish and Game Laws of the State of Rhode Island.
§ 3-5.2. Permission to Be Countersigned by Chief of Police. [Ord. 2/
5/70, § 2]
No person shall hunt, take or kill any wild bird or animal at any time on the
land of another without a written permit from the owner or tenant of said
land countersigned by the Chief of Police or his deputy, pursuant to the Fish
and Game Laws of the State of Rhode Island.
§ 3-5.3. Annual Renewal Required. [Ord. 2/5/70, § 3]
All permits shall be renewed annually and may be revoked by parties issuing
the same.
§ 3-5.4. Proximity to Buildings. [Ord. 2/5/70, § 4]
No person shall discharge any firearm within 500 feet of a dwelling or
structure without specific permission of the owner or tenant thereof. It shall
be unlawful to hunt along or across a highway.
§ 3-5.5. Violations; Penalty. [Ord. 2/5/70, § 5; Ord. 6/23/77]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined not
more than $20, or imprisonment not exceeding five days.
d. Any other reason except that which the alarm or device is designed to
operate, (including but not limited to: break-in, house invasion,
burglary, fire) will incur the following penalties:
First offense: Written warning
Second offense: $25 fine
Third offense: $50 fine
Fourth offense and each subsequent offense: $100 per incident
If the Police, Fire and other Town departments have not responded to
a false alarm within a one-year period then all prior offenses will be
erased from record and the next such violation will be considered the
first offense.
§ 3-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-5.6
AO:29
§ 3-5.6. Hunting on Sunday Prohibited. [Ord. 10/14/46, § 1, 2; Ord.
11/9/95; Ord. 7/11/02]
Chapter 4
ANIMAL CONTROL
§ 4-1. CONTROL AND LICENSING OF DOGS.8
§ 4-1.1. Impounding Dogs Which are Threatening or Menacing.
[Ord. 6/11/62, § 1]
No person, being the owner of or having the charge or custody of any dog,
shall allow such dog to go at large upon any highway within the Town so
as to be a public menace. Any dog found in this Town off the owner's or
keeper's premises, acting in a threatening or menacing manner, or biting or
attempting to bite any person so as to constitute a public menace, shall be
impounded.
§ 4-1.2. Barking, Biting or Howling Dogs. [Ord. 6/11/62, § 2; Ord. 8/
23/84, § 1]
If a complaint is made to the Chief of Police or the Animal Control Officer
about any dog within the Town, which, by barking, biting, howling, by
reason of doing damage to property, or in any other way or manner, disturbs
or annoys any person, the Chief of Police or the Animal Control Officer shall
investigate the matter. If, after investigation, they shall find facts to warrant
the complaint, and if after due notice to the person owning or keeping such
dog or permitting such dog to be kept, the Chief of Police or Animal Control
Officer ascertain that the nuisance is not abated, the Chief of Police or
Animal Control Officer shall give notice to such person owning or keeping
the dog or permitting the dog to be kept to forthwith remove such dog and
a. No person shall use or discharge any weapon of any kind or description,
including but not limited to any bow and arrow, rifle, musket, pistol,
shotgun, blunderbuss or fowling piece in the pursuing of hunting
animals or birds in the Town on the first day of the week, commonly
known as Sunday.
Notwithstanding the above, bow and arrow may be used for the hunting
of deer only on private land with written permission of the landowner
countersigned by the Chief of Police. The hunter must file with the
Chief of Police a copy of his/her valid State of Rhode Island bow-hunting
license.
b. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be fined not
exceeding $20 or shall be imprisoned not more than 10 days, for each
offense.
8. Editor's Note: For State Law as to the authority of the Town Council, see Gen. Laws, 1956
as amended, Title 4, Chapter 13.
§ 3-5.6 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 4-1.2
AO:30
keep him beyond the limits of the Town or destroy him; and such person
shall thereupon cause such dog to be forthwith removed and kept beyond
the limits of the Town or destroyed.
§ 4-1.3. Confinement of Certain Dogs and Other Animals. [Ord. 8/
23/84, § 2]
§ 4-1.4. Miscellaneous Provisions. [Ord. 8/23/84, § 2]
§ 4-1.5. Investigation. [Ord. 8/23/84, § 2]
In the discharge of the duties imposed by this section, the Animal Control
Officer or any Police Officer shall have the authority at all reasonable times
to enter upon any premises (but such authority should not include the
right to enter any residence on such premises without owner's permission)
a. The owner shall confine permanently within a building or secure
enclosure, every fierce, dangerous, or vicious dog, and shall not take
such dog out of such building or secure enclosure unless such dog is
securely muzzled.
b. The owner of every female dog in heat shall keep it confined in a
building or secure enclosure, or in a veterinary hospital or boarding
kennel, in such a manner that such female dog cannot come in contact
with another dog, except for intentional breeding purposes.
c. Any dog described in the foregoing subsections, found at large, shall be
impounded by the Animal Control Officer.
a. Immediately upon impounding dogs or other animals the Animal
Control Officer shall make reasonable efforts to notify the owners of
such dogs or other animals, so impounded, and inform such owners of
the conditions whereby they may regain custody of such animals. It
shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer to keep, or cause to be
kept, accurate and detailed records of the impoundment and disposition
of all animals coming into his/her custody.
b. Under emergency circumstances, the Animal Control Officer or any
Police Officer may destroy any injured or maimed animal after making
reasonable efforts to contact the owner of said animal if owner's
identification is present on the animal.
c. It shall not be the responsibility of the Animal Control Officer to dispose
of dogs at owner's request. The owner of a dog or any domestic animal
who wishes to dispose of such animal, shall assume all cost and the
responsibility for same.
d. All complaints made under the provisions of this section shall be made
to the Animal Control Officer or any Police Officer and may be made
orally, provided, however, that such complaint shall be reduced to
writing within 48 hours and shall be signed by the complainant showing
his address and telephone number, if any.
§ 4-1.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-1.5
AO:31
to examine a dog or other animal which it is reasonable to suspect is in
violation of a provision of this section. Such officer shall have the further
authority to take possession of any such dog or other animal and remove it
from such premises.
§ 4-1.6. Provisions in Addition to General Law. [Ord. 6/11/62, § 3;
Ord. 8/23/84, § 3]
Subsections 4-1.1, 4-1.2, 4-1.3, 4-1.4, and 4-1.5 are to be in addition to
the provisions set forth in the Rhode Island General Laws, 1956, Title 4,
Chapter 13, as amended.
§ 4-1.7. Enforcement. [Ord. 6/11/62, § 5; Ord. 8/23/84, § 4]
The Chief of Police or Animal Control Officer shall, where applicable,
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 4-2. ANIMALS AT LARGE.9
§ 4-2.1. Animals at Large Prohibited, Penalty. [Ord. 4/8/76; Ord. 6/
23/77]
Any person who willfully or negligently permits or allows any cattle, horse,
sheep, goat or pig, or any other animal to escape or stray from its enclosure
or restraint onto or to wander on or run at large upon any public or private
property in the Town other than the property of the owner of the animal
be fined not more than $20, or imprisonment not exceeding five days. The
Chief of Police and, or the Animal Control Officer of the Town shall, upon
complaint, investigate and where applicable the Chief of Police shall cause
to be enforced the provisions of this section.
§ 4-2.2. Dogs Prohibited on South Shore Beach. [Ord. 7/18/91]
No dogs shall be allowed on South Shore Beach during the hours the beach
is open.
§ 4-3. FEES FOR REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.10
§ 4-3.1. Poundage Fees. [Ord. 7/11/55, § 1; Ord. 8/23/84, § 5]
The owner of any animal going at large that has been impounded shall not
take the animal out of the pound until he shall first reimburse the Poundkeeper
the expenses of keeping such animal. No regard shall be given to
the milk derived from the same. The fees of the Pound-keeper for receiving
the animals into the pound shall be: for each horse and neat-beast, $5; for
each sheep and hog, $5; for every notification set up, or notice given to the
9. Editor's Note: For State Law as to the authority of the Town Council, see Gen. Laws, 1956
as amended, Title 4, Chapters 14, 15 and 16.
10.Editor's Note: For State Law as to the authority of the Town Council, see Public Laws of
1955, Chapter 3571; see also, General Laws as amended, Chapter 641.
§ 4-1.5 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 4-3.1
AO:32
owner, $5; and the following penalties, namely: for every horse, neat-beast,
sheep, and dog, $6 per day.
§ 4-3.2. Regulations Are in Addition to General Laws. [Ord. 7/11/55,
§ 2]
This section is in addition to the provisions of Chapter 641 of the General
Laws as amended, and is in no way to be construed as a limitation thereof.
§ 4-4. SCHEDULE OF FINES.11 [Ord. 8/23/84, § 8]
Under authority granted in Title 4, Chapter 13, Section 1 (4-13-1) of the
General Laws of Rhode Island, 1956 as amended, entitled "Regulatory
ordinances-Enforcement", the following procedure is hereby established to
permit the enforcement of the Ordinances of the Town of Little Compton
pertaining to Chapter 4, Animal Control by pecuniary penalty to be
recovered by action of debt which may be offered to the person violating
this chapter.
The following schedule of fees is herein established:
Offense Fee
First offense $10
Second offense $15
Third offense $25
Failure by the violator to dispose of any violation in the manner herein
provided will be deemed to be a waiver, on the part of the violator to be
allowed such privilege, and the Chief of Police will cause a complaint to be
filed in the Second Division Court, Newport, Rhode Island.
The Chief of Police is hereby directed to have printed summonses
containing information as to the violation being cited, the manner in which
the violator may pay for the offense, by paying the prescribed fee to the
Town Treasurer, or set forth the date and time for appearance in Court.
Chapter 5
TRAFFIC
[Editor's Note: The ordinance establishing this chapter was adopted
on September 6, 1961. Amendments are noted on sections changed.
The traffic ordinance was originally adopted on August 10, 1935;
amended June 6, 1938; February 10, 1947; August 12, 1957 and
August 11, 1958.]
§ 5-1. WORDS AND PHRASES DEFINED.
11.Editor's Note: For State Law as to the authority of the Town Council, see Gen. Laws, 1956
as amended, Title 4, Chapter 13.
§ 4-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-1
AO:33
a. The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall for the
purpose of this chapter have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them in this section.
1. AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE – Shall mean vehicles of the
fire department (fire patrol), police vehicles and such ambulances
and emergency vehicles of municipal departments or public service
corporations as are designated or authorized by the Commissioner
or the Chief of Police of this Town.
2. BICYCLE – Shall mean every device propelled by human power
upon which any person may ride, having two tandem wheels either
of which is more than 20 inches in diameter.
3. CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT – Shall mean all streets and
portions of streets within all those areas described in section
14-1.3c1(a), (b) and (c) of this Code.
4. COMMERCIAL VEHICLE – Shall mean every vehicle designed,
maintained, or used primarily for the transportation of property.
5. DRIVER – Shall mean every person who drives or is in actual
physical control of a vehicle.
6. HIGHWAY – Shall mean the entire width between the boundary
lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is
open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
7. INTERSECTION – Shall mean the area embraced within the
prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, or, if none, then
the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two highways which
join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area
within which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at
any other angle may come in conflict.
8. LANED ROADWAY – Shall mean a roadway which is divided into
two or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
9. MOTOR VEHICLE – Shall mean every object or device propelled or
drawn on wheels, rollers, runners, or otherwise except roadrollers
and those objects or devices that are run only upon rails or tracks.
10. MOTORCYCLE – Shall mean every motor vehicle having a seat or
saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more
than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a
tractor.
11. OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD – Shall mean whenever certain hours
are named herein they shall mean standard time or daylight-saving
time as may be in current use in this Town.
12. OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES – Shall mean all signs,
signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with this ordinance
§ 5-1 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 5-1
AO:34
placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having
jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding
traffic.
13. PARK OR PARKING – Shall mean the standing of a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and
while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise and
passengers.
14. PEDESTRIAN – Shall mean any person afoot.
15. PERSON – Shall mean every natural person, firm, copartnership,
association or corporation.
16. POLICE OFFICER – Shall mean every officer of the municipal Police
Department or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or
to make arrest for violations of traffic regulations.
17. PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY – Shall mean every way or place in
private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and
those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not
by other persons.
18. RESIDENCE DISTRICT – Shall mean the territory contiguous to
and including a highway not comprising a business district when
the property on such a highway for a distance of 300 feet or more is
in the main improved with residences or residences and buildings
in use for business.
19. RIGHT-OF-WAY – Shall mean the privilege of the immediate use of
the roadway.
20. ROADWAY – Shall mean that portion of a highway improved,
designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the
berm or shoulder. In the event a highway includes two or more
separate roadways the terms "roadway" as used herein shall refer
to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways
collectively.
21. SAFETY ZONE – Shall mean the area or space officially set apart
within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is
protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be
plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone.
22. SIDEWALK – Shall mean that portion of a street between the curb
lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property
lines, intended for use of pedestrians.
23. STAND OR STANDING – Shall mean the halting of a vehicle,
whether occupied or not, otherwise than for the purpose of and
while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers.
§ 5-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-1
AO:35
§ 5-2. TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION.
§ 5-2.1. Police Administration.
There is hereby established in the Police Department of this Town a traffic
division to be under the control of an officer of police appointed by and
directly responsible to the Chief of Police.
24. STOP – When required, shall mean complete cessation from
movement.
25. STOP OR STOPPING – When prohibited shall mean any halting,
even momentarily, of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except
when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with the directions of a Police Officer or traffic-control device.
26. STREET OR HIGHWAY – Shall mean the entire width between the
boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part
thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular
travel.
27. TRAILER – Shall mean any structure used or intended to be used or
capable of being used as permanent or temporary living quarters
by any person, which structure is capable of being moved from
place to place, either by its own power or by power supplied by
some vehicle attached to it or to be attached thereto.
28. THROUGH HIGHWAY – Shall mean every highway or portion
thereof on which vehicular traffic is given preferential right-of-way,
and at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting
highways is required by law to yield right-of-way to vehicles on
such through highway in obedience to either a stop sign or yield
sign, when such signs are erected as provided in this chapter.
29. TRAFFIC – Shall mean pedestrians, ridden or herded animals,
vehicles, streetcars and other conveyances either singly or
together while using any highway for purposes of travel.
30. TRAFFIC-CONTROL – Signal shall mean any device, whether
manually, electrically or mechanically operated by which traffic is
alternately directed to stop and to proceed.
31. TRAFFIC DIVISION – Shall mean the traffic division of the Police
Department of this Town, or in the event a traffic division is not
established, then the term whenever used herein shall be deemed
to refer to the Police Department of this Town.
32. VEHICLE – Shall mean every object or device propelled or drawn
on wheels, rollers, runners, or otherwise except road rollers and
those objects or devices that are run only upon rails or tracks.
§ 5-1 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 5-2.2
AO:36
§ 5-2.2. Duty of Traffic Division.
It shall be the duty of the traffic division with such aid as may be rendered
by other members of the police department to enforce the street traffic
regulations of this Town and all the State vehicle laws applicable to street
traffic in this Town, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate
accidents and to cooperate with other officers of the Town in the
administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to
improve traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic
conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon the division
by this chapter and the traffic ordinances of this Town.
§ 5-2.3. Records of Traffic Violations.
§ 5-2.4. Traffic Division to Investigate Accidents.
It shall be the duty of the traffic division, assisted by other police officers
of the department, to investigate traffic accidents, to arrest and to assist in
the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law causing or
contributing to such accidents.
§ 5-2.5. Traffic Accident Studies.
Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the
traffic division shall cooperate with the Town traffic engineer in conducting
studies of such accidents and determining remedial measures.
§ 5-2.6. Traffic Accident Reports.
The traffic division shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident
reports.
§ 5-2.7. Drivers Files to be Maintained.
a. The Police Department or the traffic division thereof shall keep a record
of all violations of the traffic ordinances of this Town or of the State
vehicle laws of which any person has been charged, together with a
record of the final disposition of all such alleged offenses, such record
shall be so maintained so as to show all types of violations and the total
of each. The record shall accumulate during at least a five-year period
and from that time on the record shall be maintained complete for at
least the most recent five-year period.
b. All forms for records of violations and notices of violations shall be
serially numbered. For each month and year a written record shall be
kept available to the public showing the disposal of all such forms.
c. All such records and reports shall be public records.
a. The Police Department or the traffic division thereof shall maintain a
suitable record of all accidents, warnings, arrests, convictions, and
§ 5-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-2.7
AO:37
§ 5-2.8. Traffic Division to Designate Method of Identifying Funeral
Processions.
The traffic division shall designate a type of pennant or other identifying
insignia to be displayed upon, or other method to be employed to identify,
the vehicles in funeral processions.
§ 5-2.9. Emergency and Experimental Regulations.
§ 5-3. ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC
REGULATIONS.
§ 5-3.1. Authority of Police and Fire Department Officials.
complaints reported for each driver, which shall be filed alphabetically
under the name of the driver concerned.
b. The division shall study the cases of all the drivers charged with
frequent or serious violations of the traffic laws or involved in frequent
traffic accidents or any serious accident, and shall attempt to discover
the reasons therefor, and shall take whatever steps are lawful and
reasonable to prevent the same or to have the licenses of such persons
suspended or revoked.
c. Such records shall accumulate during at least a five-year period and
from that time on such records shall be maintained complete for at least
the most recent five-year period.
a. The Chief of Police is hereby empowered to make regulations necessary
to make effective the provisions of the traffic ordinances of this Town
and to make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to
cover emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or
experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more than 90 days.
a. It shall be the duty of the officers of the Police Department or such
officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police to enforce all street traffic
laws of this Town and all of the State vehicle laws applicable to street
traffic in this Town.
b. Officers of the Police Department or such officers as are assigned by the
Chief of Police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand,
or signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided that, in the event of
a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard
pedestrians, officers of the Police Department may direct traffic as
conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic
laws.
c. Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct,
or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity.
§ 5-2.7 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 5-3.2
AO:38
§ 5-3.2. Required Obedience to Traffic Ordinance.
It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform
any act required in this chapter.
§ 5-3.3. Obedience to Police and Fire Department Officials.
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of a Police Officer or Fire Department official.
§ 5-3.4. Persons Riding Animals to Obey Traffic Regulations.
Every person riding an animal upon a roadway and every person driving
any animal-drawn vehicle shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter
applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those provisions of this
chapter which by their very nature can have no application.
§ 5-3.5. Use of Coasters, Roller Skates and Similar Devices
Restricted.
No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy
vehicle, or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing
a street on a cross walk and when so crossing such person shall be granted
all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to
pedestrians. This section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as
a play street as authorized by ordinance of this Town.
§ 5-3.6. Public Employees to Obey Traffic Regulations.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned
by or used in the service of the United States Government, this State,
County or Town, and it shall be unlawful for any driver to violate any of the
provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter or
by State statute.
§ 5-3.7. Authorized Emergency Vehicles.
a. The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator
of the law or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire
alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject
to the conditions herein stated.
b. The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
1. Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this chapter;
2. Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
3. Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he does not endanger
life or property;
§ 5-3.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-3.7
AO:39
§ 5-3.8. Operation of Vehicles on Approach of Authorized
Emergency Vehicles.
§ 5-3.9. Immediate Notice of Accident.
The driver of a vehicle involved in any accident shall immediately by the
quickest means of communication give notice of such accident to the Police
Department if such accident occurs within this Town.
§ 5-3.10. Written Report of Accident.
The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an accident
resulting in bodily injury to or death of any person or total property damage
4. Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning
in specified directions.
c. The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle
shall apply only when the driver of any vehicle while in motion sounds
audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably
necessary, and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted
lamp displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions
from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle, except that an
authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be
equipped with or display a red light visible from in front of the vehicle.
d. The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety
of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the
consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others.
a. Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle
making use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of
the laws of this State, or of a police vehicle properly and lawfully
making use of an audible signal only;
1. The driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and
shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as
possible, to, the right hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any
intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the
authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise
directed by a police officer.
2. Upon the approach of an authorized emergency vehicle, as above
stated, the motorman of every car shall immediately stop clear of
any intersection and keep in such position until the authorized
emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by
a police officer.
b. This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety
of all persons using the highway.
§ 5-3.7 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 5-3.10
AO:40
to an apparent extent of $200 or more shall, within five days after such
accident, forward a written report of such accident to the Police
Department, or a copy of any report he is required to forward to the State.
§ 5-3.11. When Driver Unable to Report.
§ 5-3.12. Public Inspection of Reports Relating to Accidents.
§ 5-4. TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
§ 5-4.1. Authority to Install Traffic-Control Devices.
The Police Department shall place and maintain traffic-control signs,
signals, and devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances of
this Town to make effective the provisions of said ordinances, and may
place and maintain such additional traffic-control devices as they may deem
necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic ordinances of this Town or
under State law or to guide or warn traffic.
a. Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of giving
immediate notice of an accident as required in subsection 5-3.9 and
there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the accident
capable of doing so, such occupant shall give, or cause to be given the
notice not given by the driver.
b. Whenever the driver is physically incapable of making a written report
of an accident as required in subsection 5-3.10 and such driver is not
the owner of the vehicle, then the owner of the vehicle involved in such
accident shall within five days after learning of the accident make such
report not made by the driver.
a. All accident reports made by persons involved in accidents or by
garages shall be without prejudice to the individual so reporting and
shall be for the confidential use of the Police Department or other
governmental agencies having use for the records for accident
prevention purposes, or for the administration of the laws of this State
relating to the deposit of security and proof of financial responsibility by
persons driving or the owners of motor vehicles, except that the identity
of a person involved in an accident may be disclosed when such identity
is not otherwise known or when such person denies his presence at
such accident.
b. All accident reports and supplemental information filed in connection
with the administration of the laws of this State relating to the deposit
of security or proof of financial responsibility shall be confidential and
not open to general public inspection, nor shall copying of lists of such
reports be permitted, except, however, that such reports and
supplemental information may be examined by any person named
therein or by his representative designated in writing.
§ 5-3.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-4.2
AO:41
§ 5-4.2. Manual and Specifications for Traffic-Control Devices.
All traffic-control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual
and specifications approved by the State Traffic Commission (or) resolution
adopted by the legislative body of this Town. All signs and signals required
hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform
as to type and location throughout the Town. All traffic-control devices so
erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of State law or this chapter
shall be official traffic-control devices.
§ 5-4.3. Obedience to Official Traffic-Control Devices.
The driver of any vehicle and the motorman of any car shall obey the
instructions of any official traffic-control device applicable thereto placed in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise directed by
a traffic or police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle in this chapter.
§ 5-4.4. When Traffic Signs Required for Enforcement Purposes.
No provisions of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced
against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation
an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen
by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not
state that signs are required, such section shall be effective even though no
signs are erected or in place.
§ 5-4.5. Traffic-Control Signal Legend.
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting the words
"Go", "Caution" or "Stop", or exhibiting different colored lights successively
one at a time, or with arrows, the following colors only shall be used and
the terms and lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and
pedestrians as follows:
a. Green alone or "Go":
1. Vehicular traffic facing the signal, except when prohibited under
subsection 5-10.5, may proceed straight through or turn right or
left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn, but
vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield
the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within
the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is
exhibited.
2. Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
b. Steady yellow alone:
1. Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red or
"Stop" signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter and such
§ 5-4.2 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 5-4.5
AO:42
vehicular traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection
when the red or "Stop" signal is exhibited.
2. Pedestrians facing such signal are thereby advised that there is
insufficient time to cross the roadway, and any pedestrian then
starting to cross shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles.
ALTERNATE 2. No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the
roadway until the green or "Go" is shown alone (unless authorized
so to do by a pedestrian "Walk" signal).
c. Steady red alone, or "Stop":
1. Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection of, if none, then
before entering the intersection and shall remain standing until
green or "Go" is shown alone.
2. No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he
can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic.
ALTERNATE 2. No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the
roadway until the green or "Go" is shown alone (unless authorized
so to do by a pedestrian "Walk" signal).
d. Steady red with green arrows:
1. Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow
but shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a
crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
2. No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he
can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic.
ALTERNATE 2. No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the
roadway until the green or "Go" is shown alone (unless authorized
so to do by a pedestrian "Walk" signal).
e. In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and maintained
at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section shall
be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature can
have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or
marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but
in the absence of any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the
signal.
f. The operator of any vehicle shall obey the above signals as applicable to
vehicles.
§ 5-4.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-4.6
AO:43
§ 5-4.6. Pedestrian-Control Signals.
Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words "Walk" or
"Wait" or "Don't Walk" are in place such signals shall indicate as follows:
§ 5-4.7. Flashing Signals.
§ 5-4.8. Display of Unauthorized Signs, Signals or Markings.
a. Walk. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway
in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the
drivers of all vehicles.
b. Wait or Don't Walk. No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the
direction of such signs, but any pedestrian who has partially completed
his crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety
zone while the wait signal is showing.
a. Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic
sign or signal it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
1. Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering
the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line, when
marked, or if none, then before entering the intersection, and the
right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after
making a stop at a stop sign.
2. Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed
through the intersection or past such signal only with caution.
a. No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any
highway an unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which
purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official trafficcontrol
device, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or
which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official
traffic-control device.
b. No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit
upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any
commercial advertising.
c. This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private
property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional
information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
d. Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway
is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed
without notice.
§ 5-4.6 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 5-4.9
AO:44
§ 5-4.9. Interference With Official Traffic-Control Devices or
Railroad [if any] Signs or Signals.
No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface,
injure, knock down or remove any official traffic-control device or any
inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any other part thereof.
§ 5-4.10. Authority to Establish Play Streets.
Whenever the Police Department shall have authority to declare any street
or part thereof a play street and to place appropriate signs or devices in the
roadway indicating and helping to protect the same.
§ 5-4.11. Play Streets.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof
as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street
or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose
residences are within such closed area, and that any said driver shall
exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof.
§ 5-4.12. Police Department to Designate Crosswalks and Establish
Safety Zones.
The Police Department is hereby authorized:
§ 5-4.13. Traffic Lanes.
§ 5-5. SPEED REGULATIONS.
§ 5-5.1. State Speed Laws Applicable. [Ord. 8/22/96]
The State traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable
upon all streets within the Town, except as this chapter, as authorized by
State law, hereby declares and determines upon the basis of engineering
a. To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks, or lines upon
the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in their
opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway,
and at such other places as they may deem necessary;
b. To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places
as they may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians.
a. The Police Department is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes upon
the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of
traffic is necessary.
b. Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the
boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another
vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement.
§ 5-4.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-5.1
AO:45
and traffic investigation that certain areas, in which event it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of any speed
so declared in Schedule I, "Speed Limits".
§ 5-5.2. Decrease of State Speed Limits at Certain Intersections.
It is hereby determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic
investigation that the speed permitted by State law at the street
intersections is greater than is reasonable or safe under the conditions
found to exist at such intersections and it is hereby declared that the
maximum speed limit within 100 feet upon every designated approach to
and within these intersections designated on Schedule II, "Decrease of
State Speed Limits at Certain Intersections," shall be as therein stated,
which speeds so declared shall be effective at the times specified herein
when signs are erected upon every approach to every such intersection
giving notice of the maximum speed limit so declared thereat.
§ 5-5.3. Increasing State Speed Limits in Certain Zones.
It is hereby determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic
investigation that the speed permitted by State law upon the following
streets is less than is necessary for safe operation of vehicles thereon
by reason of the designation and signposting of these streets as through
highways and (or) by reason of widely spaced intersections and it is hereby
declared that the maximum speed limit shall be as hereinafter set forth
on those streets or parts of streets herein designated in Schedule III,
"Increasing State Speed Limits in Certain Zones", at the times specified
when signs are erected giving notice thereof.
§ 5-5.4. Decrease of State-Law Maximum Speed.
It is hereby determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic
investigation that the speed permitted by State law outside of business and
residence districts as applicable upon the streets designated in Schedule IV,
"Decreasing of State-Law Maximum Speed", is greater than is reasonable or
safe under the conditions found to exist upon such streets and it is hereby
declared that the maximum speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour as herein
set forth on those streets or parts of streets herein designated at the times
herein specified when signs are erected giving notice thereof.
§ 5-6. TURNING MOVEMENTS.
§ 5-6.1. Required Position and Method of Turning at Intersections.
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do as
follows:
a. Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be
made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the
roadway.
§ 5-5.1 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 5-6.1
AO:46
§ 5-6.2. Authority to Place and Obedience to Turning Markers.
§ 5-6.3. Authority to Place Restricted Turn Signs.
The Police Department is hereby authorized to determine those
intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or "U"
turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such
turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at
other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs
or they may be removed when such turns are permitted.
§ 5-6.4. Obedience to No-Turn Signs.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or
"U" turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of
any such sign.
§ 5-6.5. Limitations on Turning Around.
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction upon any street in a business district and shall not upon
b. Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is
permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the
intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of
the right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof and by
passing to the right of such center line where it enters the intersection
and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to
leave the intersection to the right of the center line of the roadway
being entered. Whenever practicable the left turn shall be made in that
portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection.
c. Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection where
traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways, the
driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall
approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully
available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle and
after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave
the intersection, as nearly as practicable in the left-hand lane lawfully
available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being
entered.
a. The Police Department is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs
within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled
by vehicles turning at such intersections, and course to be traveled as
so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law.
b. When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed
within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles
turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of
such indications.
§ 5-6.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-6.5
AO:47
any other street so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made in
safety and without interfering with other traffic.
§ 5-7. ONE-WAY STREETS.
§ 5-7.1. Authority to Sign One-Way Streets.
Whenever any ordinance of this Town designates any one-way street, the
Police Department shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof,
and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place.
Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at
every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is
prohibited.
§ 5-7.2. One-Way Streets.
Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys described in
Schedule V, "One-Way Streets", of Chapter 5A, vehicular traffic shall move
only in the direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are
erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the
opposite direction is prohibited.
§ 5-7.3. Authority to Restrict Direction of Movement on Streets
During Certain Periods.
§ 5-8. STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS, ETC.
§ 5-8.1. Through Streets Designated.
Those streets and parts of streets described in Schedule VI of Chapter 5A
are hereby declared to be through streets for the purpose of this section.
§ 5-8.2. Signs Required at Through Streets.
Whenever any ordinance of this Town designates and describes a through
street it shall be the duty of the Police Department to place and maintain
a stop sign, or on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation at
any intersection a yield sign, on each and every street intersecting such
a. The Police Department is hereby authorized to determine and designate
streets, parts of streets or specific lanes thereon upon which vehicular
traffic shall proceed in one direction during one period and the opposite
direction during another period of the day and shall place and maintain
appropriate markings, signs, barriers or other devices to give notice
thereof. The Police Department may erect signs temporarily
designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction,
regardless of the center line of the roadway.
b. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle in violation of
such markings, signs, barriers or other devices so placed in accordance
with this subsection.
§ 5-6.5 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 5-8.2
AO:48
through street unless traffic at any such intersection is controlled at all
times by traffic-control signals, provided, however, that at the intersection
of two such through streets or at the intersection of a through street and
a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs shall be erected at the
approaches of either of said streets as may be determined by the Police
Department upon the basis of an engineering and traffic study.
§ 5-8.3. Other Intersections Where Stop or Yield Required.
The Police Department is hereby authorized to determine and designate
intersections where particular hazard exists upon other than through
streets and to determine (a) whether vehicles shall stop at one or more
entrances to any such intersection, in which event he shall cause to be
erected a stop sign at every such place where a stop is required, or (b)
whether vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on a different street
at such intersection as prescribed in subsection 5-8.6a, in which event
he shall cause to be erected a yield sign at every place where obedience
thereto is required.
§ 5-8.4. Stop Signs and Yield Signs.
§ 5-8.5. Vehicle Entering Stop Intersection.
a. Every stop sign shall bear the word "Stop" in letters not less than eight
inches in height. Every yield sign shall bear the word "Yield" in letters
not less than seven inches in height. Every stop sign and every yield
sign shall at night time be rendered luminous by internal illumination,
or by a floodlight projected on the face of the sign, or by efficient
reflecting elements in the face of the sign.
b. Every stop sign and every yield sign shall be erected as near as
practicable to the nearest line of the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, then as near as practicable to
the nearest line of the intersecting roadway.
a. Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control
signal, every driver of a vehicle and every motorman approaching a
stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, in the event there is
no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then
at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has view
of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the
intersection.
b. Such driver, after having stopped shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle which has entered the intersection from another highway or
which is approaching so closely on the highway as to constitute an
immediate hazard, but the driver, having so yielded, may proceed and
the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection shall yield
the right-of-way to the vehicle so proceeding.
§ 5-8.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-8.6
AO:49
§ 5-8.6. Vehicle Entering Yield Intersection.
§ 5-8.7. Emerging from Alley, Driveway or Building.
The driver of a vehicle within a business or residence district emerging
from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior
to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway or driveway, and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian as
may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the roadway shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.
§ 5-8.8. Stop When Traffic Obstructed.
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there
is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage
of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal
indication to proceed.
§ 5-9. MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES.
§ 5-9.1. Following Fire Apparatus Prohibited.
The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow
any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500 feet
or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has
stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
a. The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall in obedience to
such sign slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions,
or shall stop if necessary, and shall yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrian legally crossing the roadway on which he is driving, and to
any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another highway so
closely as to constitute an immediate hazard. The driver, having
yielded, may proceed, and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching
the intersection shall yield to the vehicle so proceeding, provided,
however, that a driver who enters a yield intersection without stopping
and has or causes a collision with a pedestrian in a crosswalk or a
vehicle in the intersection shall prima facie be considered not to have
yielded as required herein. The foregoing shall not relieve the drivers of
other vehicles approaching the intersection at such distance as not to
constitute an immediate hazard from the duty to drive with due care to
avoid a collision.
b. The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign if required for safety to
stop shall stop before entering the crosswalk at a clearly marked stop
line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver or anyone so concerned has a view of approaching
traffic on the intersection roadway.
§ 5-8.6 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 5-9.2
AO:50
§ 5-9.2. Crossing Fire Hose.
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a Fire Department
when laid down on any street, private driveway or otherwise, to be used at
any fire or alarm of fire without the consent of the Fire Department official
in command.
§ 5-9.3. Driving Through Funeral or Other Procession.
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral
or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such
vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this chapter. This
provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by
traffic-control signals or police officers.
§ 5-9.4. Drivers in a Procession.
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the righthand
edge of the roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead
as close as is practicable and safe.
§ 5-9.5. Funeral Processions to be Identified.
A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such
by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other
identifying insignia or by such other method as may be determined and
designated by the traffic division.
§ 5-9.6. When Permits Required for Parades and Processions.
No funeral, procession or parade containing 200 or more persons or 50
or more vehicles except the forces of the United States Army or Navy,
the military forces of this State and the forces of the Police and Fire
Departments, shall occupy, march or proceed along any street except in
accordance with a permit issued by the Chief of Police and such other
regulations as are set forth herein which may apply.
§ 5-9.7. Vehicle Shall Not be Driven on a Sidewalk.
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area except at a
permanent or temporary driveway.
§ 5-9.8. Limitations on Backing.
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can
be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic.
§ 5-9.9. Opening and Closing Vehicle Doors.
No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available
to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, nor shall
§ 5-9.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-9.9
AO:51
any person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to
moving traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload
passengers.
§ 5-9.10. Riding on Motorcycles.
A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent and
regular seat attached thereto, and such operator shall not carry any other
person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless such
motorcycle is designed to carry more than one person, in which event a
passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for
two persons, or upon another seat firmly attached to the rear or side of the
operator.
§ 5-9.11. Clinging to Vehicles.
No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle
shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
§ 5-9.12. Controlled Access.
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled access roadway
except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority.
§ 5-10. SAFETY ZONES.
§ 5-10.1. Boarding or Alighting From Vehicles.
No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in
motion.
§ 5-10.2. Unlawful Riding.
No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed
or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an
employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding
within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise.
§ 5-10.3. Driving Through Safety Zones Prohibited.
No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety zone.
§ 5-11. PEDESTRIAN'S RIGHTS AND DUTIES.
§ 5-11.1. Pedestrians Subject to Traffic-Control Signals.
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals as heretofore declared
in subsections 5-4.5 and 5-4.6, but at all other places pedestrians shall be
granted those rights and be subject to the restrictions stated in this section.
§ 5-11.2. Pedestrians' Right-of-Way in Crosswalks.
§ 5-9.9 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 5-11.2
AO:52
§ 5-11.3. Pedestrians To Use Right Half of Crosswalks.
Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.
§ 5-11.4. Crossing At Right Angles.
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at
right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb except
in a crosswalk.
§ 5-11.5. When Pedestrian Shall Yield.
§ 5-11.6. Prohibited Crossing.
a. When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation, the
driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping
if need be to so yield to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a
crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon
which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so
closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger.
b. No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and
walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is
impossible for the driver to yield.
c. Paragraph a shall not apply under the conditions stated in paragraph b
of subsection 5-11.5.
d. Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross
the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear
shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
a. Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
b. Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the rightof-
way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
c. The foregoing rules in this section have no application under the
conditions stated in subsection 5-11.6 when pedestrians are prohibited
from crossing at certain designated places.
a. Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a
crosswalk.
b. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk in any
business district.
§ 5-11.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-11.6
AO:53
§ 5-11.7. Pedestrians Walking Along Roadways.
§ 5-11.8. Pedestrians Soliciting Rides or Business.
§ 5-11.9. Drivers to Exercise Due Care.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, every driver of
a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian
upon any roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn when
necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or
any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway.
§ 5-12. REGULATIONS FOR BICYCLES.
§ 5-12.1. Effect of Regulations.
§ 5-12.2. Traffic Laws Apply to Persons Riding Bicycles.
Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the
rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a
vehicle by the laws of this State declaring rules of the road applicable to
vehicle or by the traffic ordinances of this Town applicable to the driver of
c. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk upon any
of the following through streets named in Schedule VII, "Streets
Whereon Pedestrians are Required to Cross at Crosswalks".
a. Where sidewalks are provided it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to
walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
b. Where sidewalks are not provided any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall when practicable walk only on the left side of the
roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the
opposite direction.
a. No persons shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride,
employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle.
b. No person shall stand on or in proximity to a street or highway for the
purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle while
parked or about to be parked on a street or highway.
a. It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to
perform any act required in this section.
b. The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize
or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the
provisions of this section.
c. These regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a bicycle
is operated upon any highway or upon any path set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles subject to these exceptions stated herein.
§ 5-11.6 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 5-12.2
AO:54
a vehicle, except as to special regulations in this section and except as to
those provisions of laws and ordinances which by their nature can have no
application.
§ 5-12.3. Obedience to Traffic-Control Devices.
§ 5-12.4. Riding on Bicycles.
§ 5-12.5. Riding on Roadways and Bicycle Paths.
§ 5-12.6. Speed.
No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions then existing.
§ 5-12.7. Emerging from Alley or Driveway.
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall
upon approaching a sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the
right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on the roadway.
a. Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official
traffic-control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to
vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
b. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left
or "U" turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the
direction of any such sign, except where such person dismounts from
the bicycle to make any such turn, in which event such person shall
then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians.
a. A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a
permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
b. No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped.
a. Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to
the right side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when
passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
b. Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two
abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive
use of bicycles.
c. Wherever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a
roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the
roadway.
§ 5-12.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-12.8
AO:55
§ 5-12.8. Carrying Articles.
No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article
which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handle
bars.
§ 5-12.9. Parking.
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway
against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or
against a building or at the curb, in such manner as to afford the least
obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
§ 5-12.10. Penalties.
Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $1, or by impounding of such person's
bicycle for a period not to exceed 20 days, or by any combination thereof.
§ 5-13. METHOD OF PARKING.
§ 5-13.1. Standing or Parking Close to Curb.
Except as otherwise provided in this section every vehicle stopped or
parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped
or parked with the right-hand wheels of such vehicle parallel to and within
18 inches of the right-hand curb.
§ 5-13.2. Signs or Markings Indicating Angle Parking.
§ 5-13.3. Obedience to Angle Parking Signs or Markings.
On those streets which have been signed or marked by the Town Police
Department for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other
than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs
or markings.
§ 5-13.4. Permits for Loading or Unloading at an Angle to the Curb.
a. The Police Department shall determine upon what streets angle parking
shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such streets but such angle
parking shall not be indicated upon any Federal aid streets or State
highway within this Town unless the State Highway Commission has
determined by resolution or order entered in its minutes that the
roadway is of sufficient width to permit angle parking without
interfering with the free movement of traffic.
b. Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where
passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the
left side of the street or upon any tracks.
§ 5-12.8 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 5-13.4
AO:56
§ 5-13.5. Lamps on Parked Vehicles.
§ 5-14. STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN
SPECIFIED PLACES.
§ 5-14.1. Specified Places Listed.
a. The Chief of Police is authorized to issue special permits to permit the
backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading
merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such
permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real
property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person
the privilege as therein stated and authorized herein.
b. It shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of
the special terms or conditions of any such permit.
a. Whenever a vehicle is lawfully upon a street or highway during the
hours between a half hour after sunset and a half hour before sunrise
and in the event there is sufficient light to reveal any person or object
within a distance of 500 feet upon such street or highway no light need
be displayed upon such parked vehicle.
b. Whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped upon a roadway or shoulder
adjacent thereto, whether attended or unattended, during the hours
between a half hour after sunset and a half hour before sunrise and
there is not sufficient light to reveal any person or object within a
distance of 500 feet upon such highway, such vehicle so parked or
stopped shall be equipped with one or more lamps meeting the
following requirements: At least one lamp shall display a white or
amber light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the
vehicle, and the same lamp or at least one other lamp shall display a red
light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear of the vehicle, and
the location of said lamp or lamps shall always be such that at least one
lamp or combination of lamps meeting the requirements of this section
is installed as near as practicable to the side of the vehicle which is
closest to passing traffic. The foregoing provisions shall not apply to a
motor-driven cycle.
c. Any lighted lamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed.
a. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the
directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the
following places:
1. On a sidewalk;
2. In front of a public or private driveway;
3. Within an intersection;
§ 5-13.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-14.1
AO:57
§ 5-14.2. Parking Not to Obstruct Traffic.
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such
a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than 10 feet of
the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic.
§ 5-14.3. Parking in Alleys.
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under
such conditions as to leave available less than 10 feet of the width of the
roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall
stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the
driveway entrance to any abutting property.
§ 5-14.4. Parking for Certain Purposes Prohibited.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose
of:
4. Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
5. On a crosswalk;
6. Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
7. Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign
or traffic-control signal located at the side of the roadway;
8. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless the (traffic authority) indicates a different length by signs or
markings;
9. Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on
the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within
75 feet of said entrance (when properly signposted);
10. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;
11. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street;
12. At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
b. No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any
such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
a. Displaying such vehicle for sale;
b. Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessary
by an emergency.
§ 5-14.1 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 5-14.5
AO:58
§ 5-14.5. Parking Adjacent to Schools.
§ 5-14.6. Parking Prohibited on Narrow Streets.
The Police Department is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no
parking, upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20
feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs when the width
of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet.
§ 5-14.7. Standing or Parking on One-Way Streets.
The Police Department is authorized to erect signs upon the left-hand side
of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles, and
when such signs are in place, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon
such left-hand side in violation of any such sign.
§ 5-14.8. Standing or Parking on One-Way Roadways.
In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic
is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall
stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway
unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. The Police
Department is authorized to determine when standing or parking may be
permitted upon the left-hand side of any such one-way roadway and to erect
signs giving notice thereof.
§ 5-14.9. No Stopping, Standing or Parking Near Hazardous or
Congested Places.
a. The Police Department is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no
parking upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school
property when such parking would, in their opinion, interfere with
traffic or create hazardous situations.
b. When official signs are so erected indicating no parking upon either
side of a street adjacent to any school in any property as authorized
herein, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place.
a. When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets
as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such
street in violation of any such sign.
a. The Police Department is hereby authorized to determine and designate
by proper signs places not exceeding 100 feet in length in which the
stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles would create an especially
hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic.
b. When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as
authorized herein no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any
such designated place.
§ 5-14.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-15
AO:59
§ 5-15. STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING RESTRICTED OR
PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS.
§ 5-15.1. Camping, Parking or Recreational Uses Prohibited.
No person shall use any portion of the public highways, parks, squares or
commons within this Town for camping, parking or other like recreational
purpose (including the parking of motor vehicles for such purposes). No
person shall park or leave any trailer, whether or not the same is attached
to another conveyance, on any street or public land in the Town of Little
Compton.
§ 5-15.2. Application.
The provisions of this section prohibiting the standing or parking of a
vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified or as
indicated on official signs except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or official traffic-control device.
§ 5-15.3. Regulations Not Exclusive.
The provisions of this section imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles in specified places or at specified times.
§ 5-15.4. Parking Prohibited At All Times on Certain Streets.
[Amended by Ord. 5/20/76; Ord. 7/26/82; Ord. 5/9/13]
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the streets described in Schedule VIII of Chapter
5A.
§ 5-15.4A. No Parking Ban/Tow Zone. [Ord. 3/22/90; Ord. 8/9/90;
Ord. 5/10/07]
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
of streets including turnarounds (also known as cul-de-sacs and including
areas adjacent thereto under control of the Town and dedicated to vehicular
travel) designated as a tow zone and as described in Schedule XIV of
Chapter 5A. All vehicles in violation will be subject to being towed from
the prohibited area to an area designated by the Little Compton Police
Department at the owner's expense.
§ 5-15.5. Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours on Certain
Streets. [Ord. 9/22/88; Ord. No. 5/9/13]
When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall
park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule IX of any day within
§ 5-15 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 5-15.5
AO:60
the district or upon any of the streets described in Schedule IX of Chapter
5A.
§ 5-15.6. Stopping, Standing or Parking Prohibited During Certain
Hours on Certain Streets. [Ord. 9/22/88]
When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall
stop, stand, or park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule X of
any day within the district or upon any of the streets described in Schedule
X of Chapter 5A.
§ 5-15.7. Parking Time Limited on Certain Streets. [Ord. 9/22/88]
When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no persons shall
park a vehicle for longer than one hour at any time between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day within the district or upon any of the
streets described in Schedule XI of Chapter 5A.
§ 5-15.8. Parking Signs Required.
Whenever by this or any other ordinance of this Town any parking time limit
is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets it shall be the duty
of the Police Department to erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof
and no such regulations shall be effective unless signs are erected and in
place at the time of any alleged offense.
§ 5-15.9. Penalties. [Ord. 7/21/88; Ord. 5/10/07]
All violations referred to in section 5-15 shall carry a fine of $20 per
violation, excepting a $50 fine per violation for violations in areas
designated in Schedule XIV No Parking Ban/Tow Zone paragraphs c and
d, in addition to any other penalty provided herein. If any fine is not paid
within 20 days of the issuance of the Notice of Violation, the fine shall be
doubled. If any fine is not paid within 40 days of the issuance of the Notice
of Violation the fine shall be tripled.
§ 5-16. REGULATIONS CONCERNING THE USE OF STREETS.
§ 5-16.1. Load Restrictions Upon Vehicles Using Certain Highways.
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no persons shall operate any
vehicle with a gross weight in excess of the amounts specified in Schedule
XII at any time upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in
Schedule XII of Chapter 5A.
§ 5-16.2. Commercial Vehicles Prohibited From Using Certain
Streets.
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any
commercial vehicle exceeding 6,000 pounds gross weight at any time upon
any of the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XIII of Chapter
§ 5-15.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-16.2
AO:61
5A, except that such vehicles may be operated thereon for the purpose of
delivering or picking up materials or merchandise and then only be entering
such street at the intersection nearest the destination of the vehicle and
proceeding thereon no farther than the nearest intersection thereafter.
§ 5-16.3. Restrictions Upon Use of Streets by Certain Vehicles.
§ 5-16.4. Moving Buildings, Application and Bond.
No person shall draw or remove or employ anyone to draw or remove
through, over, or upon any Town highway, road, street, driftway or public
place, or any portion thereof, in the Town of Little Compton, any house,
barn, shed, shop or other building, without first making application in
writing to the Town Council, or to a committee of the Town Council
appointed as hereinafter provided, setting forth in such application, the
kind of building proposed to be removed, its size, height, location, the Town
highways, roads, streets, driftways, or public places through which it is
proposed to draw or carry the same, the time expected to be occupied
in its removal and the location to which it is proposed to be removed;
accompanying such application with a bond with surety or sureties
satisfactory to the Town Council or said committee to indemnify the Town
from and against all damages which may occur in the process of removal, or
while such building may be temporarily occupying any Town highway, road,
street, driftway or public place, to any wires, pipes, mains, trees or other
private or public property, or to persons; to use all reasonable precautions
to prevent such damages, and to pay all damages which may occur to any
wires, pipes, mains, trees or other private or public property or fixtures
or to persons in or upon any such Town highway, road, street, driftway or
public place, or which in any way may be caused by any such removal, or by
the presence of such building in a Town highway, road, street, driftway or
public place. The Town Council may grant a permit for removal to the owner
or occupant of any building, who has made application, as provided in the
foregoing section and has complied with the requirements thereof.
§ 5-16.5. Excavations in Streets. [Ord. 9/18/86]
a. The Police Department is hereby authorized to determine and designate
those heavily traveled streets upon which shall be prohibited the use of
the roadway by motor-driven cycles, bicycles, horse-drawn vehicles or
other non-motorized traffic and shall erect appropriate signs giving
notice thereof.
b. When signs are so erected giving notice thereof, no person shall
disobey the restrictions stated on such signs.
a. No person shall open any trench, break ground or make any excavation
in any of the Town highways or public places in the Town for the
purpose of laying drains, pipes, wires or for any other purposes
whatsoever, not herein mentioned, without first obtaining from the
§ 5-16.2 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 5-16.5
AO:62
§ 5-16.6. Removal of Street Barriers or Warning Lights Prohibited.
No person shall remove any barrier or lantern, which may be placed by the
Town Council or the Superintendent of Highways, or under their authority
or direction, to protect the public from injury while any highway or public
place is being made or repaired, or while any work or improvement therein
is being performed by or for the Town.
Town Building Official a permit. Such permit shall be issued by the
Town Building Official only after:
1. The applicant has filed with the Town Treasurer a performance
bond in a form satisfactory to the Superintendent of Highways in
the amount of $1,000;
2. The applicant has filed with the Town Treasurer an indemnification
agreement to cover such damages or other expenses incurred by
the Town as a result of the work done by the applicant under the
permit issued;
3. The applicant has paid the Town Treasurer a fee of $10 to cover the
expenses of the issuance of the permit.
b. When digging is done in a so-called finished or hard-surfaced street, the
contractor must:
1. Remove and carry away any material removed in the digging
process;
2. Must not use the material removed in the digging process as fill in
re-filling the excavation;
3. Must replace the material removed in the excavation by crushed
gravel, tamped down to within three inches of the finished surface
of the street; and
4. Fill the remaining hole with cold mix, so-called, and roll it with a
roller so that the top of the refilled excavation is even with the
surrounding road level.
Within a period of not less than two nor more than three months
after the excavation is filled in accordance with the foregoing
paragraph, the contractor must remove the cold mix, so-called, and
replace it with hot mix, so-called, and seal the patch or excavation
with a hot iron so that the completed operation will result in the
patch being even with the surrounding street level.
When digging in dirt streets or ways or along unpaved or
unfinished shoulders or verges or hard finished streets or ways, all
refill must be tamped down as it is installed so that the finished
work will be brought back to the original height of the street, or to
the original height of the unpaved shoulder or verge of the paved
street or way.
§ 5-16.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-16.7
AO:63
§ 5-16.7. Depositing Dirt, Garbage or Junk Prohibited.
No person shall throw, pour, or in any way deposit, place or cause to
be placed any filth, brine, dirt, rubbish, garbage, junk or other offensive
substance of any description whatsoever, on, beside or within the
boundaries of any highway or public place in this Town.
§ 5-16.8. Parades or Processions; Permission Required.
No parade or procession shall occupy or march on any highway in this Town
to the exclusion or interruption of other persons in their individual rights
and the use thereof, except Police and Fire Departments, the organized
militia, the military and naval forces of the United States, the independent
chartered forces, associations wholly composed of soldiers, sailors or
marines honorably discharged from the service of the United States,
veterans of the national guard or naval militia and organizations of the sons
of veterans; unless application shall be made to the Town Council setting
forth the object, time and route of such parade or procession, and the Town
Council shall have granted permission for such parade or procession to be
held under such conditions as it may prescribe.
§ 5-17. PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE ON ARREST.
§ 5-17.1. Penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted
of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of
not more than $100 or by imprisonment for not more than 60 days or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 5-17.2. Issuance of Summons Books to Police Department.
The Chief of Police shall be responsible for the issuance of Uniform
Summons books to individual members of the Police Department. The Chief
of Police shall require a written receipt for every book so issued and shall
maintain a record of every such book and each set of citations contained
therein.
§ 5-17.3. Procedure of Police Officers.
Except when authorized or directed under State law to immediately take
a person before a magistrate for the violation of any traffic laws, a police
officer who halts a person for such violation other than for the purpose of
giving him a warning or warning notice and does not take such person into
custody under arrest, shall take the name, address, and operator's license
number of said person, the registered number of the motor vehicle involved,
and such other pertinent information as may be necessary, and shall issue
to him in writing on a form provided by the State of Rhode Island a traffic
citation containing a notice to answer to the charge against him.
§ 5-16.7 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 5-17.4
AO:64
§ 5-17.4. Disposition and Records of Traffic Citations, Warrants and
Complaints.
§ 5-17.5. Illegal Cancellation of Traffic Citations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cancel or solicit the cancellation of any
traffic citation in any manner other than as provided by this section.
§ 5-17.6. When Copy of Citation Shall Be Deemed a Lawful
Complaint.
In the event the form of citation provided under subsection 5-17.2 includes
information and is sworn to as required under the general laws of this State
in respect to a complaint charging commission of the offense alleged in said
citation to have been committed, then such citation when filed with a court
having jurisdiction shall be deemed to be a lawful complaint for the purpose
of prosecution under this chapter.
a. Every police officer upon issuing a traffic citation to an alleged violator
of any provisions of the motor vehicle laws of this State or of any traffic
ordinances of this Town shall deposit the original and a duplicate copy
of the citation with his immediate superior officer, who shall cause the
original to be delivered to the Traffic Court of this County and the
duplicate copy to the central records section of the Police Department.
The second duplicate copy of the citation shall be retained in the traffic
citation book and shall be delivered by such superior officer.
b. The Chief of Police shall require the return to him of each traffic citation
and all copies thereof, except that copy required to be retained in the
book as provided herein, which has been spoiled or upon which any
entry has been made and has not been issued to an alleged violator.
c. The Chief of Police shall also maintain or cause to be maintained in
connection with every traffic citation issued by a member of the Police
Department a record of the disposition of the charge by the traffic court
of this County or its traffic violations bureau.
d. The Chief of Police shall also maintain or cause to be maintained a
record of all warrants issued by the traffic court of this County or by any
other court on said traffic violation charges and which are delivered to
the Police Department for service, and of the final disposition of all such
warrants.
e. It shall be unlawful and official misconduct for any member of the Police
Department or other officer or public employee to dispose of, alter, or
deface a traffic citation or any copy thereof, or the record of the
issuance or disposition of any traffic citation, complaint, or warrant, in a
manner other than as required in this section.
§ 5-17.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-17.7
AO:65
§ 5-17.7. Failure to Obey Citation.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate his written promise to appear
given to an officer upon the issuance of a traffic citation as originally issued.
§ 5-17.8. Citation on Illegally Parked Vehicle.
Whenever any motor vehicle without driver is found parked or stopped
in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by ordinance of this Town
or by State law, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration
number and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which
may identify its user, and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a traffic
citation, for the driver to answer to the charge against him within 10 days
during the hours and at a place specified in the citation.
§ 5-17.9. Failure to Comply with Traffic Citation Attached to Parked
Vehicle.
If a violator of the restrictions on stopping, standing or parking under the
traffic laws or ordinances does not appear in response to a traffic citation
affixed to such motor vehicle within a period of 10 days, the Chief of Police
shall send to the owner of the motor vehicle to which the traffic citation was
affixed a letter informing him of the violation and warning him that in the
event such letter is disregarded for a period of 10 days a warrant of arrest
will be issued.
§ 5-17.10. Presumption in Reference to Illegal Parking.
§ 5-17.11. When Warrant To Be Issued.
In the event any person fails to comply with a traffic citation given to
such person or attached to a vehicle or fails to make appearance pursuant
to summons directing an appearance, or if any person fails or refuses to
deposit bail as required and within the time permitted by ordinance, the
Clerk of the Court shall secure and issue a warrant for his arrest.
a. In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation
governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular
vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such
law or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the
complaint was at the time of such parking the registered owner of such
vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the
registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed
such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such
violation occurred.
b. The foregoing stated presumption shall apply only when the procedure
as prescribed in subsections 5-17.6 and 5-17.7 has been followed.
§ 5-17.7 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 5-17.12
AO:66
§ 5-17.12. Disposition of Traffic Fines and Forfeitures.
All fines or forfeitures collected upon conviction or upon the forfeiture of
bail of any person charged with a violation of any of the provisions of this
section shall be paid into the Town Treasury.
§ 5-17.13. Authority to Impound Vehicles.
§ 5-18. EFFECT OF AND SHORT TITLE.
§ 5-18.1. Effect.
If any part or parts of this chapter are for any reason held to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
§ 5-18.2. Short Title.
This chapter may be known and cited as the "Chapter 5, Traffic" or the
"Traffic Ordinance."
Chapter 5A
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
a. Members of the Police Department are hereby authorized to remove a
vehicle from a street or highway to the nearest garage or other place of
safety, or to a garage designated or maintained by the Police
Department, or otherwise maintained by this Town under the
circumstances hereinafter enumerated.
1. When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct, or
causeway, or in any tube or tunnel where such vehicle constitutes
an obstruction to traffic.
2. When a vehicle upon a highway is so disabled as to constitute an
obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the
vehicle are by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an
extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal.
3. When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street and is so parked
illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the
normal movement of traffic.
b. Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street as authorized in
this section and the officer knows or is able to ascertain from the
registration records in the vehicle the name and address of the owner
thereof, such officer shall immediately give or cause to be given notice
in writing to such owner of the fact of such removal and the reasons
therefor and of the place to which such vehicle has been removed. In
the event any such vehicle is stored in a public garage, a copy of such
notice shall be given to the proprietor of such garage.
§ 5-17.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5A-1
AO:67
§ 5A-1. SCHEDULE I: SPEED LIMITS.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 5-5.1, speed limits on the
following designated streets shall be as follows:
Name of Street Maximum Speed Limit
Amesbury Lane 25 mph
Brownell Road 30 mph
Grange Avenue 25 mph
John Dyer Road 30 mph
John Sisson Road 25 mph
Long Highway 30 mph
Long Pasture Road 25 mph
Maple Avenue 30 mph
Old Main Road 30 mph
Old Stone Church Road 30 mph
Shaw Road 30 mph
South Shore Road 25 mph
Swamp Road 30 mph
Taylor's Lane 25 mph
Town Way 25 mph
Warren's Point Road 25 mph
William H. Sisson Road 25 mph
Willow Avenue 30 mph
40 mph Town-wide unless otherwise indicated at the time of the passage
of this ordinance.
§ 5A-2. SCHEDULE II: DECREASE OF STATE SPEED LIMITS AT
CERTAIN INTERSECTIONS.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 5-5.2, the following
designated street intersections shall require decreased speed limits:
Name of Street Maximum Speed Limit*
Intersection at Rhode Island Avenue
and Bluff Head Avenue
15 mph
*At all times - day and night.
§ 5A-1 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 5A-3
AO:68
§ 5A-3. SCHEDULE III: INCREASING STATE SPEED LIMITS IN
CERTAIN ZONES.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 5-5.3, the following
designated streets shall have a maximum speed limit as designated:
Name of Street Maximum Speed Limit*
(Reserved)
§ 5A-4. SCHEDULE IV: DECREASE OF STATE-LAW MAXIMUM
SPEED.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 5-5.4, the following
designated streets shall have a maximum speed limit as designated:
Name of Street Maximum Speed Limit*
All streets, lanes or roads in the Town of Little Compton save those
specifically hereinafter excluded.
*At all times - day or night
§ 5A-5. SCHEDULE V: ONE-WAY STREETS.
In accordance with subsection 5-7.2 and when properly sign-posted, traffic
shall move only on the following streets in the direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction of Traffic Movement
(Reserved)
§ 5A-6. SCHEDULE VI: THROUGH STREETS.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 5-8.1 and when signs
are erected giving notice thereof, drivers of vehicles shall stop at every
intersection before entering any of the following streets or parts of streets:
(Reserved)
§ 5A-7. SCHEDULE VII: STREETS WHEREON PEDESTRIANS ARE
REQUIRED TO CROSS AT CROSSWALKS.
In accordance with subsection 5-11.6, the streets whereon pedestrians are
required to cross at crosswalks are listed below:
(Reserved)
§ 5A-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5A-8
AO:69
§ 5A-8. SCHEDULE VIII: PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES ON
CERTAIN STREETS. [Ord. 7/21/88; Ord. 5/9/13]
In accordance with subsection 5-15.4 and when signs are erected giving
notice thereof no person shall at any time park a vehicle upon any of the
following described streets or parts of streets:
a. On the westerly side of the commons at the corner occupied by the
Congregational Church for a distance of 70 feet northerly from the
corner.
b. On the northerly side of the Commons at the corner occupied by the
Congregational Church for a distance of 70 feet westerly from the
corner.
c. On the westerly side of the Commons at the corner opposite the corner
occupied by the Congregational Church for a distance of 40 feet
southerly from the corner.
d. On the southerly side of the Commons at the corner opposite the corner
occupied by the Congregational Church for a distance of 30 feet
westerly from the corner.
e. On the southerly side of the Commons, sometimes called Hall Road and
opposite the school house for a distance of 250 feet easterly from the
corner.
f. On the westerly side of the Commons in front of the Brownell House, socalled,
for a distance of 155 feet southerly from the corner.
g. Taylor's Lane. On the north side, westerly from West Main Road to the
intersection of Taylor's Lane North. On the south side, westerly from
West Main Road to the intersection of Taylor's Lane South.
h. Adamsville Center. All hours including Sundays and holidays.
i. Rhode Island Road. On the west side, and on the east side beginning
125 feet from Ohio Road southerly, all hours, including Sundays and
holidays.
j. Town Way. All hours including Sundays and holidays from the
intersection of Oliver Lane easterly to West Main Road. On the north
side, beginning 88 feet from the intersection of Oliver Lane westerly for
18 feet shall be no parking with striping in the roadway indicating "No
Parking."
In case of an emergency, any specific section or sections of this chapter may be
temporarily suspended for a definite reasonable period by action of the Town
Council.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles
of the Fire Department, Police Department or any ambulance in the
performance of his duty.
§ 5A-8 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 5A-9
AO:70
§ 5A-9. SCHEDULE IX: PARKING PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN
HOURS ON CERTAIN STREETS. [Ord. 5/9/13]
In accordance with subsection 5-15.5, and when signs are erected giving
specified notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle between the hours
specified herein of any day within the district or upon any of the streets or
parts of streets as follows:
Name of Street or
District
Sides Hours Parking Prohibited
a. The Commons [Added
by Ord. 10/22/87]
North In front of 30 Commons starting at
the west boundary of 32 Commons
and extending westerly for a
distance of 90 feet to the east
boundary of 28 Commons during
days when school is in session,
between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and
4:00 p.m.
§ 5A-10. SCHEDULE X: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING
DURING CERTAIN HOURS ON CERTAIN STREETS PROHIBITED.
In accordance with subsection 5-15.6, and when signs are erected giving
notice thereof, no persons shall stop, stand or park a vehicle between the
hours specified herein of any day within the district or upon any of the
streets or parts of streets as follows:
(Reserved)
§ 5A-11. SCHEDULE XI: PARKING TIME LIMITED ON CERTAIN
STREETS.
In accordance with subsection 5-15.7, and when signs are erected giving
notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for a period of time longer
than that specified herein between the hours specified herein of any day
within the district or upon any of the streets or parts of streets as follows:
(Reserved)
§ 5A-12. SCHEDULE XII: LOAD RESTRICTIONS UPON VEHICLES
USING CERTAIN STREETS.
In accordance with subsection 5-16.1, and when signs are erected giving
notice thereof, no person shall operate any vehicle with a gross weight in
excess of the amounts specified herein at any time upon any of the following
streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Location Pound Limit
(Reserved)
§ 5A-9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5A-13
AO:71
§ 5A-13. SCHEDULE XIII: COMMERCIAL VEHICLES PROHIBITED
FROM USING CERTAIN STREETS.
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate a
commercial vehicle except as provided under subsection 5-16.2 upon any of
the following streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 5A-14. SCHEDULE XIV: NO PARKING BAN/TOW ZONE.
In accordance with subsection 5-15.4A, no person shall park a vehicle at any
time within the tow zone district of any streets or parts of streets as follows:
Chapter 6
GENERAL LICENSING
a. South Shore Road. Beginning at the ticket booth at the Beach,
westward and then northerly to the intersection of John Sisson Road
and South Shore Road.
b. Shaw Road. Beginning at the intersection of South Shore Road and
continuing west to the intersection of Long Pasture Road.
c. Bluff Head Avenue. Beginning at a point on the easterly line of Bluff
Head Avenue, which said point is 69+/- feet, more or less from the
southwesterly corner of land now or formerly of Point Trapp Company,
Inc. at the intersection of the northerly line of Point Street and the
easterly line of Bluff Head Avenue and described as follows:
Easterly: By land now or formerly of Point Trapp Company,
Inc. designated as Tax Assessor's Plat 9, Lot 436,
a distance of 74 feet, more or less; and
Northerly: By land now or formerly of Sakonnet Point Club
designated as Tax Assessor's Plat 9, Lot 433, a
distance of 33 feet, more or less; and
Southwesterly: By land now or formerly of Sakonnet Point Club,
designated as Tax Assessor's Plat 9, Lot 433, a
distance of 102 feet, more or less; and
Southeasterly: By Bluff Head Avenue a distance of 44 feet, more
or less, to the point and place of beginning.
d. Bluff Head Avenue — Point Street. That area encompassing the
turnaround (i.e. cul-de-sac) at the intersection of Bluff Head Avenue and
Point Street.
§ 5A-13 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 6-1
AO:72
§ 6-1. MOBILE VENDORS. [Ord. 6/8/36; Ord. 6/11/62, §§ 2 through
7; Ord. 6/23/77; Ord. 11/22/88, § 1; amended 10-10-2019]
§ 6-1.1. Definitions.
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENT (MFE) — A food service operation that
is operated from a movable motor-driven or propelled vehicle, portable
structure, or watercraft that can change location. "MFE" specifically
includes, but is not limited to food trucks, food carts, ice-cream trucks/carts,
and lemonade trucks/carts.
MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENT PERMIT — A permit issued by the Town
to a MFE operator who possesses a state MFE registration, or who achieves
equivalent qualification.
MOBILE MERCHANDISE VENDOR (MMV) — A vending operation that is
operated from a propelled vehicle or portable structure that can change
location, or a vendor who travels door-to-door to residences.
MOBILE MERCHANDISE VENDOR PERMIT — A permit issued by the Town
to a MMV operator.
§ 6-1.2. Requirements.
§ 6-1.3. Compliance.
§ 6-1.4. Limitations.
a. The applicant for a MFE or MMV permit will submit a completed Town
application to the Town Clerk.
b. If an applicant operates more than one MFE, the applicant shall submit
a separate application for each MFE and pay a separate application fee
per year for each MFE.
c. The holder of a state mobile food establishment registration is deemed
to satisfy all Town qualifications for the MFE permit.
d. MFE permits are not transferable.
a. The holder of a MFE or MMV permit will comply with all Town land use
regulations and zoning and noise ordinances.
b. Any violation thereof shall be cause for revocation of the permit.
a. The maximum number of MFE permits issued by the Town shall be five,
unless changed by vote of the Town Council.
b. The maximum number of MMV permits issued by the Town shall be
three, unless changed by vote of the Town Council.
§ 6-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-1.4
AO:73
§ 6-1.5. Display of Permit.
§ 6-1.6. Fees and Term of Permit.
§ 6-1.7. Penalty.
§ 6-2. JUNK DEALERS.12
§ 6-2.1. Conditions and Restrictions for Licensee. [Ord. 12/13/65,
§ 1]
No person shall engage in the business of purchasing, selling, processing,
converting, bartering or dealing in junk, old metals and any other secondhand
articles, used automobiles or machinery, whether as keeper of a shop,
area, yard or storehouse for the reception, processing or conversion of the
same, or as a gatherer of the same in any bag, wagon or other vehicle, or
as a foundryman receiving the same for the purpose of melting the same or
of converting the same into casting, or as a person establishing, operating
or maintaining an automobile junk yard, unless such person shall be duly
licensed by the Town Council and subject to the following conditions and
restrictions:
c. The allowed hours of operation for MFE/MMV permit holders are
between 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
d. MFEs and MMVs are to be stationary while selling. A MFE may be no
closer than 200 feet to any permanent establishment serving food.
e. MFEs and MMVs seeking to sell at South Shore Beach must first
receive the approval of the Beach Commission.
a. The MFE/MMV permit shall be affixed to the structure in a conspicuous
place.
a. The fee for a MFE/MMV permit is $75 per year, or portion thereof.
b. A MFE/MMV permit shall mirror date of expiration of state MFE
registration.
a. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section may be fined
up to $100 for each violation.
a. The annual fee for such licenses shall be as follows: For a keeper of
such shop, area, yard or storehouse, except for an automobile junk
yard, $25; for a gatherer, as aforesaid, $5; for a foundryman, as
aforesaid, $5; and $100 for a person establishing, operating or
maintaining an automobile junk yard.
12.For State Law as to the authority of the Town Council, see Public Laws of the State of
Rhode Island 1965, Chapter 138.
§ 6-1.4 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 6-2.1
AO:74
§ 6-2.2. Application Information. [Ord. 12/13/65, § 2]
Every applicant for any such license shall set forth with full particulars
upon a form to be furnished by the Town Clerk, answers to the following
questions:
b. Every such shop, area, yard, storehouse, bag, wagon, other vehicle,
foundry and place of business of any such licensed person shall be
subject to the inspection and examination of the Chief of Police or any of
his authorized agents.
c. Every such licensed person shall keep in a book a contemporaneous
record in the English language of the business done by him as follows: A
description of every article purchased or sold by him, at the time of
purchase or sale, the name and residence of the person from whom the
same was purchased or to whom the same was sold by him, and the day
or hour of such purchase or sale. This book of record shall be subject to
examination at any time by the Chief of Police or any of his authorized
agents, and also by members of the Town Council.
d. Every such licensed person shall keep any property purchased or
received by him for a period of 10 days from the date he acquires the
same, and during that period such property shall not be disfigured or
treated in any way by which its identity may be destroyed or affected,
except, however, that any person licensed as a gatherer may at any time
sell any such property to a person licensed as a keeper or foundryman
within said period, and provided further that any licensed person may
sell, process and melt such property within said period of 10 days with
the permission in writing of the Chief of Police.
e. No licensee aforesaid shall burn any material unless he has first
obtained a burning permit from the Fire Department and no such
permit shall be issued unless all of the owners or occupants of the land
within 600 feet of the land upon which such business is to be carried on
shall consent to said burning.
f. No person licensed as herein provided shall directly or indirectly either
purchase or receive in barter or exchange any junk or metals, or used
automobiles or machinery from any minor, knowing or having reason to
believe him or her to be a minor, unless such minor shall be licensed in
accordance with this section.
g. No person licensed as a keeper as aforesaid shall do or permit any
business between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
h. Every person licensed as a keeper, as aforesaid, shall display in a
conspicuous place on his place of business, the license granted to him.
a. Name and address, both of residence and of business of the applicant.
b. Business or employment of the applicant during the five years next
preceding application.
§ 6-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-2.2
AO:75
§ 6-2.3. Expiration or Revocation of License. [Ord. 12/13/65, § 3]
All licenses granted under the provisions of this section shall expire one
year from the date of their issuance, providing that any such licenses so
granted may be revoked at any time by the Town Council at pleasure or for
cause, and no rebate shall be made from the license fee for such license for
less than one year.
§ 6-2.4. Storage of Junk; Fence Required. [Ord. 12/13/65, § 4]
No junk, old metal or used automobiles or machinery shall be stored by
such licensed person in the open on any lot or tract of land within the Town
unless the area to be used for such purposes is enclosed by a tight board
fence at least six feet in height that shall not be located within 10 feet of the
boundary lines of said lot or tract of land; openings between boards not to
exceed 1/2 inch, and the nearest point of the property utilized for storage
of junk or metal, used automobiles or machinery, shall be not less than 600
feet from any public highway.
§ 6-2.5. Public Hearing Required if Location Not Presently in Such
Use; Refusal of License Upon Objections. [Ord. 12/13/65, § 5]
No license shall be granted for any location not lawfully occupied for such
purpose at the time of application for the license under this section except
upon written application which shall be duly advertised and upon which a
public hearing shall be held. Notice of the public hearing shall be posted
at least seven days but not more than 14 days prior to the hearing in not
less than two public places in the Town and in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Town. Applicant to pay the Town Clerk the sum of $10
plus cost of posting two advertisements prior to the posting and advertising.
Provided, however, that no license shall be granted under this section in
any location not lawfully occupied for such purpose at the time of the
application for such license where the owners or occupants of the greater
part of the land within 200 feet of the land upon which such business is to
be carried on, shall file with the Town Council their objection to the granting
of such licenses.
§ 6-2.6. Violations; Penalty. [Ord. 12/13/65, § 6]
Any person who engages in the business of buying, selling, processing,
bartering, or dealing in junk, old metals and any other second hand articles
or used automobiles or machinery to any person establishing, operating or
maintaining an automobile junk yard without having obtained a license as
hereinbefore provided, or who violates any of the provisions of this section,
shall pay a fine not exceeding $500, or to be imprisoned not exceeding six
months for each offense.
c. Age of applicant.
§ 6-2.2 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 6-2.7
AO:76
§ 6-2.7. Requirements for Automobile Junk Yards: Both Salvage
Yards and Scrap Parts Yards. [Ord. 12/13/65, § 7]
No license shall be granted for an automobile junk yard unless it is to be
operated and maintained exclusively for the purpose of salvaging the value
as scrap of the material collected, as opposed to reselling parts to be used
for the purpose for which they were originally manufactured, and is to
be located in a built-up commercial or industrial area, or contiguous to a
railroad siding, or on or contiguous to docking facilities; or unless it is:
§ 6-2.8. Revocation of License. [Ord. 12/13/65, § 8]
The Town Council shall have the right to revoke this license at pleasure, or
upon violation of this section, or, in the event any such licensee is deemed
to be operating a nuisance, the revocation shall become effective only after
a public hearing, the location, date and time of which to be determined by
the Town Council after receipt of a complaint and after notice has been sent
to the licensee effected. This notice shall be given to the licensee at least
five days prior to the date of the hearing.
§ 6-3. PUBLIC LAUNDRIES.
§ 6-3.1. Permit Required. [Ord. 3/25/64]
No person shall operate a public laundry within the Town unless a permit
is obtained from the Town Council for the operation thereof. Such permit
shall be issued only after the Town Council has caused an inspection to be
made of such laundry and upon such terms and subject to such rules and
regulations as are hereinafter provided for the purpose of protecting the
public health and the suppression of unsanitary conditions.
§ 6-3.2. Term of Permit; Fee. [Ord. 3/25/64; Ord. 5/7/81, § 2]
Every permit issued under this section shall continue in force until April 1
in the year following its issue unless sooner revoked or suspended, and for
each permit the person to be licensed shall pay a fee in the amount of $10
per year or a pro rata sum for the unexpired portion of any year, all fees to
be paid into the Town Treasury.
a. More than 600 feet from any State highway; and
b. More than 300 feet from any park, bathing beach, playground, school,
church or cemetery and is not within ordinary view therefrom; and
c. Screened from view either by natural objects or well constructed and
properly maintained fences at least six feet high acceptable to the Town
and so specified on the license.
§ 6-2.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-3.3
AO:77
§ 6-3.3. Revocation and Suspension. [Ord. 3/25/64]
Any permit issued may be revoked or suspended by the Town Council for
cause shown after a hearing of which the holder of such permit shall receive
seven days' notice in writing.
§ 6-3.4. Application Information. [Ord. 3/25/64]
Application for this permit shall be made in such form and shall contain
such information in regard to the public laundry for which it is desired as
hereinafter required. The application for such permit may be made at any
time. Within 40 days after the receipt of any such application, the Town
Council shall determine whether or not the permit applied for shall be
granted. The Town Council shall give the applicant for, or holder of, any
permit notice in writing of any decision it may make in relation thereto,
and any such applicant or holder aggrieved by such decision may, within 30
days after receipt of such notice, appeal therefrom to the Superior Court as
provided by law.
§ 6-3.5. Display of Permit. [Ord. 3/25/64]
Every person to whom a permit is issued under this section shall keep the
same displayed in a conspicuous place in the office or place of business for
which it is issued, and shall whenever requested exhibit the same to the
Town Council or its duly authorized agent. The Town Council shall cause
inspection to be made of each public laundry before a permit is issued for
its operation and at least once a year after such first inspection, and for
such purpose and for the enforcement of the provisions of this section, the
Town Council and its duly authorized agent may enter upon and inspect any
premises which it has reason to believe are being conducted, operated and
maintained as a public laundry.
§ 6-3.6. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. 3/25/64, § 6]
a. "Public laundry" shall mean and include any plant or equipment
conducted or operated as a laundry for profit, and for which business is
solicited from the general public, but shall not mean or include a
laundry operated exclusively for and in connection with a hospital,
school or other institution, hotel, boarding house or private dwelling,
nor a laundry operated by one institution which also serves another
institution.
b. A "public laundry" shall mean and include laundromats or automatic
laundries, so-called.
c. No public laundry shall be operated between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. of any weekday, nor on Sunday or any legal State
holidays, provided however, that nothing herein shall be deemed to
exclude the collection of articles to be washed or cleaned at any time of
the day or night in duly licensed laundries or those existing outside of
the Town of Little Compton.
§ 6-3.3 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 6-3.6
AO:78
§ 6-3.7. Violations; Penalty. [Ord. 3/25/64, § 7]
Any person, and any official or agent of a corporation or association
operating or maintaining a public laundry or making collection of articles to
be washed or cleaned therein contrary to the provisions of this section or
who shall in any way interfere with the Town Council or its duly authorized
agent in the inspection of any premises as prescribed in this section, or
who shall operate or maintain any public laundry without a permit as
prescribed in this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500
or by imprisonment for not more than 10 days or by both such fine and
imprisonment and each day of such operation after due notice from the
licensing authority shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 6-3.8. Statutory Authority.
This section is hereby enacted under the provisions of Title 5, Chapter 16,
of the General Laws of the State of Rhode Island of 1956, as amended.
§ 6-4. MISCELLANEOUS LICENSE FEES. [Ord. #1981-2, § 1, 2; Ord.
6/10/82; Ord. 9/22/88; Ord. 8/5/93; Ord. 9/8/05; amended 9-22-2016]
d. All applicants under the provisions of this section shall, prior to the
issuance of a permit, prove to the satisfaction of the Town Council the
suitability of the water to be utilized in the laundry. The water shall be
tested and shall pass the standard requirements of the State
Department of Health. If the water does not pass the standard
requirements of the State Department of Health, no permit shall be
issued. The applicant shall furnish the Town Council with a written
certificate of satisfactory water condition of the State Department of
Health.
e. The applicant shall further provide to the satisfaction of the Town
Council sufficient sewerage facilities to take care of peak operation of
the laundry at all times. The sewerage facilities shall be of a design and
construction to be approved by the Council in advance of the issuance
of a permit. The construction shall be shown by the applicant on a plat
and the applicant shall furnish a location and design so that the
distance between well and septic tank shall be at least 300 feet and the
distance from septic tank and any well or facility of abutting land
owners shall be at least 400 feet apart.
a. The Town Clerk is authorized to grant the following licenses upon
submission of an application and payment of fees.
Entertainment See Subsection 6-7.1
Bingo $10 per night
Dance $10 per night
Masquerade balls $10 per night
Moving picture shows $10 per night
§ 6-3.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-4
AO:79
§ 6-5. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES LICENSES.
§ 6-5.1. Application for License.
Any person submitting an application for an alcoholic beverage license shall
do so in accordance with the provisions set forth in the General Laws of
Rhode Island, 1956, as amended.
b. The Town Clerk is authorized to issue the following licenses subject to
prior approval by the Town Council and upon payment of fees.
Entertainment See Subsection 6-7.1
Bingo $75 per year
Bowling alley (each alley) $20 per year
Dance (over 1 day to 6 months) $40 per year
Dances (up to 1 year) $75 per year
Moving picture shows $75 per year
Pool table, pinball machine,
mechanical music machine,
electronic music machine, video
game (each table machine, or
game)
$20 per year
Holiday sales $50 per year
Victualing house, tavern, etc. $20 per year
Laundromat $20 per year
c. No license shall be granted until the following conditions have been
fulfilled:
1. All Town taxes and fees shall have been paid to date to the Town
Treasurer and Collector of Taxes or other Municipal Agency
authorized to collect such fees or taxes.
2. All conditions for operation of said establishment imposed on said
establishment by any Town Board or Commission shall have been
complied with in full.
d. All licenses shall come due on December 1. Any license for a partial
year or any seasonal license shall pay the full fee unless otherwise
provided in this section.
e. Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section, or any
of the rules and regulations promulgated by the Town Council in
carrying out the provisions of this section, shall be fined not more than
$100, or be imprisoned not exceeding 30 days, or both.
§ 6-4 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 6-5.2
AO:80
§ 6-5.2. Granting and/or Renewal of License. [Ord. 8/5/93]
The Board of License Commissioners shall not grant any alcoholic beverage
license, except a Class F or F-1, until the following conditions have been
fulfilled:
§ 6-5.3. Limit on Number of Licenses. [Ord. 9/8/05; Ord. 2/8/07;
Ord. 4/23/15; amended 9-5-2019]
Class A 2
Class B-V 4
Class B-V, Limited 2
Class D, Full 3
Class F Unlimited
Class F-1 Unlimited
Class SE Unlimited
Class SE-1 Unlimited
§ 6-5.4. Fee Schedule.13 [Ord. #1981-1, § 1-4; Ord. 11/10/83; Ord. 8/
7/86; Ord. 11/21/91; Ord. 1-10-02; Ord. 11/6/03; Ord. 9/8/05]
Class A $400†
Class B-V $500†
Class B-V, Limited $500†
Class D, Full $400†
Class F $15*†
Class F-1 $35*†
Class SE $15
Class SE-1 $35
a. All requirements under the General Laws of Rhode Island, 1956, as
amended.
b. All State and Town taxes pertaining to the establishment have been
paid.
c. If a corporation, proof of incorporation and good standing from the
Rhode Island Secretary of State has been filed with the Board.
d. If a renewal, an activity report for the establishment has been received
from the Chief of Police.
e. All conditions for operation of said establishment imposed on said
establishment by any Town Board or Commission shall have been
complied with in full.
13.Editor's Note: These fees became effective November 10, 1983.
§ 6-5.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-5.4
AO:81
Transfer Fee of a Class A, B-V or D (full) Beverage
License
$100
† Prorated to December 1
§ 6-6. PRIVATE DETECTIVES.14
§ 6-6.1. Definition. [Ord. 5/23/91]
PRIVATE DETECTIVE — Shall mean any person who accepts employment
for hire, fee, or reward to conduct investigations involving inquiries into
unsolved crimes, clandestine surveillance, search for missing persons,
search for lost or stolen property, or into the character or kind of business
or occupation of any person.
§ 6-6.2. License Required. [Ord. 5/23/91]
No person shall operate as a private detective in the Town of Little Compton
without first obtaining a license therefor from the Town Council as provided
in this section.
§ 6-6.3. License Qualifications. [Ord. 5/23/91]
In order to be eligible for a license, an applicant must:
a. Be a resident of Little Compton and a citizen of the United States or a
resident alien;
b. Not have been convicted of a felony in any jurisdiction;
c. Not have had any previous private investigator license or registration
revoked, or application for such license or registration denied, by the
appropriate authority of any local licensing authority;
d. Not have been declared by any Court of competent jurisdiction
incompetent by reason of mental defect or disease unless said Court
has subsequently determined that his or her competency has been
restored;
e. Not suffer from habitual drunkenness or from illegal narcotics,
addiction or other illegal drug dependency;
f. Be of good moral character;
g. Have:
1. At least five years experience as an investigator, or as a police
officer with a State, County or municipal police department, or with
an investigative agency of the United States of America or of any
State, County or municipality; or (2) a degree in criminal justice
from an accredited college or university; or (3) been employed by a
14.Editor's Note: Previous ordinances codified herein include Ordinance No. 12/18/86.
§ 6-5.4 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 6-6.3
AO:82
§ 6-6.4. Application for License. [Ord. 5/23/91]
Applications for licenses issued under this section shall be made upon blank
forms prepared and made available by the Town Clerk and shall state the
following:
§ 6-6.5. Application Fee. [Ord. 5/23/91]
The application required shall be accompanied by a filing fee of $50 payable
to the Town Clerk of Little Compton.
§ 6-6.6. Investigation and Action on Application. [Ord. 5/23/91]
After an examination of the application and such further inquiry and
investigation as deemed necessary and proper by the Town Council as to
the good character, competency and integrity of the applicant and person
named in the application, the Town Council shall within 30 days after the
receipt of the application, or as soon as practicable, notify the applicant as
to the issuance or denial of the license.
private detective as an investigator for at least five years; or (4)
substantially equivalent training or experience.
a. The full name, age, residence, and previous occupation of the applicant.
b. Whether the applicant is a citizen of the United States or resident alien
and a resident of Little Compton and for how long.
c. Whether the applicant has ever pleaded guilty or been convicted of a
felony.
d. Whether the applicant has been declared by a court to be incompetent
by reason of mental defect or disease unless said court subsequently
determined that the applicant's competency has been restored.
e. Whether the applicant suffers from habitual drunkenness or from illegal
narcotics addiction or other illegal drug dependency.
f. The experience of the applicant as an investigator or as a police officer
with a State, County or municipal police department or with an
investigative agency of the United States of America or of any State,
County or municipality.
g. Whether the applicant has received a degree in criminal justice from an
accredited college or university, and if so the details thereof.
h. The number of years the applicant has been a private detective or has
been employed by a private detective as an investigator.
§ 6-6.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-6.7
AO:83
§ 6-6.7. Grounds for Denial of Application for License or Renewal of
License. [Ord. 5/23/91]
The Town Council shall deny the application for or renewal of licenses if it
finds that the applicant:
§ 6-6.8. Procedure for Approval or Denial of Application. [Ord. 5/23/
91]
The Town Council in approving or denying an application for a license or
renewal shall:
§ 6-6.9. Renewal of Licenses. [Ord. 5/23/91]
Each license shall expire one year after its date of issuance. Subject to the
Council's power to deny, revoke or suspend, any license shall be renewable
by the Council upon proper application and payment of license fees. An
application for renewal must be received by the Town Council at least 30
days prior to the expiration date of the license. If the Council denies such
application for renewal, the applicant may within 15 days after receipt of
notice of such denial, request a hearing, and the Council shall afford such a
hearing and give due notice to the applicant.
§ 6-6.10. License Fee. [Ord. 5/23/91]
The license fee for a private detective shall be $150 annually.
§ 6-6.11. Conditions of License. [Ord. 5/23/91]
a. Does not meet the qualifications for a license set forth in this section, or
if the applicant has violated any of the provisions of this section;
b. Practices fraud, deceit or misrepresentation;
c. Makes a material misstatement in the application for or renewal of a
license; or
d. Demonstrates incompetence or untrustworthiness in actions affecting
the conduct of his or her private detective business.
a. If the application is approved, issue a license in the form prescribed by
this section.
b. If the application is denied, notify the applicant in writing of same
stating its reasons for such action.
c. If the applicant, within 15 days of the Council's denial of the
application, requests a hearing the Council shall grant such a hearing
and give the applicant due notice thereof.
a. No license issued under this section shall be assigned or transferred.
b. A license may be suspended or revoked if the licensee:
§ 6-6.7 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 6-6.11
AO:84
§ 6-6.12. Uniform and Equipment. [Ord. 5/23/91]
§ 6-6.13. Bond Requirement. [Ord. 5/23/91]
No license shall be issued under this section until the applicant has filed
with the Town Clerk a bond with a surety company authorized to do
business in the State of Rhode Island, conditioned for the benefit of any
person injured by willful malicious, or wrongful acts of the licensee, which,
in the case of an individual, shall be $5,000.
§ 6-6.14. Identification Cards. [Ord. 5/23/91]
Identification cards shall be carried by persons licensed under this chapter.
Every person in the employ of the licensee shall be given an identification
card by the licensee. The identification card shall be approximately 2 1/
2 inches wide and 3 1/2 inches long, and shall bear upon it the name of
the person, the name of the licensee (business name), date of birth of the
individual, residence address, his or her left thumb-print, and a photograph,
1. Violates any provisions of this section; or
2. Practices fraud, deceit, or misrepresentation.
c. Each license shall be surrendered within 72 hours after it has been
revoked or after the licensee ceases to do business pursuant to an order
of suspension.
d. The licensee shall notify the Town Council in writing within five days of
any material change in the information previously furnished to the
Town Council or of any occurrence which could reasonably be expected
to affect such license.
a. No individual, licensed by or subject to the provisions of this section,
shall wear or display any insignia, patch or pattern which shall indicate,
or tend to indicate, that he is a law enforcement officer of the Federal
government, a State, or any political subdivision thereof, or which
contains or includes the word "police", or the equivalent thereof, or is
similar in wording to any law enforcement agency in this State. All
badges, shields and any other devices shall not indicate or tend to
indicate that it represents that of any law enforcement officer of the
Federal government, a State or any other political subdivision thereof.
All such wording must be approved by the Town Council.
b. No person while performing any activities licensed by this chapter, shall
have or utilize any vehicle or equipment displaying the words "police",
"law enforcement officer", or the equivalent thereof or have any sign,
shield, marking, accessory or insignia that may indicate that such
vehicle is a vehicle of a public law enforcement agency. All such
wording must indicate private detective or private investigating agency
and be approved by the Town Council.
§ 6-6.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-6.14
AO:85
and a space which the licensee shall write his or her usual signature with
pen and ink.
§ 6-6.15. Prohibited Activities. [Ord. 5/23/91]
It is unlawful, under this section, to knowingly commit any of the following:
§ 6-6.16. Duties of Licensee. [Ord. 5/23/91]
§ 6-6.17. Penalty. [Ord. 2/18/93]
Any person violating this section shall be imprisoned five days or fined $500.
§ 6-7. ENTERTAINMENT LICENSE.
§ 6-7.1. License Required. [Ord. 1/7/16; Ord. 9/22/16]
§ 6-7.2. Definitions. [Ord. 1/7/16; Ord. 9/22/16]
a. Provide any service required to be licensed under this chapter without
possession of a valid license issued by the Town Council.
b. Employ any individual who has not first complied with all the provisions
of this section.
c. Falsely represent that a person is the holder of a valid license.
d. Possess a license or identification card issued to another person.
e. Wear or display any insignia in violation of Subsection 6-6.12.
a. The licensee shall post the license in the primary place of business and
carry proper identification cards as provided for in this chapter.
b. The licensee shall report all felonies immediately to the Rhode Island
State Police, appropriate Federal Agency, or to the Town Police
Department where the crime has occurred.
a. An entertainment license must be obtained by any person, business or
entity intending to provide entertainment to customers within the
Town.
b. The fee for an entertainment license is $100 annually, or $15 per event.
a. ENTERTAINMENT — Shall mean and includes, but is not limited to:
singing, recitations, drama productions, playing of musical instruments
or recorded music, whether amplified or not, public viewing of live or
televised sports or events, and lighting of fireworks.
b. INDOOR — Shall mean within the exterior walls of any durable
building, with doors and windows closed.
§ 6-6.14 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 6-7.2
AO:86
§ 6-7.3. Application. [Ord. 1/7/16; Ord. 9/22/16]
§ 6-7.4. Conditions of License. [Ord. 1/7/16; Ord. 9/22/16]
c. OUTDOOR — Shall mean beyond the exterior walls of any durable
building.
d. Entertainment in any area not enclosed by hard-surface walls, doors
and glass is considered outdoor entertainment.
a. The entity seeking an entertainment license must apply in writing,
providing the following information as a minimum:
1. Name, residence, mailing address, telephone number.
2. Total number of events planned, with days and hours that
entertainment will be offered.
3. Nature and types of entertainment to be offered.
4. Maximum number of participants expected at the largest event.
5. A plan to limit the number of participants to the maximum cited.
6. A scaled drawing of locations, sizes and dimensions of major
elements for each planned type of event.
7. An opinion of the Zoning Official that the proposed activity is
compliant with the provisions of Chapter 14 (Zoning).
b. For those applications which seek to use property subject to a
"conservation restriction" pursuant to RIGL 34-39, such as a
conservation easement, deed for development rights, or other similar
instrument, the applicant must provide a written statement from the
agency or organization holding such a conservation restriction
affirming that the proposed entertainment activity is fully consistent
with the terms, conditions, and provisions of the conservation
restriction.
c. Applications found to be incomplete or erroneous, or whose applicant is
delinquent in taxes or fines, may be denied by the Town Council.
d. Applications which seek to intensify any non-conforming use of
property per Chapter 14 must be accompanied by a special use permit.
a. Outdoor entertainment shall be permissible between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Its duration shall not exceed four hours.
b. Reasonable efforts shall be made by the licensee to project noise away
from abutting property owners. Noise mitigation techniques and
devices shall be used where appropriate and as may be required by the
Town Council.
§ 6-7.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-7.4
AO:87
§ 6-7.5. Penalty. [Ord. 1/7/16; Ord. 9/22/16]
c. The licensee shall cooperate with any official of the Town in the
collection by both parties of accurate noise data associated with
entertainment.
d. Outdoor entertainment will be strictly limited to a precise area on the
premises as approved by the Town Council.
e. For events expected to host more than 150 persons, the licensee shall
supply an off-street parking area consistent with Chapter 14 (Zoning),
with an adequate number of attendants to supervise orderly handling of
traffic and with a detail of police officers or constables as determined
necessary by the Chief of Police. The licensee shall pay the Town the
prevailing detail rate for all such services.
f. The licensee shall supply adequate toilet facilities at both the site of
outdoor entertainment and the site of parking for any event.
g. The licensee shall provide evidence of insurance, satisfactory to the
Council at the time the license is issued. The Town shall be named as an
additional insured.
h. The licensee shall be responsible for compliance with all State, Federal
and local laws relating to health, safety and welfare of the public at
public gatherings.
i. For events that will go beyond 1/2 hour after sunset, lighting for the
safe ingress and egress of attendees will be supplied, subject to
Subsection 14-5.11e of these ordinances. Such lighting shall be
energized only for the duration of the event. It shall be directed
downward, inward, away from abutting properties, and below the
horizontal plane onto the path or road. It shall be installed no higher
than necessary to cast light on the intended surface.
j. Flying piloted vehicles overhead for the purpose of recording or
promoting entertainment events is prohibited.
a. Any licensee who violates the terms of the license, or this ordinance or
any other ordinance of the Town, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a warning,
fine and/or revocation or suspension of license and/or be subject to
restrictions by the Town Council on the amount and frequency of
entertainment:
•First offense: Warning
•Second offense: $100
•Third offense: $200
•Fourth offense: $500 and revocation or suspension
of license
•This sequence will restart with each annual license renewal
§ 6-7.4 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 6-7.5
AO:88
§ 6-7.6. Exceptions. [Ord. 1/7/16; Ord. 9/22/16]
The Town Council may, at its discretion, waive any requirement of this
ordinance upon application with good cause shown, following a public
hearing. This section shall not apply to non-profit, religious, charitable or
civic organizations.
Chapter 7
BUILDING AND HOUSING
§ 7-1. PERMITS.
§ 7-1.1. Conformity with State Building Code Required. [Ord. 6/29/
77; Ord. 6/18/98]
No building or construction of any sort shall take place within the Town of
Little Compton except in conformity with the Building Codes of the State of
Rhode Island.
§ 7-1.2. Applications for All Permits. [Ord. 6/29/77; Ord. 6/18/98]
Applications for all permits shall be made to the Building Official of the
Town on forms prescribed by the Building Official in conformity with the
State Building Codes.
§ 7-1.3. Fees for All Permits. [Ord. 6/29/77; Ord. 6/18/98]
The fees for all permits shall be in accordance with the attached Schedules.
Any fee not listed in the Schedules, will be at the discretion of the Building
Official.
§ 7-1.4. Late Filing Fee. [Ord. 6/7/79; Ord. 6/18/98]
Any person, firm or corporation who does any building or construction
work for which a permit is required under the provisions of the Rhode
Island State Building Codes and who does not secure such a permit prior
to commencing such work but applies for a permit after the work has been
commenced, then in all such cases, such person, firm or corporation shall
pay as a late filing fee, an additional fee in the amount of 50% of the regular
fee, with a minimum late filing charge of $20.
b. The Town Council may revoke a license for the calendar year, or
suspend it, or reissue it conditionally, or deny an application for a
subsequent calendar year, after notification has been given.
§ 6-7.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-1.5
AO:89
§ 7-1.5. Fees for Non-Profit Tax Exempt Organizations. [Ord. 11/21/
89; Ord. 6/18/98]
All permit fees for non-profit, tax exempt organizations in the Town of Little
Compton as listed in the tax rolls will be waived.
§ 7-1.6. Cancelled Permits. [Ord. 11/21/89; Ord. 6/18/98]
Upon written request of an applicant for a cancellation of a permit already
issued and for which no work has been started, the Building Official may at
his discretion honor such request. In such instances, upon written request
from the Building Official the Town Treasurer will return to the applicant
80% of the original fee collected.
§ 7-1.7. Fees and Taxes. [Ord. 5/20/93; Ord. 6/18/98]
No person, firm or corporation shall be issued any permits until all
municipal fees and taxes shall have been paid to date to the Town Treasurer
and Collector of Taxes or other municipal agency authorized to collect such
fee or taxes.
§ 7-1.8. Driveway Cut. [Ord. 2/20/97; Ord. 6/18/98]
No permits shall be issued for any new construction on any Town
maintained road until the Highway Supervisor has inspected and certified
in writing to the Building Official that a new or existing driveway will not
cause a drainage or a hazardous problem on or to the road.
§ 7-1.9. Reinspections. [Ord. 6/18/98; Ord. 2/10/05]
Any work for which a permit has been issued and which does not conform
with the State Building Codes or Town Ordinances, will not be approved.
After the violations have been corrected, the Building Official or his
authorized representative will reinspect after the payment of a fee of $50.
Schedule I
Building Permit Fees
The fee for a building permit shall be:
Project Validation Fee
10,000 and under $9 per $1,000
10,001 to $50,000 $90 plus $7 per $1,000 Exceeding
10,000
Greater than $50,000 $370 plus $5 per $1,000 Exceeding
$50,000
§ 7-1.5 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 7-1.9
AO:90
Minimum fee shall be $50.
For projects with valuations greater than $10,000, 40% of fees received
shall be deposited in a Housing Trust Fund, when established by the Little
Compton Housing Trust. Use will be determined by the Financial Town
Meeting and shall be reserved for use as described in Charter Sections
103 and 710. [Ord. 6/29/77; Ord. 1/10/84; Ord. 2/23/84; Ord. 9/4/86;
Ord. 1/10/91; Ord. 6/18/98; Ord. 6/21/01; Ord. 1/20/05; Ord. 9/4/08;
Ord. 9-20-18]
Schedule II
Plumbing Permit Fees
The basic fee for a plumbing permit shall be $50 for projects requiring a
single inspection and $100 for projects requiring both rough-in and finish
inspections. The following additional fees shall be assessed:
All Fixtures (per fixture) $5
Modular Homes $50
Manufactured Homes (Mobile Homes) $50
[Ord. 6/29/77; Ord. 1/10/84; Ord. 2/23/84; Ord. 9/4/86; Ord. 1/10/91;
Ord. 6/18/98; Ord. 6/21/01; Ord. 12/4/03; Ord. 9/4/08]
Schedule III
Electrical Permit Fees
The basic fee for an electrical permit shall be $50 for projects requiring a
single inspection and $100 for projects requiring both rough-in and finish
inspections. The following additional fees shall be assessed:
Outlets, including lights, switches, receptacles,
furnaces and all other wire terminations (per
outlet)
$0.35
New Service $50
Revamp Service $50
Temporary Service $50
Modular Homes $50
Manufactured Homes (Mobile Homes) including
service
$50
Security System Fee $50
[Ord. 6/29/77; Ord. 1/10/84; Ord. 2/23/84; Ord. 9/4/86; Ord. 1/10/91;
Ord. 6/18/98; Ord. 2/18/99; Ord. 6/21/01; Ord. 12/4/03; Ord. 9/4/08]
§ 7-1.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-1.9
AO:91
Schedule IV
Mechanical Permit Fees
The basic fee for a mechanical permit shall be $50 for projects requiring a
single inspection and $100 for projects requiring both rough-in and finish
inspections. The following additional fees shall be assessed:
Boilers and Furnaces $50
Replacement of Boilers and Furnaces $50
Central Air Conditioning $50
Modular Homes $50
Manufactured Homes (Mobile Homes) $50
[Ord. 6/29/77; Ord. 1/10/84; Ord. 2/23/84; Ord. 9/4/86; Ord. 1/10/91;
Ord. 6/18/98; Ord. 6/21/01; Ord. 12/4/03; 9/4/08]
Schedule V
Miscellaneous Fees
The following fees shall be assessed for the indicated permit:
Structure Demolition and Moving Permit $45
Certificates of Occupancy $25
Swimming Pool (greater than 30 inches above
ground) Permit
$25
Swimming Pools (in-ground) Permit 0.3% of cost
All Commercial Permits 3% of cost
Reinspections $50
[Ord. 6/18/98; Ord. 6/21/01; Ord. 9/4/08]
§ 7-2. UNIFORM SYSTEM FOR THE NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS
AND LOTS.
§ 7-2.1. Preamble. [Ord. 10/9/80, § 1]
Acting under the authority granted under Section 45-6-1 of the General
Laws of Rhode Island, 1956 as amended, the Town Council of the Town of
Little Compton hereby ordains this section establishing a uniform system
for the numbering of residential, commercial, and industrial buildings and
lots in the Town of Little Compton.
§ 7-2.2. Purpose. [Ord. 10/9/80, § 2]
The standards set forth in this section are made for the purpose of
promoting the public health and safety by providing a means of locating
residential and other structures by police, fire, and other emergency
§ 7-1.9 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 7-2.2
AO:92
services and for such other purposes requiring the location of residential
and other structures as may be required.
§ 7-2.3. Administration.
This building and lot numbering system shall be administered by the Little
Compton Town Council who shall assign building numbers to all residential,
commercial, and industrial structures and lots in conformity with the plan
developed pursuant to this ordinance. The Town Council shall also be
responsible for maintaining the following official records of this numbering
system.
§ 7-2.4. Numbering System. [Ord. 10/9/80, § 4; Ord. 2/9/06]
The following criteria shall govern the development of the numbering
system and the assignment of numbers.
a. A Town map for official use showing said numbering system.
b. A Town-wide alphabetical list of property owners by last name, showing
the assigned numbers.
c. A Town-wide alphabetical list of streets with property owners listed in
order of their assigned numbers.
a. Number Interval. Each 800 feet of every street shall be assigned 20
number intervals, 10 odd numbers and 10 even numbers at intervals of
80 feet on each side of the street.
b. Odd and Even Numbers. Odd numbers shall be on the right-hand side of
all streets, facing from the point of number origin to the point of
number destination of each street.
c. Number Origins. On through streets which terminate at another street
at both ends, numbers shall start at the northerly end of streets which
run in a generally north-south direction and shall start at the easterly
end of streets which run in a generally east-west direction. Streets
running in other directions shall start numbers at whichever end is
most northerly or easterly.
On dead-end streets or cul-de-sacs, numbers will start at the
intersection of origin of the street and run toward the dead end or
turnaround.
Exceptions to either of the above shall be decided on a case-by-case
basis.
d. Common Access. Where several residences or other structures are
served by a common driveway or a private right-of-way which is not on a
street recognized by the Town, the number at the entrance shall apply
to all residences or structures served by the drive or way and each
separate residence or structure shall be identified by a suffix letter. As
§ 7-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-2.4
AO:93
§ 7-2.5. Compliance. [Ord. 10/9/80, § 5]
All residents and other occupants are requested to display assigned
numbers in the following manner.
§ 7-2.6. New Development. [Ord. 10/9/80, § 6; Ord. 2/9/06]
Whenever any residence or other structure is constructed or developed,
it shall be the duty of the new owner to procure an assigned number or
numbers from the Fire Chief. This shall be done at the time of the issuance
of the building permit.
§ 7-2.7. New Subdivisions. [Ord. 10/9/80, § 7]
Any prospective subdivider shall show a proposed lot numbering system
on the pre-application submission to the Little Compton Planning Board.
Approval of the Plan Commission shall constitute the assignment of
numbers to the lots in the subdivision.
§ 7-2.8. Effective Date. [Ord. 10/9/80, § 8]
This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and number assignment shall
be initiated by the Town Council upon completion of the official map of
street numbers and the availability of such official map of street numbers in
the office of the Little Compton Town Clerk.
with dead end streets, letters will start at the intersection of origin of
the street and run toward the dead end or turnaround.
e. Number Assignment. The number assigned to each residence or other
structure shall be the number which falls closest to the main entry or
driveway providing access to the property as shown on the official map
of street numbers.
a. Number on the Structure or Residence. Where the residence or
structure is within 50 feet of the edge of a street right-of-way, the
assigned number shall be displayed on the front of the residence or
structure in the vicinity of the front door or entry.
b. Number at the Street Line. Where the residence or structure is over 50
feet from the edge of the street right-of-way, the assigned number shall
be displayed on a post, fence, wall, or the mail box at the property line
adjacent to the walk or access drive to the residence or structure.
c. Size and Color of Number. Numbers shall be displayed in a color and
size approved for use by the Town Council and shall be so located as to
be visible from the street.
d. Interior Location. All residents and other occupants are requested to
post the assigned number and street name adjacent to their telephone
for emergency reference.
§ 7-2.4 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 7-3
AO:94
§ 7-3. ALARM USER.
§ 7-3.1. Title. [Ord. 6/18/92; Ord. 8/7/03]
This section shall be known as the Alarm User Ordinance. The purpose
hereof is to protect the fire and police services of the Town from misuse, and
thereby to protect the health, welfare, and safety of the public generally.
§ 7-3.2. Definitions. [Ord. 6/18/92; Ord. 8/7/03]
a. The words used herein shall be construed according to their common
usage and definition.
b. The word "shall" as used herein is used in its mandatory sense.
Whenever not inconsistent within the context thereof, words used
herein in the singular sense shall include the plural sense, and words
used in one gender shall be deemed to include all genders.
c. The following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
ALARM SYSTEM OR DEVICE OR SYSTEM — Shall mean any
equipment or assembly of equipment, of whatever nature, designed to
detect and signal a fire or an intruder in or upon premises, with respect
to which signal fire and/or police personnel are expected to respond.
ALARM USER OR USER — Shall mean any person, group of persons,
association, firm, partnership, corporation or organization of any kind,
in ownership, possession or control of any building wherein a system
is maintained or installed for activation in the event of a fire or an
intruder, in or at such building structure or facility.
AUDIBLE-VISUAL ALARM — Shall mean any device designed for the
protection against a fire or an intruder therein, which device generates
an external audible sound or flashing light, or both, when it is activated.
FALSE ALARM (HEREINAFTER SOMETIMES REFERRED TO AS
"ALARM") — Shall mean any alarm or signal through the activation
of such system when no fire and/or emergency exist. The term shall
include any alarm or signal occasioned by a malfunction or other defect
in the system and by any intentional act of the user or by agent, servant
or employee of the user, or by any member of the user's household
or any person testing a system without notice to the fire/police alarm
personnel, fire/police dispatcher or any other person lawfully having
access to such system. It shall not include a signal caused by acts of
nature or other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to
the control of the alarm user.
INTERCONNECT — Shall mean to connect an alarm system, including
an automatic dialing device, to a telephone line, either directly or
through a mechanical device, that utilizes a telephone for the purpose
of using a telephone line to transmit a message upon the activation of
the system.
§ 7-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-3.3
AO:95
§ 7-3.3. Alarm User's Registration Required. [Ord. 6/18/92; Ord. 8/7/
03]
§ 7-3.4. Violations. [Ord. 6/18/92; Ord. 8/7/03]
§ 7-3.5. Control of Audible Alarms. [Ord. 6/18/92; Ord. 8/7/03]
A user utilizing an audible alarm or flashing light, or combination of the two,
on the premises only, and not connected to the Fire/Police Headquarters,
shall obtain a user's registration. The user of such alarm shall file at Fire/
Police Headquarters the names and telephone numbers of at least two
persons who shall respond within a reasonable time, not to exceed 20
minutes, on request of the Fire/Police Department with the means and
knowledge, to deactivate the alarm.
§ 7-3.6. Testing System. [Ord. 6/18/92; Ord. 8/7/03]
No person holding a user's registration shall test any system without notice
to the personnel on duty at the Fire/Police Department.
§ 7-3.7. False Alarms. [Ord. 6/18/92; Ord. 8/7/03]
Any alarm user who has a false alarm as a result of a malfunction or defect
in such system shall undertake measures to have the system fault corrected
or repaired within 24 hours of such false alarm and said correction or
repair shall be subject to inspection and approval by the Fire/Police Chief.
Any alarm user who has a false alarm is subject to the penalties listed in
subsection 3-4.2.
a. Except as hereinafter provided, every alarm user shall obtain a user's
registration from the Fire/Police Department (a) in the case of a system
already installed within 90 days of the effective date of this section, (b)
otherwise prior to the installation and use of a new system, and (c)
within 90 days of transfer of ownership of the protected property. Said
registration shall have a fee of $10. Fee shall be waived for the
registration of medical alarms.
b. Failure to register an alarm as stated in subsection 7-3.3 shall subject
an alarm user to a fine of $100.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to program an automatic dialing
device to select a primary trunk line as identified by the Fire/Police
Department, without specific approval from said department.
b. It shall be unlawful for an alarm user to fail to disconnect or reprogram
an automatic dialing device, which is designated to connect a primary
trunk line within 12 hours of receipt of written notice from the Fire/
Police Department, that it is so programmed.
§ 7-3.3 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 7-3.8
AO:96
§ 7-3.8. Smoke or Fire Alert Alarms or Detectors. [Ord. 6/18/92;
Ord. 8/7/03]
Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit the installation and use of socalled
"smoke or fire alert detectors", designed for the internal use for the
protection, safety and well-being of occupants at any building, structure or
facility, and no permit shall be required for the installation or use of the
same.
§ 7-3.9. Penalties. [Ord. 6/18/92; Ord. 8/7/03]
Any violation of any provision of this section shall be punishable by the
applicable penalties listed in subsection 7-3.3b and subsection 3-4.2. In
the event of a violation by a corporation, any responsible officer of the
corporation shall be liable for the above penalty.
§ 7-3.10. Confidentiality. [Ord. 6/18/92; Ord. 8/7/03]
All statements and information relating to the installation and location of a
system given to the Fire/Police Chief or his designees shall be maintained
in strict confidence, and may be public only when required in a prosecutive
action resulting from the violation of any part of this section, or by order of
a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 7-3.11. Severability. [Ord. 6/18/92; Ord. 8/7/03]
If any provision of this section or the application hereof is held invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect other provisions hereof which can be given effect
without the invalid provision or application, and to that end, the provisions
hereof shall be deemed severable.
§ 7-3.12. Alarm Service. [Ord. 6/18/92; Ord. 8/7/03]
It shall be the obligation of the alarm user to provide training for employees
and/or occupants of the building in silencing the alarm system, upon
authorization by Fire/Police Department personnel. Resetting the alarm,
by trained personnel, shall not be done until cleared through the Fire/
Police Department and/or alarm service company. The responding Fire/
Police Department personnel are not obligated to silence the alarm system
or to reset it. The Fire/Police Department is an emergency service, and is
not liable for the functioning of the system.
Chapter 8
STREETS AND SANITATION
§ 8-1. DISPOSAL OF WASTE.
§ 7-3.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-1.1
AO:97
§ 8-1.1. Dumping Rubbish, Garbage and Trash Prohibited. [Ord. 11/
14/38; Ord. 5/8/80, § 1]
No person shall deposit or dump, or cause to be deposited or dumped, any
rubbish, garbage, house offal or refuse, animal or vegetable matter of any
kind, in any street, lane, highway, or common, or upon any part of any public
beach or upon any public lands or upon that part of any land or shore which
is flowed by the waters of the Atlantic Ocean and/or Sakonnet River within
this Town, or upon any property not belonging to said person, without the
permission of the owner thereof.
§ 8-1.2. Depositing Filth, Brine, or Other Offensive Substances
Prohibited. [Ord. 5/8/80, § 2]
No person shall throw, pour, or in any way deposit, place or cause to
be placed any filth, brine, dirty water, dirt, rubbish, or other offensive
substance of any description whatsoever, or any paper, sawdust, shavings
or any refuse animal or vegetable matter of any kind in any street, wharf,
lane, highway, common, park, or public land in the Town.
§ 8-1.3. Property Not to Breed Mosquitoes or Rodents. [Ord. 5/8/80,
§ 3]
All owners or tenants of real estate in the Town shall keep the same free
from accumulating waste, that because of its nature, condition or proper
storage, may invite the breeding or collecting of flies or mosquitoes or
rodents, or that may in any other manner be prejudicial to the public health,
welfare or safety of the inhabitants of the Town.
§ 8-1.4. Town Dump Designated. [Ord. 5/8/80, § 4]
The Town Council shall designate an area as the Town dump. No person may
operate a commercial waste disposal site within the Town other than on the
designated area. The Town dump shall be operated under the authority of
the Town Council in such manner and under such rules and regulations as
the Town Council may adopt. It is also to be understood that the dump shall
conform to all Federal and State laws and/or rules and regulations.
a. All waste shall be transported to the Town dump at the expense of the
owner thereof. "Waste" shall mean all trash, rubbish, garbage, offal and
other refuse or discharged or discarded matter. [Ord. 5/8/80, § 5]
b. No waste shall be dumped or left on any private property, or any road or
highway, or property of the Town, other than at the Town dump. [Ord.
5/8/80, § 6]
c. No carcass of an animal shall be deposited at the Town dump. Such
carcass shall be buried by the owner of the animal or by the person on
whose property the carcass may be found. [Ord. 5/8/80, § 7]
d. The Town dump shall be for waste generated by Little Compton
residents only and no person shall deposit waste at the Town dump, or
§ 8-1.1 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 8-1.4
AO:98
§ 8-1.5. Rules and Regulations for the Town Transfer Station. [Ord.
5/8/80, § 9; Ord. 6/7/84; Ord. 10/4/84; Ord. 12/6/84; Ord. 3/10/88;
Ord. 7/1/91; Ord. 4/22/93; Ord. 3/24/94; Ord. 7/21/94; Ord. 8/22/96;
Ord. 10/18/01; Ord. 11/20/01; Ord. 8/19/10; Ord. 7/23/15]
make any use of this dump without first obtaining a permit, which shall
be obtained from the office of the Town Clerk of the Town of Little
Compton. The fee for said permit shall be determined by the Town
Council of the Town. All persons collecting waste as a business and
depositing the same within Little Compton, shall do so only if the loads
are covered and protected so said waste cannot fall or be blown from
the vehicle being utilized. [Ord. 5/8/80, § 8]
e. Type of Disposal Area. The Little Compton Dump shall be operated as a
transfer station. At the discretion of the operator or contractor there
may be provisions for the recycling of materials such as metal, glass, or
newspaper. Other waste shall be in lengths and/or widths of not greater
than three feet and shall be deposited in a compactor for transfer to an
approved disposal site. Exceptions to the three foot length may be
granted if the item is easily compacted.
a. It is important that the Town have rules and regulations for an orderly
and systematic process for the disposal of trash and garbage at the
transfer station. Therefore, these rules and regulations are adopted by
the Town Council pursuant to subsection 8-1.4 of the Town Code.
b. Hours of Operation. The hours of operation for the Town Transfer
Station shall be determined by the Town Council. If the transfer station
is closed due to a holiday, the hours of operation for the day following
the holiday shall be the same as the day on which the holiday falls,
except if the holiday falls on a Saturday. Contracting and/or
construction debris will not be accepted on Saturday.
c. Residence stickers will allow access to and use of the transfer station.
d. Recycling of Materials.
1. Mandatory Recycling. A mandatory recycling program is hereby
implemented in the Town of Little Compton pursuant to Chapters
23-18.8, 23-18.9 and 23-19 of the Rhode Island General Laws and
the Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management
Municipal Recycling Regulations, as amended.
2. Definitions.
(a) MIXED RECYCLABLES – Are those materials required to be
removed from municipal solid waste at the source and
delivered directly to the Town recycling facility or placed in or
on top of the set-out container provided by the Solid Waste
Management Corporation for collection by a privately
contracted hauler.
§ 8-1.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-1.5
AO:99
(b) RECYCLABLE MATERIALS – Are those separated from
municipal solid waste for processing for reuse as specified by
the Director of DEM and listed in Section 4 of the Municipal
Recycling Regulations and within this paragraph. The
materials to be included may change from time to time
depending upon new technologies, economic conditions, waste
stream characteristics, environmental effects or mutual
agreement between the State and municipalities.
(c) RESIDENT – Is anyone (including any business entity
regardless of organizational form) residing in the Town of Little
Compton for any period of time who generates solid waste for
which the Town accepts disposal responsibility.
(d) SEASONAL OR SHORT TERM RENTALS – Shall mean those
temporary residents with a rental agreement of three months
or less.
(e) SOLID WASTE – Is garbage, refuse and other discarded solid
materials generated by residential, institutional, commercial,
industrial and agricultural sources but not including solids or
dissolved material in domestic sewage or septage nor
hazardous waste as defined in the Hazardous Waste
Management Act, Chapter 23-19.1 of the Rhode Island General
Laws.
(f) SOURCE SEPARATION – Is the removal by the generator of
recyclable materials including mixed recyclables from all other
solid waste generated by the household and conveyance of the
recyclable materials to the Town recycling facility or to the
curbside for collection by a private hauler.
3. Residential recycling.
(a) All residents are required to separate recyclable materials
from residential solid waste and to deliver those materials
directly to the Town recycling facility or to have them delivered
to a Town or State recycling facility by a private hauler. This
paragraph does not, however, bar any residents from giving
recyclable materials to a nonprofit or private organization.
(b) The following materials are required to be separated from
residential solid waste and delivered to a Town or State
recycling facility:
(1) Newspapers.
(2) Aluminum.
(3) Steel/tin cans.
(4) Glass containers.
§ 8-1.5 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 8-1.5
AO:100
(5) PET plastic soda bottles.
(6) HDPE plastic dairy jugs.
(7) Electronic waste.
(8) Other materials determined by the Department of
Environmental Management to be recyclable in its
Municipal Recycling Regulations, Section 4-1.
(c) All separated materials are to be delivered to a Town, State or
State designated recycling facility in a processable condition,
i.e., at a minimum, all glass, plastic, steel/tin and aluminum
containers shall be empty and rinsed, aluminum foil shall be
clean, webbing shall be removed from aluminum furniture, no
non-container glass shall be mixed with the recyclables,
newspapers shall be placed in a brown paper bag or tied in
bundles with a string and any other requirements in DEM's
Municipal Recycling Regulations, Appendix A.
4. Public Events. The separation of recyclables from solid waste shall
be a condition of licensing or authorization of any public event, the
conduct of which generates solid waste for which the Town accepts
disposal responsibility.
5. Ownership of Recyclables. Any recyclable materials, as defined by
this paragraph, once placed in a designated pickup place or
delivered to a Town facility, become the property of the Town and
no person not permitted by the Town shall collect such materials
except as specifically authorized by the Town. The Town may issue
permits to charitable organizations to collect recyclable materials
on the condition that a report is filed by said organizations detailing
the weights of each material collected in compliance with the
Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management reporting
requirements and provided that the Town determines that said
collection does not conflict with the Town's recycling program.
Such permit shall be obtained from the Town Clerk after
application is made on a form furnished by the Town Clerk. The fee
for such permit shall be $10 to be paid at the time of application.
e. The following items will be accepted at the transfer station:
1. Normal residential household trash and garbage. All trash shall be
transported to the transfer station in leak-proof containers with
closed tops.
2. Grass, leaves and loose hedge trimmings.
3. All materials listed above as recyclable.
4. Used oil — Used oil will be transported to the transfer station in
nonbreakable, leak-proof containers. Only standard grades of
automobile oil will be accepted. No other liquid substance should
§ 8-1.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-1.5
AO:101
be transported to the station for any purpose. Disposal of used oil
at the station will be in accordance with the posted regulations.
5. White goods, scrap metal and tires — White goods, scrap metal and
tires will be accepted at the transfer station as a service to the
homeowner but will not be accepted from a commercial business
unless said business pays the following fees:
(a) Tires: $30 per trip for vehicles with a carrying capacity of less
than 2,000 pounds.
(b) White goods and scrap metal: $30 per trip for vehicles with a
carrying capacity of less than 2,000 pounds.
f. The following items will not be accepted at the transfer station:
1. All liquid and semi-liquid wastes with the exception of used oil, as
specified above.
2. Tree stumps, wood and roots of any size or description.
3. Animal remains.
4. Ash, cinders or hot loads.
5. Boulders, dirt, gravel, or any other earthen materials.
6. Farm equipment, industrial equipment, automobiles or parts
thereof.
7. Pathological or biological or hazardous wastes as defined by any
governmental agency.
8. Chemicals or compounds that are explosive, flammable, radioactive
or toxic.
9. Any substance or material or item that may cause damage to or
adversely affect the operation of the Little Compton Transfer
Station.
g. No scavenging, dump picking or loitering will be permitted at the
transfer station.
h. No trucks, trailers, or other open vehicles will be allowed entry into the
transfer station if their load is not covered.
i. All items deposited at the transfer station become the property of the
Town of Little Compton. The Town may dispose of the items in any way
appropriate.
j. It is expressly prohibited to deposit into the household trash compactor
items specified herein as recyclable, including newspapers, aluminum
beverage cans, plastic, glass, heavy metals.
§ 8-1.5 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 8-1.6
AO:102
§ 8-1.6. Fee Schedule; Transfer Station Stickers/Coupons/Seasonal
Passes. [Ord. 7/1/91; Ord. 4/8/93; Ord. 8/5/93; Ord. 7/21/94; Ord. 9/
4/97; Ord. 10/18/01; Ord. 2/21/02; Ord. 8/21/03; Ord. 12/4/03; Ord.
8/19/10; Ord. 5/21/15; Ord. 6/23/16]
a. Transfer station stickers shall be issued annually to residents of the
Town of Little Compton. Each sticker shall carry a fee of $5 and shall be
permanently affixed by the resident to a window on the driver's side of
the vehicle in such a manner as to be readily visible by the transfer
station attendant. Proof of vehicle registration and residency within the
Town of Little Compton will be required.
b. Coupons may be purchased for use by temporary residents, such as
short term or seasonal rentals. Said coupons shall carry a fee of $2 per
coupon expiring on the 31st of December annually. The coupon will
allow the holder to deliver household trash to the Town Transfer Station
by surrendering one coupon per trip to the transfer station attendant.
Proof of temporary residency will be required. Coupons may be
purchased by local realtors to be utilized with Little Compton rental
properties.
c. Seasonal passes may be purchased for use by summer residents that
will allow passage into the Town Transfer Station from Memorial Day to
September 30 during the year of issue. Said passes shall carry a fee of
$5. Proof of seasonal residency and vehicle registration will be
required.
d. All other vehicles, except vehicles which collect waste in the Town for
hire, may use the Town transfer station under the following conditions:
1. They may only deposit trash at the transfer station which is
generated in the Town.
2. A permit shall be obtained from the Town Clerk for each trip to the
transfer station and shall pay the following fee for each permit.
Contractors and/or persons with construction debris must provide
home owner's name and building permit number.
(a) A fee of $75 per trip for vehicles with a carrying capacity of
less than 2,000 pounds.
(b) A fee of $150 per trip for vehicles with a carrying capacity of
2,000 pounds through 3,999 pounds.
(c) A fee of $275 per trip for vehicles with a carrying capacity of
4,000 pounds through 5,999 pounds.
(d) A fee of $400 per trip for vehicles with a carrying capacity of
6,000 pounds through 7,999 pounds.
(e) A fee of $550 per trip for vehicles with a carrying capacity of
8,000 pounds through 9,999 pounds.
§ 8-1.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-1.6
AO:103
(f) A fee of $700 per trip for vehicles with a carrying capacity of
10,000 pounds through 11,999 pounds.
(g) A fee of $75 per trip shall be charged for trailers with a
capacity of up to 160 cubic feet. A fee of $150 per trip shall be
charged for trailers with a capacity of more than 160 cubic feet
but not to exceed 400 cubic feet.
Trailers with a capacity that exceeds 400 cubic feet will not be
accepted at the transfer station.
3. No vehicle with a carrying capacity of greater than 11,999 pounds
and no rollers or roll off boxes will be allowed to dump at the Town
transfer station.
4. For convenience, one or more permits may be purchased from the
Town Clerk at one time.
5. Permits must be provided to the attendant at the transfer station
upon entry.
e. All qualified persons engaged in the business of collecting and hauling
refuse to be delivered to the Town Transfer Station for refuse generated
within the boundaries of the Town shall be licensed by the Town,
pursuant to Section 23-18.9-1(b)(1) of the Rhode Island General Laws.
1. The following fees shall be charged:
(a) A fee of $200 per year for each vehicle with a gross weight of
4,000 pounds or less.
(b) A fee of $300 per year for each vehicle with a gross weight in
excess of 4,000 pounds.
2. No licenses shall be granted until all Town taxes and fees shall have
been paid to date to the Town Treasure and Collector of Taxes or
other Municipal Agency authorized to collect such fees or taxes.
3. Licensed haulers shall collect only that residential solid waste that
is source separated by the resident into the recyclable and
nonrecyclable components.
4. Licensed haulers shall keep recyclable materials separate from
nonrecyclable residential solid waste.
5. Licensed haulers shall maintain any separated recyclable materials
that are delivered to either a Town, State, or State designated
recycling facility in processable condition.
6. Licensed haulers shall keep residential recyclable materials
separate from recyclables collected from commercial accounts.
§ 8-1.6 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 8-1.6
AO:104
§ 8-1.7. Penalty. [Ord. 5/8/80, § 10; Ord. 11/19/87; Ord. 9/21/95]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section, or any of the
rules and regulations promulgated by the Town Council in carrying out
the provisions of this section, shall be fined not more than $100, or be
imprisoned not exceeding 30 days, or both.
§ 8-2. DRAINAGE ONTO TOWN ROADS AND HIGHWAYS. [Ord. 5/9/
85]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make any
connection into a Town road drainage system or to drain or pump water
onto the traveled surface of a Town road or highway lying and being within
the bounds of the Town of Little Compton without first obtaining the written
permission of the Town Council.
§ 8-3. OUTDOOR BURNING OF RUBBISH AND OTHER WASTE
PRODUCTS.
§ 8-3.1. Fire Safety Requirements. [Ord. 4/24/86, § 1]
All persons shall comply with the following fire protection and safety
requirements.
§ 8-3.2. Bonfires and Outdoor Rubbish Fires. [Ord. 4/24/86, § 2]
Burning of rubbish and bonfires and other waste products shall be
permitted only under the following conditions.
7. Licensed haulers who deliver recyclables to a Town, State, or State
designated recycling facility shall deliver to said facility only
recyclables generated by residents of the Town of Little Compton.
8. Licensed haulers shall deliver all recyclables designated to go to a
Town, State, or State designated recycling facility to said facility.
f. Any person or business that wishes to dispose of a refrigerator, freezer,
air conditioner, dehumidifier or any other appliance that requires
Chlorofluorocarbons (CFC) and/or Hydrofluorocarbons (HFC) removal
shall first obtain a permit from the Town Clerk which shall be presented
to the attendant at the transfer station. The fee for said permit shall be
$25 for each appliance.
g. Any person or business that wishes to dispose of a mattress or box
spring shall be allowed to dispose for free unless said mattress or box
spring is deemed unrecoverable by RI Resource Recovery standards
whereby there shall be a fee levied for disposal equal to the rate
charged to the Town by RI Resource Recovery.
§ 8-1.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-3.3
AO:105
§ 8-3.3. Permit Required. [Ord. 4/24/86, § 3]
No person shall kindle or maintain any open fire or authorize any such fire
to be kindled or maintained on or in public or private property without
having obtained a permit from the Fire Department.
§ 8-3.4. Location Restricted. [Ord. 4/24/86, § 4]
No person shall kindle or maintain any open fire or authorize any such fire
to be kindled or maintained on any private land unless:
§ 8-3.5. Attendance of Open Fires. [Ord. 4/24/86, § 5]
Any open fires shall be constantly attended by a competent person until
such fire is extinguished. This person shall have a garden hose connected
to the water supply, or other extinguishing equipment readily available for
use. All bonfires shall be inspected by the Fire Chief or Duty Man before
being ignited.
§ 8-3.6. Contained Burning Allowed Without Permit. [Ord. 4/24/86,
§ 6]
When the fire is contained in a waste burner with a closed or properly
screened top, the type approved by the Fire Chief or Duty Man, and located
safely on private property no less than 25 feet from any structure, fence or
property line, unless special exception is granted by the Fire Chief or Duty
Man of the Fire Department.
§ 8-3.7. Fire Chief or Duty Man May Prohibit. [Ord. 4/24/86, § 7]
The Chief or Duty Man of the Fire Department may prohibit by a written
cease and desist order upon any person, group or corporation, any or
all bonfires and outdoor rubbish fires whether in the open air or in Fire
Department approved rubbish or waste burners or outdoor fireplaces, when
atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous or
the smoke or fumes from such fires a nuisance to adjoining or surrounding
property or persons.
§ 8-3.8. Penalty. [Ord. 4/24/86, § 8]
1st Offense: Written warning or five days in jail.
2nd Offense: $25 fine or five days in jail.
3rd Offense: $50 fine or five days in jail.
a. The location is not less than 50 feet from any structure and adequate
provision is made to prevent fire from spreading to within 50 feet of any
structure, unless special exception is granted by the Fire Chief or Duty
Man of the Fire Department.
§ 8-3.3 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 8-3.8
AO:106
Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be fined not less
than $25 nor more than $50 or by imprisonment for not more than five days
or by both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 8-4. UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANKS.
§ 8-4.1. Definitions. [Ord. 8/22/91, § I; Ord. 2/6/92, § I; Ord. 9/10/92,
§ I]
§ 8-4.2. Inspection of Underground Storage Tanks. [Ord. 8/22/91,
§ I; Ord. 2/6/92, § I; Ord. 9/10/92, § I]
The enforcing officer shall have the authority to:
§ 8-4.3. Installation of Underground Storage Tanks Prohibited.
[Ord. 8/22/91, § I; Ord. 2/6/92, § I; Ord. 9/10/92, § I]
The installation of underground storage tanks in the Town where its
purpose is to serve a residential or farm dwelling is hereby prohibited.
a. UNDERGROUND – Shall mean that 10% or more of the volume of the
components of storage tanks and piping is buried in the ground.
b. Except for the purpose of registration under subsection 8-4.5
"underground storage tanks" shall mean either:
1. On-site underground storage tanks used for storing heating oil and
serving a dwelling including underground pipes connected thereto;
2. Farm or residential underground storage tanks holding less than
1,100 gallons and storing motor fuel or heating oil for noncommercial
purposes including underground pipes connected
thereto.
c. ENFORCING OFFICER – Shall mean the Fire Chief or his designee.
a. Inspect facilities at which underground storage tanks are located.
b. Require closure of abandoned storage tanks consistent with the
permanent closure procedures set forth in the regulations for
underground storage facilities used for petroleum products and
hazardous materials issued by the Department of Environmental
Management.
c. Require the removal, at the owner's expense, of all tanks and
underground pipes deemed to pose a threat to the public health or the
environment.
§ 8-3.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-4.4
AO:107
§ 8-4.4. Appeals. [Ord. 2/6/92, § I; Ord. 9/10/92, § I]
Any property owner may appeal any decision of the enforcing officer to the
Town Council, within 30 days of said decision, and, the Town Council shall
have the discretion to reverse or modify said decision for good cause.
§ 8-4.5. Registration of Underground Storage Tanks. [Ord. 2/6/92,
§ I; Ord. 9/10/92, § I]
§ 8-4.6. Duty to Remove or Neutralize Underground Storage Tanks.
[Ord. 9/10/92, § I]
Prior to the sale of any farm or residential property in the Town, the owner
thereof shall either (a) remove or (b) pump out and fill with sand any
underground storage tank located on such property.
§ 8-4.7. Penalties. [Ord. 8/22/91, § I; Ord. 2/6/92, § I; Ord. 9/10/92,
§ I]
Violation of this section shall be subject to fines of $50 per day for each
day that such violation exists after notification, in writing, by the enforcing
officer of such violation.
Chapter 9
BEACHES, HARBORS, RECREATIONAL AREAS AND
ENVIRONMENT
§ 9-1. HARBOR MASTER/HARBOR COMMISSION.
§ 9-1.1. Jurisdiction. [Ord. 12/8/94]
The jurisdiction of this section shall include the coastal waters and harbor
areas of the Town of Little Compton.
§ 9-1.2. Authority. [Ord. 12/8/94]
The authority for the section comes from the General Laws of the State of
Rhode Island, § 46-4-6,7.
a. All new, existing, and abandoned underground tanks used to store
motor fuel or heating oil for commercial and non-commercial purposes,
regardless of their size, shall be registered with the Town.
b. Registration applications may be obtained at the Fire Department.
c. All tanks must be registered no later than September 30, 1992. A
registration fee of $50 per property shall be paid for any tank
registered after said date.
§ 8-4.4 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 9-1.3
AO:108
§ 9-1.3. Harbor Commission. [Ord. 12/8/94]
The Harbor Commission shall be the local advisory body concerning the
implementation of the Harbor Management Plan and related ordinances.15
a. Composition. The Harbor Commission shall consist of seven members
who are residents of Little Compton as follows:
One owner of a recreational boat kept on a mooring, or one who is on a
waiting list for a mooring.
One joint representative of the Sakonnet Point Marina Association Inc.
and Sakonnet Point Club; (Charter amendment approved by voters at
election of November 4, 2014.)
One representative of the Sakonnet Yacht Club;
One commercial trip fisherman;
One commercial day fisherman;
One officer of the local fishermen's association;
One member of a Town conservation organization.
b. Appointments. Members shall be appointed by the Town Council for
staggered terms of three years. The original members shall be
appointed in such manner as to provide for the expiration of the term of
two members in one year, two members in two years, and three
members in years.
c. Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled as necessary and in accordance with
the initial appointment, but only for the remainder of the term of the
former member.
d. Officers. A Chairperson, a Vice Chairperson, and Secretary shall be
elected by the members of the Commission. Regular meetings shall
occur at least once a month. Special meetings may be called by the
Chairperson, and shall be called by the Chairperson at the request of at
least three members of the Commission. The Secretary shall keep
minutes of all meetings and file such minutes promptly with the Town
Clerk. Such minutes shall append the Harbor Master's monthly report.
e. Powers and Duties. The Harbor Commission shall adopt as its primary
authority the current edition of Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised
and may adopt supplementary rules of procedure. The Harbor
Commission is authorized and directed to:
15.Editor's Note: History of Ordinance. This ordinance was originally enacted on April 9,
1957. It was amended on March 9, 1959; April 13, 1964; August 7, 1969; April 23, 1970;
January 24, 1974; August 8, 1974; November 7, 1974; June 23, 1977; January 18, 1979;
January 10, 1980; February 19, 1981; February 4, 1982: May 20, 1982; March 16, 1983;
February 21, 1985; June 5, 1986; February 5, 1987; April 20, 1989; October 24, 1991;
February 20, 1992; October 7, 1993; January 6, 1994 and December 8, 1994.
§ 9-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1.3
AO:109
§ 9-1.4. Harbor Master. [Ord. 12/8/94]
There shall be a Harbor Master for the Town who shall annually be
appointed by the Town Council. The Harbor Master shall serve at the
pleasure of the Town Council and shall report to the Town Council and the
Harbor Commission with the following duties:
1. Recommend to the Town Council the adoption of rules and
regulations, fees, penalties, and other amendments to the Harbor
Management Plan and its subsequent ordinances;
2. Recommend to the Town Council additional authorities and duties
for the Harbor Master, herein detailed;
3. Recommend to the Town Council an annual budget in accordance
with the provisions of the Town to expend monies appropriated at
the Annual Financial Town Meeting;
4. Review and make recommendations for all applications for mooring
permits and approve any permits issued;
5. Review and revise as necessary the Harbor Management Plan and
its subsequent ordinances for Town Council and Coastal Resources
Management Council approval. The Harbor Management Plan and
its ordinances shall be reviewed and revised at least once every five
years.
f. Ex-Officio Member. The Harbor Master shall be a nonvoting, ex-officio
member of the Harbor Commission.
g. Compensation. Harbor Commission members may be compensated for
any normal expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
a. Be responsible for the administration and enforcement of the provisions
of the Harbor Management Plan and its ordinances;
b. Process applications for the issuance of mooring permits and assign
proper placements of moorings in accordance with this ordinance;
c. Keep a detailed, current, computerized record at the Little Compton
Town Hall of all moorings and slip information, including but not limited
to a keyed map showing location of moorings and slips; boat owner's
name, address(es) and telephone number(s), mooring permit number,
date mooring was set, last mooring inspection date, vessel data as
described in this section. The Harbor Master shall maintain in his/her
files a copy of the location map and a current printout of such
information;
d. Prepare, keep current, and make available a waiting list for mooring
permits in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance if the
demand for available mooring permits is greater than the number of
available mooring locations in any given year;
§ 9-1.3 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 9-1.4
AO:110
§ 9-1.5. Assistant Harbor Master(s). [Ord. 12/8/94]
Assistant Harbor Master(s) for the Town may be appointed annually by
the Town Council and shall serve at the pleasure of the Town Council.
Assistant Harbor Master(s) shall report directly to the Harbor Master and
are authorized with the same duties as the Harbor Master, under the
direction of the Harbor Master.
§ 9-1.6. Compensation and Budget. [Ord. 12/8/94]
The Harbor Master and Assistant Harbor Master(s) shall receive a salary
at such a rate as the Town Council shall fix subject to approval of the
Annual Financial Town Meeting. The Harbor Master is responsible for the
day to day administration of a harbor management budget, with Harbor
Commission authorization.
§ 9-1.7. Powers and Duties. [Ord. 12/8/94]
The Harbor Master shall have full power and authority to prescribe
regulations and to give directions regarding the anchorage, management
and control of all vessels within waters and harbors of the Town of Little
Compton subject to any and all State or Federal laws governing the same.
The Harbor Master may remove from any public wharf in these harbors any
vessel not engaged in receiving or discharging a cargo or any vessel not
anchored or moored according to his/her direction in the waters over which
the Harbor Master is hereby given jurisdiction, and he/she shall charge
the owner for all reasonable costs thereof. The Harbor Master may also
determine the extent, time and manner of accommodation respecting the
position of all vessels. The Harbor Master, having due regard to the draft of
each vessel and the facility of navigation, shall designate upon a map of the
waters subject to his/her jurisdiction areas restricted to vessels moored 12
months per year, areas restricted to seasonal craft moored during certain
parts of the year, areas restricted to guest moorings, areas restricted to all
moorings, areas restricted to no moorings, and the places where adequate
permanent or temporary moorings or anchorages may be maintained. The
Harbor Master shall affix or append to this map a list or key designating
the name and address of the owner of each vessel and the size and type
thereof. No moorings or anchorages in the waters subject to the jurisdiction
of the Harbor Master shall hereafter be maintained except at the location
designated by the Harbor Master for such maintenance. The Harbor Master
e. Supervise the inspection of mooring tackle in accordance with the
provisions of this section;
f. Carry out all other powers and duties authorized to the Harbor Master
under various State and Federal marine laws, including but not limited
to Marine Sanitation Device (MSD) inspection and discharge
responsibilities afforded through the U.S. Coast Guard, MARPOL
ANNEX V, Section 312 of the Clean Water Act, Title 46-22 of the
General Laws of Rhode Island, and future laws yet to be enacted.
§ 9-1.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1.7
AO:111
shall file the map in the Town Hall and shall thereafter maintain the same
currently accurate. He/she shall also maintain a currently correct copy
thereof in a place reasonably accessible to mariners for their convenience
in consulting the same during hours when the Town Hall would not normally
be open. He/she shall, annually on or before June 1, make a complete and
accurate revision of both his/her original master map and its copy. He/she
shall issue to each person applying to him/her therefor, a license properly
keyed to this map to maintain such permanent or temporary mooring, the
license to expire on April 1 in each succeeding year after its issuance, and
shall see to it that the said mooring is maintained at the spot designated by
him/her upon his/her map and in the license and not elsewhere, and if the
licensee or any other person shall place a mooring or maintain anchorage
elsewhere than as designated, the Harbor Master may remove the mooring
or vessel or both in his/her discretion charge the expense of so doing to
the person so placing the mooring or maintaining anchorage in a spot other
than is designated by the Harbor Master.
§ 9-1.8. Owner of Vessels to Place and Maintain Moorings at Harbor
Master's Direction. [Ord. 12/8/94]
The owner or master of any vessel of any size shall have the right to
furnish and place his/her own mooring ground tackle, and shall have the
responsibility for its maintenance, subject to the right of the Harbor Master
to designate location of said mooring, as aforesaid, and subject to there
being space for said mooring, provided, however, any mooring ground
tackle so placed or maintained by the owner or master or anyone else in
his/her behalf shall meet the requirements set up by the Harbor Master
pertaining to size of said mooring, scope of said mooring and any mooring
not so maintained to the satisfaction of the Harbor Master may be removed
by the Harbor Master.
§ 9-1.9. Vessels Moored at Docks or Slips. [Ord. 12/8/94]
No vessel shall be moored at any dock or in any slip in such manner that
any portion of its hull, spars or tackle extend into or over the navigation
channel. Any vessel in violation of this rule shall be relocated immediately
upon the instructions of the Harbor Master, and if the person in control of
such vessel cannot be located, the Harbor Master shall deem appropriate at
the expense of the owner, to correct the violation.
§ 9-1.10. Wakes Prohibited Which are Large or Unsafe. [Ord. 12/8/
94]
No vessel shall be navigated or operated within the waters of the harbor
of the Town of Little Compton in such manner as to create any wake which
would cause damage to other boats or in such manner as to infringe upon
the safety of other users of the harbor or at a speed greater than five miles
per hour.
§ 9-1.7 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 9-1.10
AO:112
The use of sailboards and the use of personal watercraft as defined by R.I.
Gen. Laws 46-27-1 (commonly known as jet skis) in the harbor is prohibited
except for access and egress from June 15 to September 15. Personal
watercraft are only permitted to enter or exit the harbor at headway speed
as that term is defined in R.I. Gen. Laws 46-27-1. Headway speed means the
slowest speed at which a personal watercraft can be operated and maintain
steerage way. In all of Little Compton waters, no personal watercraft may be
operated at more than headway speed within 200 feet of swimmers, divers,
shore or moored vessels.
§ 9-1.11. Mooring Regulations. [Ord. 12/8/94; Ord. 10/24/96; Ord.
12/10/98; Ord. 1/9/03; Ord. 12/5/13; Ord. 9/22/16]
a. Permit Process.
1. A mooring permit issued by the Harbor Master, with the review and
recommendations of the Harbor Commission, is required for all
moorings within and on the public waters of the Town of Little
Compton. The permit holder may renew the permit annually upon
payment of the mooring fee. No permit for a mooring shall be
issued unless the mooring complies with all the conditions of this
section.
2. Any mooring holder, who during the immediately preceding year
held a valid mooring permit for a specifically named boat which
was on its mooring for a minimum of four weeks between June 1
and October 31, shall have until April 1 of the next succeeding year
to reapply for a permit. All renewal applications shall be
accompanied by the permit fee required and shall be delivered or
mailed before April 1 by the United States mail and addressed to
the Little Compton Harbor Master.
3. Failure to submit a complete and accurate application and fee
payment for a renewal permit shall result in loss of mooring space.
4. The Harbor Master shall, during the month of January of each year,
cause application forms to be mailed to all mooring holders who
held valid permits at the end of the prior year, to the address listed
on their last permit. It shall be the burden of the permit holder to
notify the Harbor Master of any change of address.
5. An annual review of all mooring permit owners will be conducted to
insure that the CRMC's ratio of resident mooring permit owners to
nonresident mooring permit owners will be maintained at the ratio
of 3 to 1.
b. Application Procedures.
1. All applications for a mooring permit, new or renewal, shall contain
the following information:
§ 9-1.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1.11
AO:113
(a) Name, address and telephone (work and home) of the boat
owner.
(b) Type, color, and name of boat.
(c) Overall length of boat.
(d) Beam of boat.
(e) Draft of boat.
(f) Type and weight of mooring anchor.
(g) Size and length of anchor chain.
(h) Date of last mooring inspection.
(i) Type of MSD (Marine Sanitation Device), if any, installed on
boat.
(j) Shoreside access point to mooring.
2. Assignment of moorings in Sakonnet Harbor shall be limited to one
mooring per immediate family. Immediate family shall be defined as
follows: spouse and or minor children.
3. No mooring shall be licensed to any person who is not the owner of
the boat for which he or she certifies the intention to use said
mooring. Any person holding mooring license shall surrender said
license when he or she ceases to have ownership of the boat for
which the mooring was licensed and does not.
(a) Place the named boat on its mooring for a minimum of four
weeks between June 1 and October 31 of any given year. A one
year absence may be requested in writing, to the Harbor
Commission, after paying the appropriate mooring fee, in the
case of illness, death, being out of the country or other valid
reason. Any such request must be received by May 1st for the
next summer season absent extraordinary circumstances. If
approved, the vacant mooring shall be offered to the next
person on the waiting list with a boat of similar size, based on
the Harbor Master's judgment, for one season. If accepted that
individual must also pay the appropriate mooring fee to the
Town of Little Compton.
(b) Use the mooring for one season (at least four weeks is a
season) with a boat of the same size or smaller of which he or
she acquires ownership. A second condition which requires
any person holding a valid mooring license to surrender said
license is if the specifically named boat for the mooring is not
placed on its mooring for a minimum of four weeks between
June 1 and October 31 during the preceding year. This
condition must be fully met, even in the event of the sale of an
§ 9-1.11 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 9-1.11
AO:114
old boat and the purchase of a new boat of the same or smaller
size.
Ownership of a boat shall be defined as ownership of at least a 51%
monetary interest therein. The Harbor Master shall have the authority
to require any mooring licensee or applicant for a mooring license
to provide proof of ownership of the boat for which such license was
issued or is requested, and in a case of refusal or inability to provide
such proof the Harbor Master shall have the authority to require the
surrender of any such license or deny any such application. If the
registered mooring holder and owner of a vessel or boat transfers
partial or full ownership of a boat to another person or entity other
than an immediate family member, the person or entity acquiring
ownership of the boat will not become a mooring holder until his/her/
its name reaches the top of the mooring waiting list.
4. A permit holder during the immediately preceding year who shall
need or desire a new location shall file an application in accordance
with this section specifying the reasons for the relocation request
along with the existing mooring space number and size and type of
boat. Based on available spaces and the requirements of this
section action will be taken on the request.
5. One Vessel Allowed per Mooring. No more than one vessel shall be
moored at any mooring at any time unless the Harbor Master
grants permission to the owner of any vessel or vessels to moor two
or more at the same mooring. The mooring fee as hereinbefore
stated shall be applied to every boat moored in the harbor whether
the same is located at one mooring along with another vessel or
singly at any mooring.
6. All new, first time mooring applications must be sent to the Town
Clerk to ensure it is time stamped and officially received by the
Town. The Town Clerk shall then ensure delivery of the applications
to the Harbor Master. All renewal applications must be sent to the
Harbor Master.
7. A maximum of 20% of the moorings in Sakonnet Harbor shall be
made available to the owners of boats which are maintained
principally for commercial fishing purposes not to exceed a
maximum of 30% of the mooring field. Applicants shall be subject
to the proposed point system. The first two commercial fishing
vessel moorings which become available will be reserved as
moorings for resident owners of commercial fishing vessels. In the
interim these moorings will be used as transient moorings.
8. The Harbor Master, with the review and recommendations of the
Harbor Commission, shall approve or deny all new applications in
writing, within 60 days of receipt thereof. All renewal applications
will be issued or denied in writing no later than June 1 of each year.
§ 9-1.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1.11
AO:115
c. Transferability. Mooring permits may be transferred to immediate
family members of the same or higher priority group as outlined in
Subsection d following.
d. Priority for Mooring Locations. The Harbor Master will maintain a
chronological list of all applicants requesting a mooring location and
ensure that the Harbor Commission and the Town Clerk receive a copy
of the list within one week (seven days) after each time the list is
updated. The list should be updated at least once annually by no later
than April 15.
Within the space available, providing consideration for safety due to
the size of each vessel, requests will be treated on a first come, first
serve basis. Moorings will be given out in the order in which someone's
name is placed on the waiting list, contingent on a mooring space being
available which is the length requested by the waiting list individual.
The decision will be based on the judgment of the Harbor Master with
review and approval by the Harbor Commission. Additionally, when a
commercial mooring space becomes available, it is to be given to the
next individual seeking a commercial mooring, in order to maintain
the commercial to recreational boater ratio. If an individual on the
waiting list is given a mooring space and they then request a one year
delay before placing their boat on a new mooring, they must place the
appropriate size boat on the mooring during the following season.
If there is appropriate space a boat length increase request may be
granted at the discretion of the Harbor Master with review and
approval of the Harbor Commission.
When a space assignment is offered to the first individual on the
mooring waiting list with a boat of the appropriate size for said space,
the individual has the privilege of refusing the space twice and
remaining at the top of the mooring waiting list. A third refusal of
an open space assignment will result in the individual being removed
from the mooring waiting list. If the individual at the top of the list
refuses a mooring assignment, the next person on the list will be offered
the available mooring location, and so on. It is the responsibility of
individuals on the mooring waiting list to keep their contact information
current with the Harbor Master. If contact information is not kept
current, the individual may be removed from the mooring waiting list.
e. Occupation of Mooring. No boat shall occupy a mooring other than the
one for which it is registered. The Harbor Master shall have the
authority to move any boat violating the provisions of this section and
such movement shall be at the owner's expense and risk. The Harbor
Master may permit the temporary use of a mooring by another boat of
the same, or smaller size, for up to seven days per year, upon the
written application of the registered permit holder. The owner shall not
receive any money, or any other form of remuneration, for the
temporary use by another boat on his or her mooring. Another boat on
§ 9-1.11 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 9-1.11
AO:116
the mooring does not contribute toward the four week minimum
occupancy required for the permit holder's boat.
f. Fee for License. The Harbor Master shall collect a fee from each
applicant for each license issued by him/her. The fees shall be deposited
with the Town Treasurer of the Town of Little Compton to the account of
the General Funds of the Town. License will be revoked if the
application accompanied by completed mooring inspection form as set
forth in Subsection h below and fee is not submitted before April 1 of
each year.
The following fees are fixed and ordered to be paid annually. For each
mooring for all boats of whatsoever length, propelled by oars, sails or
motors, which are maintained principally for the recreational use of
the owners thereof, at the rate of $7 per foot of length; and for all
such boats which are maintained principally for commercial or profitmaking
purpose by the owners thereof, at the rate of $10 per foot of
length. All boats shall be measured for purposes of this subsection from
the outermost point of the bow to the furthest point of the stern. The
minimum annual fee for any boat maintained for recreational purposes
shall be $60, and for any boat maintained for commercial or profitmaking
purposes shall be $75.
g. Numbering and Winterizing.
1. Each mooring in the waters of the Town of Little Compton will be
assigned a number by the Harbor Master or his/her designee. The
number will be displayed in contrasting color in two places on each
mooring buoy or pick-up float in block letters at least three inches
in height.
2. Any mooring not displaying a mooring registration number will be
considered an unregistered/unpermitted mooring. Unregistered/
unpermitted moorings and any boats attached thereto, will be
removed at the owner's risk and expense.
3. Winter Mooring Spars. Winter mooring spars shall be readily
visible above the water at all times and shall be removed not later
than June 15 of the next succeeding year. Winter spars shall not be
set until on or after the first day of October of each calendar year.
h. Specification of Mooring Tackle.
1. Mooring tackle shall meet at least the following minimum
requirements:
§ 9-1.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1.11
AO:117
Registered
Boat
Length
(Feet)
Mushroom
Anchor
Pounds
Bottom
Chain Top Chain
Nylon
Dacron
Line
Under 16 75 3/8 5/16 1/2
16-19 150 3/8 5/16 1/2
20-22 200 1/2 3/8 5/8
23-25 250 1/2 3/8 3/4
26-30 300 5/8 3/8 3/4
31-35 400 5/8 3/8 3/4
36-40 500 3/4 1/2 7/8
41-50 600 3/4 1/2 1
51-65 750 1 1/2 1 1/4
2. The maximum length of the headfast shall be 2 1/2 times the
distance from the bow chock to the water plus the distance from
the bow chock to the mooring cleat or post.
3. All headfast lines running through the chock or any other object
where chafing may occur shall have adequate chafe guards.
4. The total scope of the chain shall be 2 1/2 times the depth of the
water at high tide. The bottom and top chain shall each consist of
approximately 50% of the scope.
5. All shackles, swivels and other hardware used in the mooring
hookup shall be proportionate in size to the chain used.
6. All shackles shall be properly seized.
7. It is recommended that the headfast be spliced or shackled into the
bitter end of the top chain below the buoy so the strain is not
carried by the buoy. The use of a second headfast in heavy weather
is encouraged.
i. Inspection Procedure.
1. All moorings in water shall be inspected at least once every year at
the owner's expense by a Qualified Inspector. Such inspection shall
be made by raising the mooring, or in the case of moorings which
are determined by the Harbor Master to be of such weight that they
cannot be conveniently raised, inspection may be made
underwater. The Harbor Master shall maintain for each mooring in
use in the harbor, a record of the name of the Qualified Inspector
who made each inspection thereof, and his/her report, each such
record to cover no less than four consecutive years prior to the
most recent inspection. In the event that the ground tackle of any
mooring shall have been replaced in its entirety since the most
§ 9-1.11 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 9-1.11
AO:118
recent annual inspection, and provided that such newly replaced
ground tackle shall have met the approval of the Harbor Master at
the time it was first put in place, annual inspection thereof shall be
waived until it shall have been in place at least 24 months. In no
case shall the annual inspection be waived for any such mooring
more than once.
2. If, as the result of the annual inspection of a mooring, the Qualified
Inspector shall determine that any chain is warped or worn by 1/3
of its normal diameter, all tackle shall be replaced by the owner
thereof. Failure to make such replacement shall be grounds for
revocation of the mooring license issued to the owner, or refusal to
renew the same, by the Harbor Master, as appropriate.
3. No renewal of a mooring license shall be issued by the Harbor
Master unless the application therefor shall be submitted in
appropriate form, shall be accompanied by a certificate signed by a
Qualified Inspector certifying that said mooring has been inspected
within the last six months and found to be in satisfactory condition,
and shall also be accompanied by payment in full of the appropriate
mooring fee as prescribed in Town Regulations.
In the case of moorings which did not pass inspection, and for
which repairs were ordered, applications for renewal must be
accompanied by the report of the Qualified Inspector detailing the
repairs or replacements which were required with endorsement
by the Harbor Master signifying that he/she is satisfied that the
necessary work has in fact been completed. All such applications
for renewal must also be accompanied by the payment of the
appropriate mooring fee.
4. No mooring tackle in place, which shall have failed to pass
inspection, shall be used to moor any vessel until repairs to such
tackle have been completed and approved by the Harbor Master in
accordance with the provisions of Subsection i2 and 3 above; nor
shall any mooring tackle in place be used for the mooring of any
vessel belonging to or authorized by the person to whom that
mooring location had been assigned unless such person has in his/
her possession a valid and current license for the use of such
mooring location issued by the Harbor Master.
j. Qualification of Inspectors. A person appointed by the Harbor Master
must be able, upon demonstration to him/her of their familiarity with
the rules and regulations of the Town relating to mooring tackle
inspection, to be considered a Qualified Inspector. Such approval may
be revoked by the Harbor Master if it shall appear to him/her that the
Inspector has failed to exercise due diligence in performing their duties
as an Inspector.
§ 9-1.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1.11
AO:119
k. Permanent Moorings Not Permitted. No permanent mooring shall be
installed in said harbor as per the requirements of the United States
Army Corps of Engineers.
l. Temporary Mooring. No empty mooring shall be permitted by the
Harbor Master to be used by another vessel, unless the mooring's
owner has given prior written, general permission for such use, or
unless the Harbor Master determines there to be an emergency.
Additionally, under no circumstances shall any fee or payment be levied
or accepted by any person for the temporary use of a mooring except
for the specific guest moorings of the Town of Little Compton or of the
Sakonnet Yacht Club. No visiting boat shall be allowed to spend more
than three consecutive nights on any of the guest moorings.
m. Fee for Town Mooring. A fee of $30 shall be charged for the use of the
Town Mooring per night, not to exceed three nights per month by any
one person/vessel.
n. Forfeiture of Mooring Space. Any owner shall be deemed to have
forfeited his/her mooring permit by reason of the following:
1. Removal of tackle and written notification to the Harbor Master/
Harbor Commission that the space is available.
2. Failure to reapply for the mooring permit by April 1 of any season
or failure to replace any piece of mooring tackle not complying with
the mooring tackle standards hereinafter set forth.
3. Failure to resurface or replace mooring within 60 days after being
advised by the Harbor Master that the mooring is down.
4. Failure to pay a mooring fee by April 1 of each year.
5. Failure to have a registered boat on an assigned mooring for four
weeks in any one season.
6. Failure to comply with any and all requirements of this section.
o. Moorings not in Sakonnet Harbor. Any mooring placed in waters
adjacent to the Little Compton shoreline shall only be allowed if the
following criteria are met.
1. Said mooring shall be registered with the Harbor Master.
2. Said mooring shall be placed within the littoral rights of the boat
owner.
3. Mooring must conform to all specifications as set forth in this
chapter.
4. Mooring owner shall hold the Town of Little Compton, its agents
and assigns harmless from any damage caused as a result of
mooring failure.
§ 9-1.11 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 9-1.12
AO:120
§ 9-1.12. Anchoring. [Ord. 12/8/94]
All anchoring will be under the direction of the Harbor Master. No vessel
will be allowed to anchor in Sakonnet Harbor utilizing her own ground
tackle and be left unattended by its owner or operator.
When anchoring in a combination mooring and anchoring area it shall be
the anchored vessel's responsibility to remain clear of all moored vessels
including a change of wind or tide situation.
§ 9-1.13. Regulations Concerning Sakonnet Harbor. [Ord. 12/8/94;
Ord. 5/24/01]
No person shall have the right to erect a mooring connected to the shore or
to any other location in said harbor by means of a pulley rope or any rope
or line whatsoever in nature, without the written permission of the Harbor
Master.
The placing of lobster pots in Sakonnet Harbor shall be illegal from May
1 until October 31, the Harbor Master shall order removal of all pots or
devices found therein during and between these dates.
Except for emergencies, scuba diving shall be permitted in Sakonnet
Harbor between the hours of sunset and sunrise only with the prior
permission of the Harbor Master or, in his absence, from the policeman on
duty.
No boat shall be left unattended on the launching ramp without the prior
permission of the Harbor Master or, in his absence, from the policeman on
duty.
No boat shall be abandoned in Sakonnet Harbor or on the land owned by
the Town of Little Compton at Sakonnet Harbor. The Harbor Master shall
arrange for the removal of any boat so abandoned to such place within the
Town of Little Compton as shall be designated by the Town Council and the
cost of such removal and any storage fees shall be borne by the owner of
such boat.
No tenders, boats, or other craft shall be stored on land owned by the Town
of Little Compton, unless the owner of such vessel/craft/boat has a mooring
in Sakonnet Harbor, or without prior approval from the Harbor Master;
nonetheless, nothing within the foregoing language shall be construed to
impinge, or otherwise adversely affect, any rights of the inhabitants of the
Town of Little Compton as described in the William Rotch deed, all as more
particularly described in Narragansett Real Estate Company v. Mackenzie,
34 R.I. 103 (1912).
No litter, garbage, oil, gasoline or other petroleum products or other
material which would cause deterioration of water quality shall be disposed
of in Sakonnet Harbor or on the land owned by the Town of Little Compton
at Sakonnet Harbor. Any such disposal shall be contained and removed
promptly by the owner of the boat or the person causing the same.
§ 9-1.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1.14
AO:121
§ 9-1.14. Violations; Penalty. [Ord. 12/18/94]
Every owner, master or person in charge of any vessel who shall neglect or
refuse to obey the directions of such Harbor Master in matters within his
authority to direct and every person who shall resist or oppose such Harbor
Master in the execution of his duties or shall violate any of the provisions
of section 9-1 of this chapter, shall, upon conviction therefor, be fined not
exceeding $100 or imprisonment not exceeding 10 days for each offense
and each day that such neglect or refusal to obey shall continue after notice
thereof is given by the Harbor Master to any owner, master or person
in charge of vessel or mooring, shall constitute a separate offense. Any
person who shall remove from a location assigned by the Harbor Master any
mooring belonging to another, without authority from or under the direction
of the Harbor Master, shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not exceeding
$100 or imprisonment not exceeding 10 days.
Any person to whom a mooring location has been assigned who shall
permit another boat to use said mooring without authority from or under
the direction of the Harbor Master or who shall rent, lease, transfer or
exchange said mooring location (such transfer to include family members)
without authority from or under the direction of the Harbor Master shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined not exceeding $100 or face imprisonment
not exceeding 10 days, and any such rental, lease, transfer, or exchange
shall be null and void.
§ 9-1.15. Harbor Master to Serve as Commissioner of Wrecks. [Ord.
12/8/94]
The Harbor Master shall also serve as the Commissioner of Wrecks as
provided by Title 46, Chapter 10 of the General Laws of Rhode Island, 1956
as amended.
§ 9-1.16. Schedule of Fines. [Ord. 12/8/94]
The following procedure is hereby established to permit the enforcement of
section 9-1 by pecuniary penalty to be recovered by action of debt which
may be offered to the person violating the terms thereof. The following
schedule of fines is hereby established:
First Offense $10
Second Offense $15
Third Offense $25
§ 9-1.14 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 9-1.16
AO:122
For the purposes of identifying offense fines to be imposed, violations shall
be accumulated over a period of 24 months. Failure by the violator to
dispose of any violation in the manner herein provided will be deemed to
be a waiver on the part of said violator to be allowed such privilege, and
the Chief of Police will cause a complaint to be filed in the Second Division
Court, Newport, Rhode Island.
The Harbor Master shall have printed summonses containing information
as to the violation being cited, the manner in which the violator may pay
for the offense, by paying the prescribed fee to the Town Treasurer, or set
forth the date and time for appearance in Court.
§ 9-1.17. Harbor Management Fund. [Ord. 1/23/03]
§ 9-2. PROHIBITING THE TAKING OF SAND, GRAVEL, STONE,
SEAWEED AND DRIFTSTUFF FROM PUBLIC BEACHES.
§ 9-2.1. Removal of Sand, Gravel, Driftwood Prohibited; Exception
for Residents. [Ord. 12/12/40, § 1]
No person who is not an inhabitant of the Town of Little Compton shall take,
appropriate or carry away any sand, gravel, stone, seaweed or driftstuff
from any public beach or commons in the Town.
§ 9-2.2. Penalty. [Ord. 12/12/40, § 2]
Any person who may be found guilty of violating the provisions of this
section shall be fined not exceeding $20, or be imprisoned for not more than
10 days, for each violation thereof.
a. Creation. A Harbor Management Fund is hereby created to receive and
expend monies for harbor related purposes as recommended by the
Harbor Commission to the Town Council. All revenues generated by
Town boat launching fees, mooring permit fees, qualified mooring
inspectors, other fees of this chapter, and fines levied under the
authority of this chapter shall be deposited into said Harbor
Management Fund and expended by the Town Council with advice from
the Harbor Commission.
Funds shall be dispersed for purposes directly associated with the
management and implementation of the Town of Little Compton Harbor
Management Plan and this chapter. Monies from this fund shall be
allocated to the Harbormaster and/or his designee, subject to Town
Council approval, for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of the
Town of Little Compton Harbor Management Plan and/or this
ordinance. Said Harbor Management Fund shall be established,
budgeted and administered in a manner consistent with the procedures
of the Town of Little Compton and as approved at the Annual Financial
Town Meeting as per the standard budgetary procedures of the Town of
Little Compton.
§ 9-1.16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-3
AO:123
§ 9-3. REGULATING THE USE OF PUBLIC RECREATIONAL AREAS.
§ 9-3.1. Wilbour Woods. [Ord. 6/22/78, § 1; Ord. 8/7/80; Ord. 9/10/
81; Ord. 7/7/83]
Wilbour Woods shall be for the use of Town residents only. These premises
shall be maintained in its natural state as a park or as a place of recreation
in accordance with the deed of Elizabeth Mason Lloyd to the Town of Little
Compton, dated April 14, 1937.
§ 9-3.2. Adamsville Recreation Field. [Ord. 6/22/78, § 1A; Ord. 8/7/
80; Ord. 9/10/81, § 1A]
The Adamsville Recreational Field shall be for the use of Town residents
only. These premises will be maintained for recreational purposes in
accordance with the deed of Sophie H. Wheeler to the Town of Little
Compton designating these premises as the Philip Manchester Wheeler
Memorial Common, dated December 31, 1953.
Horses, motorcycles and motor vehicles shall be prohibited on this field.
§ 9-3.3. Hester B. Simmons Lot (Town Lot). [Ord. 6/22/78, § 1B; Ord.
8/7/80; Ord. 9/10/81]
The Hester B. Simmons lot shall be for the use of Town residents only. These
premises shall be maintained for recreational purposes in accordance with
the Last Will and Testament of Hester Beulah Simmons filed in the records
of the Probate Court, Town of Little Compton, July 11, 1949.
§ 9-3.4. Public Beaches. [Ord. 4/4/91; Ord. 8/22/91; Ord. 7/9/92, § I;
Ord. 4/22/93]
a. Motorized vehicles of any kind shall not be permitted to traverse any
public beach in the Town, except in designated vehicular travel lanes
and parking areas. This subsection shall not apply to emergency and
maintenance vehicles.
b. During the period from April 1st through Labor Day, no animals will be
allowed on Goosewing Beach, except seeing eye dogs on a leash.
c. The setting of fires and fireworks are prohibited on Goosewing Beach.
d. Kite flying is prohibited on Goosewing Beach.
e. During the period from April 1st through Labor Day, except for
conservation wardens or their designated representatives, it shall be
unlawful for any person to enter any area of Goosewing Beach which
has been designated as a nesting area for threatened or endangered
bird species and which area is fenced off and duly posted as such. It
shall also be unlawful to disturb any such fencing, or any enclosures on
the nests, or the birds themselves.
§ 9-3 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 9-3.4
AO:124
§ 9-3.5. Hours.
The aforementioned recreational areas shall be closed to all persons, except
those receiving special permission of the Town Council, or, in the case of
South Shore Beach, the Beach Commission, between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. daily.
§ 9-3.6. Violations, Penalty. [Ord. 6/22/78; Ord. 8/7/80; Ord. 9/10/81,
§ 1; Ord. 7/9/92, § II]
Every offense of this section 9-3 shall be punishable by the imposition of
a fine in an amount not exceeding $500 or by a term of imprisonment not
exceeding 30 days, and, in cases involving property damage the wrongdoer
shall pay restitution in an amount not exceeding $2,500.
§ 9-4. REGULATING THE MANAGEMENT AND USE OF THE PUBLIC
DOCK AT SAKONNET HARBOR.
§ 9-4.1. Rules Concerning the Dock. [Ord. 4/23/91; Ord. 6/18/92;
Ord. 1/6/94; Ord. 10/24/96]
f. During the period when Goosewing Beach is open to the public, parking
for both residents and non-residents of the Town shall be provided in a
designated parking area on Goosewing Beach, and, fees charged by the
Beach Commission for non-residents to park in said area shall be no
more than twice the amount charged to residents. No trailers, campers,
or commercial vehicles other than pick-up trucks shall be allowed in
said parking area, except Town maintenance vehicles. Access to said
parking area shall be by means of a vehicular bridge across Tunipus
Breachway. Except in the case of emergency vehicles, no vehicles shall
enter upon said bridge unless permitted to do so by duly authorized
Town personnel.
g. Horses and horse trailers are prohibited from the parking lots of South
Shore Beach and Goosewing Beach. Jet skis are prohibited from said
parking lots and the swimming areas at all times. The maximum speed
limit in the beach parking lots shall be five miles per hour. Parking in
the turn-around area at the east end of the South Shore Beach parking
lot (designated fire lane) is prohibited.
a. Any commercial person or commercial entity who has paid for a
registered mooring or a slip in Sakonnet Harbor shall have the use of
the dock to load and unload cargo for no additional fees. Other
commercial vessels or boats shall pay a fee of $3 per foot of boat length,
per use.
b. Nothing shall be left on the dock at any time whatsoever.
c. No bait shall be dumped into the harbor.
§ 9-3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-4.1
AO:125
§ 9-4.2. Rules Concerning the Hoist. [Ord. 4/23/91, Ord. 7/1/91; 10/
10/91; 1/6/94; Ord. 12/8/94; Ord. 10/24/96]
d. The captain of any vessel berthed at the public dock shall not leave the
vessel. No vessel shall be berthed at the public dock overnight without
the express approval of the Harbor Master.
e. No captain of any vessel berthed at the public dock shall discharge
bilge waters.
f. Vessels berthed at the public dock shall immediately be taken out of
gear to prevent suspension of the underlying bottom sediments. No
vessel shall operate in gear while berthed at the public dock.
g. No discharge of fish waste, cleaning solutions or other waste shall be
allowed.
h. No paints, pot dip, or other environmentally hazardous materials shall
be stored or applied to any surface on a vessel while berthed at the
public dock.
i. Vessels taking on fuel at the public dock shall use the utmost care to
prevent spills into coastal waters. Any fuel line in use for taking on fuel
shall be manned at all times.
j. No recreational swimming or diving shall be permitted from or adjacent
to the dock.
a. The hoist shall be operated exclusively by one of the following persons:
1. Harbor Master or Assistant Harbor Master.
2. Members of the Sakonnet Fisherman's Association.
3. Sakonnet Yacht Club designees.
4. Little Compton Fire Chief or designee.
b. All persons desiring to use the hoist must make an appointment with
the Harbor Master. Any person or entity who has paid for a registered
mooring or a slip in Sakonnet Harbor shall have the use of the crane/
hoist to load and unload cargo for no additional fees. Other persons or
entities shall be charged a fee of $30 or $3 per foot per use, whichever
is greater.
Any person or entity who has paid for a registered mooring or a slip
in Sakonnet Harbor and who wishes to use the crane to launch or lift
a boat from or into the water shall have two such uses per year at no
additional charge. Any additional uses or any other person or entity
shall pay a fee of $30 or $3 per foot per boat per use, whichever is
greater.
c. The Harbor Master shall supervise the availability of keys to the hoist.
§ 9-4.1 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 9-4.2
AO:126
§ 9-4.3. Rules Concerning the Parking Area. [Ord. 4/23/91]
§ 9-4.4. Maintenance Program for the Public Dock and Hoist. [Ord.
4/23/91]
§ 9-4.5. Violations; Penalty. [Ord. 4/23/91]
Every person found guilty of violating this section shall be fined not more
than $20 or imprisoned not more than 10 days.
§ 9-5. PLASTIC BAGS. [Added 12-19-2019]
d. The failure of the owner of any commercial fishing vessel to abide by
any of the rules set forth in this section shall be cause for the revocation
of the privilege to use the hoist by the Harbor Master. The decision of
the Harbor Master shall be appealable to the Town Council, whose
decision shall be final.
e. All other persons interested in using the hoist must make an
appointment with the Harbor Master, who shall operate the hoist.
f. The Harbor Master, or his assistant, shall be responsible for turning off
the electricity for the hoist and locking the hoist on a daily basis.
a. The parking of vehicles in the parking area shall be restricted to the
owners of commercial fishing vessels and their employees and to
persons intending to make recreational use of the harbor and its
environs.
b. Ten spaces shall be reserved for the trip fishermen which shall be
designated with a sign indicating "trip fishermen parking".
c. With the exception of the trip fishermen parking, no persons shall use
or occupy the parking area between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00
a.m. daily.
a. Supervision and maintenance of the public dock and its facilities shall
be the sole responsibility of the Harbor Master.
b. The Harbor Master shall cause the hoist to be inspected annually by a
certified hoist engineer.
c. The Harbor Master shall cause the dock to be inspected every five years
by a qualified marine contractor.
d. Normal and incidental maintenance of the dock and its facilities shall be
completed when practicable by the Town maintenance department.
e. The Harbor Master shall post, inspect and maintain all necessary signs
concerning the rules and regulations for the dock and the parking area.
§ 9-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-5.1
AO:127
§ 9-5.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to protect the wildlife and coastal ecosystems
of Little Compton, the enjoyment of nature, and the health, safety, and
welfare of the Town's residents and visitors by encouraging the use of
reusable carryout bags, banning the use of single-use plastic carryout bags
for retail checkout of goods, and reducing the number of single-use carryout
bags that enter our environment.
§ 9-5.2. Definitions.
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT — Any commercial enterprise, including sole
proprietorship, joint ventures, partnerships, corporations, or any other legal
entity, and includes all employees of the business and any independent
contractors associated with the business. For the purposes of this section,
"business establishment" shall also include farmers markets. "Business
establishment" does not include sales of goods at yard sales, tag sales, or
other sales by residents at their homes.
CARRYOUT BAG — A bag used by the customer at the point of sale for
the purpose of removing products purchased from retail establishment.
"Carryout bag" does not include plastic barrier bags, double-opening plastic
bags, or plastic bags measuring larger than 28 inches by 36 inches.
DOUBLE-OPENING PLASTIC BAG — Any thin plastic bag with a double
opening (top and bottom) to protect clothing or other items for transport.
PAPER BAG — A paper bag that is fully recyclable.
PLASTIC BAG — A bag where any portion of the bag is made of plastic,
including but not limited to those called "biodegradable," "compostable" or
"oxo-biodegradable."
PLASTIC BARRIER BAG — Any thin plastic bag with a single opening used
to:
RECYCLABLE PLASTIC — Plastic that meets the current Rhode Island
Resource Recovery Corporation's standards.
Transport fruit, vegetables, nuts, grains, small hardware items, or other
items selected by customers to the point of sale;
a.
Contain or wrap fresh or frozen foods, meat, or fish, whether
prepackaged or not;
b.
Contain or wrap flowers, potted plants, or other items where damage
to a good or contamination of other goods placed together in the same
bag may be a problem; or
c.
d. Contain newspapers, unwrapped prepared foods or bakery goods.
§ 9-5.1 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 9-5.2
AO:128
REUSABLE CARRYOUT BAG — A bag that is specifically designed and
manufactured for multiple reuse. The bag must be made of washable cloth,
other durable woven or nonwoven fabric, or durable plastic film that is
recyclable plastic with a minimum thickness of four mils.
§ 9-5.3. Regulations.
§ 9-5.4. Violations; Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to
the penalties set forth in § 1-5 of this Code.
§ 9-5.5. Implementation.
This section shall take effect on July 1, 2020.
§ 9-6. BALLOONS. [Added 12-19-2019]
§ 9-6.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to protect the wildlife and coastal ecosystems
of Little Compton, the enjoyment of nature, and the health, safety, and
welfare of Little Compton's residents and visitors by regulating balloons
as it has been determined that balloons contribute to plastic pollution in
the ocean and pose a risk and nuisance to the environment, particularly to
wildlife and marine animals.
§ 9-6.2. Definitions.
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BALLOON — A flexible nonporous bag made from materials such as rubber,
latex, polychloroprene or nylon fabric that can be inflated or filled with
gas, such as helium, hydrogen, nitrous oxide, oxygen, air or water and then
sealed at the neck, usually used as a toy or decoration.
§ 9-6.3. Regulations.
a. No business establishment shall make available any plastic carryout
bags, either complimentary or for a fee, for any sales transaction or
other use to members of the public.
b. Nothing in this section shall preclude business establishments from
making reusable bags or paper bags available to customers, by sale or
otherwise.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, use or distribute any balloon
filled with a lifting gas such as helium, hydrogen, nitrous oxide.
§ 9-5.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-6.3
AO:129
§ 9-6.4. Violations; Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to
the penalties set forth in § 1-5 of this Code.
§ 9-6.5. Implementation.
This section shall take effect on July 1, 2020.
§ 9-7. PLASTIC STRAWS. [Added 12-19-2019]
§ 9-7.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to protect the wildlife and coastal ecosystems
of Little Compton, the enjoyment of nature, and the health, safety, and
welfare of Little Compton's residents and visitors by prohibiting the
distribution of plastic beverage straws as it has been determined that
plastic beverage straws contribute to plastic pollution in the ocean and pose
a risk and nuisance to the environment, particularly to wildlife and marine
animals.
§ 9-7.2. Definitions.
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PLASTIC BEVERAGE STRAW — A tube made predominately of plastic
derived from either petroleum or a biologically based polymer, such as corn
or other plant sources, for transferring a beverage from its container to the
mouth of the drinker. "Plastic beverage straw" includes compostable and
biodegradable petroleum or biologically based polymer straws, but does not
include straws that are made from nonplastic material, such as paper, straw,
sugar cane, bamboo, etc.
§ 9-7.3. Regulations.
§ 9-7.4. Exemptions.
b. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly and intentionally
release, organize the release of, or intentionally cause to be released
into the atmosphere of Little Compton any balloon.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or distribute plastic beverage
straws.
a. Use of plastic beverage straws on private property used as a residence.
b. Beverages prepared and packaged outside the Town of Little Compton,
provided such beverage is not altered or repackaged within the Town of
Little Compton.
§ 9-6.3 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 9-7.5
AO:130
§ 9-7.5. Violations; Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to
the penalties set forth in § 1-5 of this Code.
§ 9-7.6. Implementation.
This section shall take effect on July 1, 2020.
Chapter 10
PERSONNEL
§ 10-1. PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS.
§ 10-1.1. Purpose. [Ord. #1981-3, § 1; Ord. 8/5/99]
The following rules and regulations are adopted to establish a uniform
system of employment in the Town of Little Compton for employees who are
hired and have their working conditions set by Town Council.
§ 10-1.2. Applicability. [Ord. #1981-3, § 2; Ord. 8/5/99]
These rules shall apply to all employees in the service of the Town, unless
otherwise specified, but shall not apply to members of the Fire and Police
Departments, where inconsistent with union contracts, Town ordinance, or
State law concerning firemen and policemen. Also, the rules shall not apply
to members of other unions where inconsistent with their union contracts.
§ 10-1.3. Discrimination Prohibited. [Ord. #1981-3, § 3]
In the application and administration of this chapter, no person shall be
discriminated against because of any political or religious affiliation or
belief, or because of race, national origin, color, sex or marital status.
§ 10-1.4. Plan Established; Policies Enumerated. [Ord. #1981-3, § 4]
There is hereby established a personnel policy for the Town as follows:
a. Employment in the Town government shall be based on merit and
fitness, free of personal and political consideration.
b. Just and equitable incentives and conditions of employment shall be
established and maintained to promote efficiency and economy in the
operation of the Town government.
c. Positions having similar duties and responsibilities shall be classified on
a uniform basis.
d. Appointments, promotions, and other actions requiring the application
of the merit principle shall be based upon systematic test and
evaluation.
§ 9-7.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-1.4
AO:131
§ 10-1.5. Definitions. [Ord. #1981-3, § 5]
e. High morale shall be maintained by fair administration of this chapter
and by every consideration of the rights and interests of employees
consistent with the best interests of the public and the Town.
a. For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this subsection:
1. ADDRESS – Shall mean the last known street and number of the
resident or post office or box mailing address.
2. CLASSIFICATION – Shall mean one or more positions in the service
of the Town sufficiently alike in duties, authority, and
responsibilities as to reasonably presume requirement of
equivalent qualifications.
3. CLASSIFIED SERVICE – Shall mean all employees appointed by the
Town Council and not otherwise exempt under terms of this
chapter.
4. CORPORATE LIMITS – Shall mean the municipal limits of the Town
of Little Compton.
5. DEPARTMENT – Shall mean a major functional unit of the Town
government.
6. DEPARTMENT HEAD – Shall mean the person who is responsible
for the administration of a department.
7. EMPLOYEE – Shall mean any person working or engaged in the
service of the Town of Little Compton.
8. IMMEDIATE FAMILY – Shall mean husband, wife, son, daughter,
father, mother, brother or sister.
9. LAYOFF – Shall mean a separation from the service because of a
shortage of work, funds or materials; abolishment of position or
other reasons beyond the control of an employee and not reflecting
discredit on him or her.
10. MILITARY LEAVE – Shall mean the leave of absence granted an
employee entering the armed forces of the United States during a
national emergency or in response to draft or call to duty from
civilian components of the armed services.
11. MONTH – Shall mean one calendar month.
12. OVERTIME – Shall mean time worked in excess of the regular work
week at the direction of the job foreman or department head.
13. LICENSED PHYSICIAN – Shall mean a medical doctor licensed by
the State Board of Medical Examiners.
§ 10-1.4 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 10-1.5
AO:132
§ 10-1.6. Exempted Positions. [Ord. #1981-3, § 6; Ord. 8/5/99]
There shall be exempted from the classified service of the Town:
14. POSITION – Shall mean a group of current duties and
responsibilities legally assigned or delegated by an appointive
authority requiring the full or part-time employment of one person.
15. PROBATIONARY EMPLOYEE – Shall mean an employee who has
not completed his probationary period.
16. PROMOTION – Shall mean an assignment of an employee from a
position in one classification to a position in another classification
having a higher maximum salary rate.
17. RATING FORM – Shall mean a form used to record the evaluation
of ability, attitude, conduct, production, etc. of an employee.
18. REGULAR EMPLOYEE – Shall mean an employee working full time;
appointed under these rules, and who has satisfactorily completed
his probationary period.
19. RESIDENCE – Shall mean the actual place of abode of the
employee.
20. SENIORITY – Shall mean credits allowable by reason of continued
service.
21. SERVICE CREDIT – Shall mean the credit used in personnel
records for length of service.
22. SUPERVISOR – Shall mean any person responsible for directing the
work of others.
23. TERMINAL LEAVE – Shall mean the period of time to be credited to
a regular employee in accordance with qualifications set forth in
subsection 10-1.7g11.
24. TOWN – Shall mean the Town of Little Compton.
25. TRANSFER – Shall mean any change of an employee from one
position to another position having no greater than the same
maximum salary rate.
26. WORK WEEK – Shall mean the number of hours regularly
scheduled during any seven consecutive days; Sunday being the
first of said days.
27. WORKING DAY – Shall mean any one period of at least eight
continuous hours during which an employee is scheduled to work.
a. Officers elected by the people and all persons appointed to fill vacancies
in such elective positions.
§ 10-1.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-1.6
AO:133
§ 10-1.7. Working Conditions. [Ord. #1981-3, § 7; Ord. 10/4/84; Ord.
6/20/85; Ord. 7/24/86; Ord. 9/18/86; Ord. 11/19/87; Ord. 6/9/88; Ord.
11/9/89; Ord. 2/18/93; Ord. 12/8/94; Ord. 8/5/99; Ord. 9/7/06]
b. Heads of departments and all members of boards, commissions, and
committees appointed by the Town Council.
c. Employees of the school department.
d. Persons engaged by contract to perform special services for the Town.
e. Persons temporarily appointed or designated to make or conduct a
special inquiry, investigation or examination, or to perform a special
service where such appointment or designation is found by the Town
Council to be for employment which because of its expert nature or
character could not or should not be performed by persons in the
classified service.
f. Such temporary unskilled workers paid on an hourly basis as the Town
Council may determine.
g. Persons who in times of public emergency may be appointed special
employees.
h. Employees of the Town appointed by the Trustees of the Brownell
Library.
i. Employees of the elected Beach Commission.
j. Any employee working part-time for any Board, Commission or Trust
appointed by the Town Council.
Employees of the School Department, Library and Beach Commission
shall include salaries and benefits in their budget requests for Financial
Town Meeting approval.
a. Hours of working. The hours during which the Town offices (other than
the offices of elected officials) and departments shall be open for
business shall be determined by the Town Council.
b. Work week. The working week shall consist of a minimum of 35 hours
during seven consecutive days, commencing on Sunday of each week,
except as otherwise hereafter provided.
The working time per week for all regular or probationary employees
shall be 35 hours, except that salaried employees of the various
departments may be required to work additional time to meet existing
conditions or unexpected contingencies. Special provisions shall be
made in any department, such as fire and police (covered by contract)
which require additional hours to meet existing conditions or
unexpected contingencies.
§ 10-1.6 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 10-1.7
AO:134
c. Attendance. Employees shall regularly be at their places of work in
accordance with these rules and other department regulations. All
departments shall maintain daily attendance records of employees.
d. Overtime. Employees shall work overtime when necessary and overtime
shall be allocated on any job as evenly as possible among the employees
qualified to do the work. Overtime compensation shall be at time and 1/
2 the regular hourly pay rate for the work concerned.
e. Holidays. Employees shall be paid for the following legal holidays.
New Year's Day Labor Day
Martin Luther King Day Columbus Day
President's Day Veteran's Day
Memorial Day Thanksgiving Day
Independence Day Christmas Day
Victory Day
If any of the above holidays falls on a Saturday, it shall be observed
on the preceding Friday; if any holiday falls on a Sunday, it shall be
observed on the following Monday.
At the discretion of the Town Council, employees may be required to
work on any of the above holidays, and shall be compensated at regular
rates, in addition to their regular day's pay.
An employee who is absent on leave without pay shall not be paid for
authorized holidays.
An employee who is absent without leave on the working day preceding
or following a holiday shall lose pay for the holiday as well as for the
other day off.
Employees wishing to observe religious holidays not listed herein shall,
with their option, and the approval of their department head, be given
time off during said day, without pay, or have the time charged to their
vacation
f. Vacations. Department heads shall schedule vacations, giving due
consideration to the needs of the service and the ability of the
remaining staff to perform the work of the department. The employee
shall be permitted to take his vacation at such time as, in the judgment
of the department head, will best serve the interest of the Town.
Every employee who successfully completes his probationary period
and receives a full time appointment shall receive one vacation day per
month during the remaining fiscal year of employment. During each
succeeding year of employment regular employees shall be entitled to
two weeks vacation per fiscal year.
§ 10-1.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-1.7
AO:135
Employees who have completed five successive years of full-time
employment in the Town service shall be entitled to three calendar
weeks of vacation (not necessarily successive); vacation time to be
determined by the department head, during the fiscal year.
Employees who have completed 10 consecutive years of full-time
employment in the Town service shall be entitled to four weeks vacation
during the fiscal year, at times to be determined by the department
head.
Official holidays occurring during a vacation shall not be charged to
vacation time. No accumulation of vacation leave will be allowed
beyond any one fiscal year.
g. Leave regulations.
1. Sick leave. Each full time employee in the classified service shall
earn sick leave with pay at the rate of 1 1/4 working days for each
calendar month of service, provided, however, that such benefit
shall not accrue in excess of 120 days, except for uniformed or full
time members of the Fire and Police Departments who are disabled
in the line of duty. In such case, such employee shall receive full pay
while so disabled in accordance with provisions of State law. Sick
leave must be earned before it can be granted and shall not be
considered a "right", but shall be a "privilege" granted under the
authority of these rules and regulations.
Sick leave will be granted for absence from duty because of actual
personal illness, non-compensable bodily injury or disease and
exposure to contagious disease. It may also be granted for a
maximum of three days (not to exceed one day for each time used)
in any one year for illness' in the immediate family of an employee.
If an employee is required to be absent from work for any of the
reasons specified herein, he shall cause his absence to be reported
to his department head within two hours of the time set for the
beginning of his daily duties. Sick leave may not be granted unless
such report has been made, and notice given as required herein.
In all cases where sick leave exceeds five working days, the
department head may require the employee to file a licensed
physician's certificate indicating the nature and probable duration
of the illness or disability.
Holidays and regular days off shall not be counted in computing
sick leave taken. On the job injuries may be chargeable against
accrued sick leave, and no loss of pay shall result from time lost
due to such injury.
2. Bereavement leave. Regular full-time employees shall be granted
three days leave (not to encompass more than five calendar days)
§ 10-1.7 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 10-1.7
AO:136
with pay in the event of the death of members of the immediate
family and one day for all other relatives.
3. Jury leave. Regular full-time employees shall be granted leaves of
absence for required jury or other civic duty requiring appearances
before a court or other public body. Such employees shall receive
that portion of their regular salary or pay which will, together with
their jury pay or appearance fees, equal their total salary or pay for
the same period. Mileage allowances for such services may be
retained by the employee.
4. Civic duties. All employees entitled to vote at national, municipal or
special elections shall, when necessary, be allowed sufficient time
off with pay to exercise this right.
5. Military leave. Every employee holding a position in the classified
service who has left or shall leave said position by reason of
entering the armed forces of the United States, and who has held a
position in the classified service for 180 consecutive calendar days
within the past 23 months preceding such entrance in the armed
forces, shall be entitled to military leave of absence without pay.
Employees on military leave shall be entitled to annual salary
increases which would have been earned but for military service, if,
upon release from military service the employee resumes full-time
employment with the Town within 30 days of release.
Any regular full-time employee who may be a member of the standby
branch of the armed forces and who may be required to perform
military duties for a period of up to 365 days, while employed
by the Town, shall receive the difference between his regular pay
and the compensation paid during the performance of his military
service.
6. Extended leave of absence. Extended or emergency leave of
absence, without pay, shall only be granted on the recommendation
of the department head and with the approval of the Town Council.
When any leave of absence without pay exceeds time worked in
any one month, service credit for all employment privileges shall
cease until active employment is resumed. This rule of employment
applies to all employees.
Department heads shall be responsible for accurate reports of
employees who are absent from work and shall report absentees
who are not entitled to pay under the prevailing working policy.
7. Administrative leave. During times of severe storms, when roads
may be impassable, etc., administrative leaves may be granted to
the employees at the discretion of the Department Head. Leave of
this nature shall be with pay and shall not be chargeable against
accrued sick or vacation leave.
§ 10-1.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-1.7
AO:137
8. Seasonal and part-time employees. Seasonal and part-time
employees shall not be entitled to vacation, sick leave or any other
benefits that are allowed regular employees.
9. Emergency leave. If an employee shall be called to his home to
respond to an emergency, emergency leave, with pay, may be
granted at the discretion of the department head.
10. Occupational disability or injury leave. Subject to the approval of
the Town Council, an employee injured in the course of his
employment may be granted occupational disability or injury leave,
not charged against his sick leave or vacation. When such
occupational disability or injury leave is granted the Town Council
shall establish the amount to be paid during such leave, if any. In
these cases it shall be the responsibility of the department head to
submit a full report of the character, degree, and potential duration
of such disability, and periodically review the progress of the case
and make recommendations to the Town Council as may seem
advisable. The Town Council shall have the right to order the
employee to be examined by any licensed physician at the expense
of the Town.
11. Terminal leave. Any unused vacation leave due any employee on his
last work day prior to retiring from Town service shall constitute
his terminal leave, payable to him at his last regular rate. The
employee will receive his pay for terminal leave in a lump sum at
the beginning of such period. Sick leave and vacation leave shall
not be accrued during any terminal leave. Any employee who
leaves Town employment for reasons other than normal retirement
will receive payment for any unused vacation leave prorated from
the beginning of the fiscal year.
h. Insurance Coverage. Full time employees not otherwise covered by
Union Contract including Department Heads, the elected Town Clerk,
and the elected Town Treasurer/Tax Collector shall be entitled to a level
of health insurance coverage equivalent to the level of coverage equal
to but not to exceed the union contracts for full time employees. All
premiums for the above to be paid by the Town.
All retired employees, whether full or part time, employed for at least
10 years at the time of retirement, and retiring after passage of this
paragraph, shall be eligible for said insurance coverage; all premiums
to be paid by said retired employees.
Town Council members currently receiving health benefits shall
continue to receive such benefits at their present level subject to
Financial Town Meeting approval; however all benefits will end in
November 1996 for all Town Council members.
Full time employees not otherwise covered by union contract including
Department Heads, the elected Town Clerk and the elected Town
Treasurer/Tax Collector shall also be entitled to group life insurance
§ 10-1.7 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 10-1.7
AO:138
§ 10-1.8. Administration. [Ord. #1981-3, § 8; Ord. #6/18/87, § 1]
coverage in the amount of $10,000, all premiums to be paid by the
Town.
Employees of the Town, other than the Fire and Police Departments,
shall be subject to the provisions of the Rhode Island Workers
Compensation Act.
i. Retirement. All employees of the Town will come under Social Security.
In addition, any employee who works over 1,000 hours in any calendar
year will be included in the Town pension plan.
1. Any member of the Police Department or Fire Department shall be
subject to compulsory retirement upon attainment of age 62.
j. Longevity. Effective 1 July 1988 longevity shall be paid as follows:
Years of Service Longevity
5 years through 9 years 2% of base salary per year
10 years through 14 years 3% of base salary per year
15 years through 20 years 4% of base salary per year
More than 20 years 5% of base salary per year
Length of service shall be as of June 30 each year and longevity shall be
disbursed on June 30 each year.
a. Position Vacancy.
1. Announcement. The Town Council shall advertise every position
vacancy at least once in a newspaper with general circulation
within the Town.
2. Application. The applicant for a position will submit a letter of
application plus a resume to the Town Clerk before the deadline
specified in the announcement. The Town Council may in its
discretion reject any application which indicates on its face that the
applicant does not possess the minimum qualifications established
for the class of position; or if the application discloses that the
applicant is not a citizen of the United States; is physically unfit for
the performance of the duties involved; is addicted to the habitual
use of drugs or intoxicants; has been recently convicted of a crime
involving moral turpitude; has willfully made any false statements
of material fact; or has practiced or attempted to practice any
deception or fraud in his application.
3. Examinations. Examinations may be required by the Town Council
or department head and may consist of written, oral, performance
or physical tests, or any combination thereof, as will best fairly test
the qualifications of the applicant for the position involved.
§ 10-1.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-1.8
AO:139
4. Examination results. Notice of examination results, as soon as
possible after the conclusion of an examination, shall be sent each
person taking the examination. The notice shall state the relative
position of the applicant on the rating list, or the fact that he has
failed to attain a passing grade in the examination.
After the eligible list has been established, the markings and test
papers of each competitor shall be open to his personal inspection,
for a period of time not exceeding 15 days after mailing of the
notices.
5. Eligibility list. As soon as possible after the conclusion of an
examination, the Town Council shall prepare and keep available for
a period of one year an appropriate eligibility list for the
employment within the classified service consisting of the names of
persons successfully passing examinations. The names shall be
arranged in order of final ratings made from the highest score
down to the lowest acceptable passing score.
6. Non-Competitive appointments. In the event that the Town Council
shall consider it necessary to fill any position in service, without the
delay necessary to the establishment of an eligibility list, the
Council may make a provisional or emergency appointment. No
provisional or emergency appointment shall be continued effective
beyond one pay period after the establishment of an appropriate
eligibility list for the particular position and class.
b. Time of Payment. All employees in the Town's classified service shall be
paid bi-weekly.
c. Part-Time Rates. An employee who works less than the established
hours of employment will be paid by the hour.
d. Overtime. All employees required to work overtime shall be paid for
additional time worked. All overtime shall be paid at 1-1/2 times the
regular rate.
No overtime shall be paid until after the hours required for the basic
work week shall have been worked. Vacation leave or holiday leave
shall be credited as hours worked during the week in which taken.
Sick leave shall not be credited as hours worked for the purpose of
determining overtime pay.
Department heads must certify all overtime hours worked to the Town
Treasurer prior to payment. Overtime shall be reported exactly as
worked, and shall be paid accordingly.
e. Leave Pay. When an employee is absent due to authorized occupational
disability or injury leave, sick leave, vacation or special leave with pay,
he will be paid his regular pay and authorized allowances.
§ 10-1.8 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 10-1.8
AO:140
§ 10-1.9. General Provisions And Responsibilities. [Ord. #1981-3,
§ 9; Ord. 10/4/84; Ord. 11/7/85]
f. Terminal Pay. All employees who leave the service of the Town for any
reason shall receive all pay which may be due them with the following
qualifications.
1. Regular employees who have completed one year service shall be
paid for all unused vacation time prorated on months of service
worked during any fiscal year. Employees who leave before
completing one year service shall not be entitled to any vacation
pay upon termination of service.
2. Regular employees who are retired or die in the service of the Town
shall be paid for all accumulated vacation leave.
3. Employees who are granted military leave of absence shall also be
paid earned but not used vacation leave to the date of their
separation computed in the usual manner. Accumulated sick leave
shall be credited to them upon return to employment.
a. Working Relationship. It shall be the duty of each employee to maintain
high standards of cooperation, efficiency and economy in his work for
the Town. Department heads and supervisors shall organize and direct
the work of their unit to achieve these objectives.
When work habits, attitude, production or personal conduct of an
employee falls below a desirable standard, department heads should
point out the deficiencies at the time they are observed. Warning in
sufficient time for improvement should precede formal discipline, but
nothing in this section shall prevent immediate formal action whenever
the interest of the Town requires it.
b. Physical Fitness. It shall be the duty of each employee to maintain
standards of physical fitness required for the performance of his work.
When a department head has reason to believe that the physical fitness
of an employee constitutes a hazard to persons or property, he may
request the employee to submit to medical examination by a licensed
physician at the Town's expense. The employee shall be paid for the
time required for such examination when it is for the sole purpose of
determining his physical condition relative to Town employment.
c. Residence. All employees shall be required, as part of their working
agreement, to furnish their department head any change of address. No
employee shall be permitted to maintain his residence outside the
corporate town limit of the Town of Little Compton without express
permission of the Town Council.
d. Outside Work. No full time employee holding a position under the
classified service shall engage in any outside business activities,
however remote from the function of his position, which will in any way
§ 10-1.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-1.9
AO:141
interfere with the employee's regular duties, or embarrass or bring
discredit to either the employee or the Town.
e. Safety. All employees shall be required to take every precaution to
prevent accidents to himself, to his fellow employees and the public.
All drivers of motor vehicles owned or used by the Town shall be
responsible to maintain the standards of physical fitness required for
the operation of such motor vehicles and shall be required to obey
all traffic rules and regulations prescribed by law and to use every
precaution to prevent accidents. Said driver shall also be required to
possess a valid Rhode Island operator's license.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of all operators of motor vehicles
or equipment, both heavy and light, to report immediately to their
supervisor any defect in their mechanical equipment, and, when same
occurs, to use every precaution to prevent accidental loss, expense, or
recurrence of such condition.
Operators of all motorized equipment used in the service of the Town
who violate this rule or become involved in any accident will be subject
to disciplinary action if upon investigation it is determined that the
employee was responsible for such accident or through carelessness or
recklessness contributed to the cause of such accident.
All employees whose duties require the operation of office equipment,
machinery or tools of any kind or nature shall use every precaution in
the prevention of accidents to themselves or other employees and shall
be chargeable with the responsibility for the proper operation of all
equipment used in the normal function of their duties.
f. Prohibited Practices. No employee shall take any part in the
management of any Town political organization or in the conduct of any
Town political campaign further than in the exercise of the rights of a
citizen to express his or her opinion and to cast his or her vote.
g. General Personnel Policy. The personnel policies herewith adopted shall
become a part of any employment agreement of any employee, and a
copy shall be given to each employee by the Town Council. The policies
may be changed or amended at the discretion of the Town Council.
Each employee is expected to have a thorough working knowledge of
his job and should possess a profound respect for his work. He should
be endowed with the spirit that his effort is of importance and that his
work is of worthwhile value. He should possess a knowledge of the
relation of his job to those of other employees and to the entire Town.
Employment in a position either full time or temporary, is not
recognized as a vested right, and shall be continued only when the
standard of service justifies the continuance.
h. Motor Vehicles. With permission of the Town Council, Town owned
vehicles may be taken home by Town employees for emergency or call
back use only. Any private or personal use of said vehicle is prohibited.
§ 10-1.9 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 10-1.10
AO:142
§ 10-1.10. Probationary Period. [Ord. #1981-3, § 10]
All original appointments to the classified service shall be for a probationary
period of six months. Any employee may be dismissed by the Town Council
during the probationary period for reasons relating to the employee's
qualifications or for the good of the service stated by the Town Council in
writing.
§ 10-1.11. Full Time Status. [Ord. #1981-3, § 11; Ord. 10/4/84]
An employee shall be retained beyond the end of the probationary period
and granted full time status only if the Town Council finds that the services
of the employee have been satisfactory.
§ 10-1.12. Eligibility Lists. [Ord. #1981-3, § 12; Ord. 10/4/84]
The Town Council shall maintain a list of the names of all full time and
probationary employees who have been removed from service or
employment within the Town government for lack of work or lack of funds.
Such list shall be called a reemployment list. Upon the restoration of
necessary funds or work involved, within one year from the date of his or
her removal, the employee shall be returned to the position from which he
was removed.
§ 10-1.13. Separation, Dismissal, or Resignation. [Ord. #1981-3,
§ 13; Ord. 10/4/84]
a. The tenure of every employee shall be conditioned on good behavior
and the satisfactory performance of duties. Any employee may be
temporarily separated by lay-off or suspension; or permanently
separated by resignation or dismissal.
b. Whenever there is lack of work or lack of funds requiring reductions in
the number of employees in a department of the Town government, the
required reduction shall be made in such job class or classes as the
department head may designate. Within each affected job class, all
temporary employees shall be laid off before probationary employees,
and all probationary employees shall be laid off before any full time
employees.
c. A full time employee may be dismissed or demoted whenever in the
judgment of the department head or the appointing authority, the
employee's work or conduct so warrants. The Town Council shall notify
the employee in writing of their action. This notice shall contain a
detailed statement of the reasons for dismissal or demotion.
d. When in the judgment of a department head an employee's work
performance or conduct justifies disciplinary action short of dismissal,
the employee may be suspended without pay by the Town Council. A
suspended employee may request a hearing before the Town Council.
§ 10-1.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-1.13
AO:143
§ 10-1.14. Affirmative Action and Equal Employment Opportunity.
[Ord. #1981-3, § 14]
e. An employee after an absence of five consecutive working days without
authorized leave shall be considered to be permanently separated by
resignation or dismissal.
f. An employee wishing to resign his position of employment with the
Town shall submit his resignation, in writing, to the head of the
department in which said employee is employed, and said resignation
shall contain the reasons for termination of employment of service. The
department head shall forthwith forward the original copy of such
resignation to the Town Council.
g. An employee who resigns with adequate reason, as explained in his
notification of resignation, may be reinstated to any position in the
same class if there is need of his service within one year after the date
of resignation.
a. Policy of Town Stated. It shall be the policy of the Town to conform to
the provisions of the Equal Employment Opportunity Act of 1972
through the reinforcement of the merit principle of employment by
assuring that all segments of society, especially members of minority
groups, women, handicapped, and aged have an opportunity to enter
the Town service on the basis of open competition and to advance
according to their relative ability.
b. Principles Incorporated within Merit System. To assure this, the Town
will incorporate the following principles within its merit system:
1. The recruiting, selecting and advancing of employees will be done
on the basis of their relative ability, knowledge and skills, including
open consideration of qualified applicants for initial appointing.
2. The Town will provide equitable and adequate compensation to all
employees within the classified service.
3. Employees will be trained as needed to assure high service.
4. Employees will be retained on the basis of the adequacy of their
performance. Inadequate performance will be corrected where
possible through job counseling, evaluation, and employee
interviews and employees will be separated whose inadequate
performance cannot be corrected.
5. The Town will assure fair treatment of applicants and employees in
all aspects of personnel administration without regard to political
affiliation, race, color, national origin, sex, marital status or privacy
and constitutional rights as citizens.
6. The Town will assure that its employees are protected against
coercion for partisan official purposes and are prohibited from
§ 10-1.13 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 10-1.14
AO:144
§ 10-1.15. Drug-Free Workplace. [Ord. 12/8/94]
In accordance with the Drug-Free Schools and Communities Act
Amendments of 1989 (Public Law 101-226) and the Drug-Free Workplace
Act of 1988 (Public Law 100-690), the Little Compton Town Council hereby
adopts the following policy for the prevention of substance abuse among the
employees of the Town of Little Compton.
The possession, use or distribution of alcohol or illicit drugs by employees
while on town property or during any town sponsored activity is strictly
prohibited. Furthermore, employees are prohibited from being under the
influence of alcohol or illicit drugs while on town property or during a town
sponsored activity.
using their official authority for the purpose of interfering with or
affecting the results of an election or a nomination for office.
7. Taking affirmative action shall not mean that the Town will give
preferential treatment to minority groups, women, handicapped, or
the aged; but will provide equal employment and advancement
opportunity for all.
a. Prevention. The Town will:
1. Advise employees of the dangers of drug abuse in the workplace,
2. Inform employees of this policy, and
3. Inform employees of any available drug-counseling or
rehabilitation programs.
b. Intervention. The Town shall maintain an assistance program to aid
employees who are chemically involved.
The Town shall not, however, be obligated to pay the costs of any
rehabilitation program in which an employee may enroll.
c. Discipline. The employee shall notify the Town Council in writing of any
criminal conviction for a drug violation occurring in the workplace no
later than five days after such conviction in Federal or State Court;
The Town will notify the relevant Federal agency within 10 days after
receiving notice of any conviction of an employee for a workplace drug
violation;
The Town will, within 30 days of receiving notice of the criminal
conviction of an employee for a workplace violation, either take
appropriate action against the employee or refer the employee to a
rehabilitation program;
Violation of this policy shall be considered grounds for disciplinary
action, including dismissal.
§ 10-1.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-1.16
AO:145
§ 10-1.16. Sexual Harassment Policy. [Ord. 9/19/02]
It is the policy of the Town of Little Compton to maintain a working
environment that is entirely free of sexual harassment in any form.
Supervisors and managers and all other employees are absolutely
prohibited from engaging in sexual harassment of Town employees, visitors,
and members of the general public. Sexual harassment is unlawful. Because
sexual harassment can be destructive to employee morale as well as to the
Town's reputation and because it can be extremely costly to the Town in
terms of lost productivity, lost employees, and out-of-pocket expense, no act
of sexual harassment can serve the Town or be incidental to any service
on account of which any employee has been employed. Thus, any act or
pattern of sexual harassment by any employee of the Town is beyond the
scope of his or her authority as an employee, agent, supervisor or servant
of the Town and will subject the employee to discipline up to and including
the termination of employment.
The Town will administer all provisions of this policy without regard to
race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, age, national origin, handicap,
Vietnam-era veteran status, or disabled veteran status.
a. Scope. This policy applies to all employees of the Town of Little
Compton.
b. Responsibility.
1. The Town Council President has overall responsibility for this
policy.
2. Department Heads are responsible for the implementation and
daily administration of this policy.
3. Supervisory employees at all levels are responsible for
implementing and enforcing this policy, and for assisting in
investigating and processing employee complaints with the utmost
priority and consideration for the rights of all concerned.
4. Every employee is responsible for reporting to his/her supervisor or
the Department Head any incident of sexual harassment that he/
she witnesses or learns of. The Town will maintain the highest
degree of confidentiality possible with respect to such reports,
consistent with its obligation to investigate thoroughly all such
reports.
c. Definition and Examples of Sexual Harassment.
1. Unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other
verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature constitute sexual
harassment when:
(a) Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or
implicitly a term or condition of an individual's employment;
§ 10-1.16 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 10-1.16
AO:146
(b) Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is
used as the basis for employment decisions affecting such
individual;
(c) Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably
interfering with an individual's work performance or creating
an intimidating, hostile, or offensive working environment.
d. Some examples of employee conduct towards other employees
prohibited by this policy include:
1. Physical assaults of a sexual nature, such as:
(a) Assault, rape, sexual battery, molestation or threats or
attempts to commit these acts; or
(b) Unwelcome intentional physical conduct, or threats of such
conduct, which is sexual in nature, such as touching, pinching,
patting, grabbing, brushing against another person's body, or
poking another person's body.
2. Unwanted sexual advances, propositions or other sexual
comments, such as:
(a) Sexually-oriented gestures, noises, remarks, jokes or
comments about a person's sexuality or sexual experience;
(b) Giving rewards or promises of rewards for submitting to sexual
conduct, or reprisals or threats of reprisal for refusal to submit
to sexual conduct.
3. Sexual or discriminating displays in the workplace such as:
(a) Displaying or otherwise publicizing in the work environment
materials that are sexually revealing, suggestive, demeaning
or pornographic; or
(b) Displaying signs or other materials purporting to segregate an
employee by sex in any area of the workplace (other than
restrooms and similar semi-private lockers/changing rooms).
4. Retaliation against an employee for making a complaint under this
policy or for assisting or cooperating in an investigation of a
complaint under this policy;
5. Failure to cooperate fully with investigation of harassment
complaints.
e. Issuance and Circulation of Policy Statement.
1. The Department Head or his/her designee is responsible for
developing a bulletin board notice to all employees for posting at
the time that this policy is adopted by the Town of Little Compton.
The notice will emphasize the importance of the policy to the Town,
§ 10-1.16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-1.16
AO:147
the obligation of every employee to report any incident of sexual
harassment, the availability of supervisors and administrative staff
to receive such reports and the confidentiality with which these
reports will be treated.
2. A copy of the Policy will be given to all employees and new
employees will be given a copy upon hire. Employees will provide
written acknowledgment that they have received the policy and
understand its terms.
f. Employee Report and Investigation Procedure.
1. Employees may report sexual harassment to any supervisor, or
directly to the Department Head, or, if the Department Head is
involved in the allegation of sexual harassment, to the Town
Council President.
2. The supervisor will promptly inform either the Department Head
or, if the Department Head is involved in the allegation of sexual
harassment, the Town Council President of any report of sexual
harassment.
3. The Department Head or the Town Council President or his/her
designee, will thoroughly investigate the report of sexual
harassment as promptly as possible, keeping the matter as
confidential as is practicable. After investigation, he/she will take
whatever action is necessary to remedy any harm done by a proven
instance of sexual harassment and the complaining employee will
be notified of the action taken. If, after investigation, the
Department Head or the Town Council President is unable to
establish that any act of sexual harassment has occurred, he/she
will meet with the complaining employee(s) and with the
complained-against employee(s) individually to explain both the
results of the investigation and the Town of Little Compton's policy
on sexual harassment.
4. It is the responsibility of every employee to cooperate fully with any
investigation under this policy.
g. Statement of Range of Consequences.
1. Sexual Harassment.
(a) Employees are subject to discipline, up to and including
discharge, for any act of sexual harassment which is proven to
the satisfaction of the Town of Little Compton.
(b) The appropriate measure of discipline will be determined on
the basis of the Town's assessment of the nature and severity of
the misconduct, along with any other relevant factors.
2. Retaliation. It is unlawful to retaliate in any way against an
individual who has complained of sexual harassment or cooperated
§ 10-1.16 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 10-1.16
AO:148
§ 10-2. INDEMNIFICATION OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES. [Ord.
7/10/86]
All public employees, officials, members of boards, agencies and
commissions appointed by the Town Council or by any other persons
exercising appointing authority delegated to them by the Town Council;
whether or not such employees officials or members are paid; are
indemnified from all loss, cost, expense and damages, including legal fees
and court costs, if any, arising out of any claim, action, compromise,
settlement or judgment by reason of any intentional tort or by reason of
any alleged error or misstatement or act of omission, or neglect or violation
of the rights of any person under any Federal or State law, including
misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance or any act, omission or neglect
contrary to any Federal or State law which imposes personal liability on any
such employee, official or member, if such employee, official or member,
at the time of such intentional tort or act, omission or neglect, was acting
within the scope of his or her official duties or employment. The Town
Council may decline to indemnify any such employee, official or member for
any misstatement, error, act, omission, or neglect if the same resulted from
willful, wanton or malicious intent on the part of such employee, official
or member. Persons so indemnified shall be provided legal counsel at the
expense of the Town and/or reimbursement for attorneys' fees and other
expenses incurred in connection with the conduct of such defense, including
the payment of the judgment thereon. The Town Council shall establish
a fund into which it may deposit monies appropriated from time to time
to defer the costs incurred in carrying out the purposes of this section.
The amounts contained in such fund at the end of any fiscal year may
be carried forward to subsequent fiscal years without any reappropriation.
in an investigation of a complaint of sexual harassment. An
employee may be disciplined, up to and including discharge, for
any such act of retaliation. The appropriate measure of discipline
will be determined on the basis of the Town's assessment of the
nature and extent of the retaliation and any other relevant factors
brought to the attention of the Town of Little Compton.
h. Enforcement Agencies.
1. State and federal employment discrimination agencies are: the
Rhode Island Commission for Human Rights, which may be
contacted at 10 Abbott Park Place, Providence, RI, 02903 and the
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, which may be
contacted at the Boston Area Office, One Congress Street, Suite
1001, 10th Floor, Boston, MA 02114.
2. State and federal agencies generally expect that employees will
have first recourse to the procedures under an employer's sexual
harassment policy in order to put a stop to sexual harassment or
retaliation. It is the purpose of this policy that no employee should
ever have to go to an outside agency in order to resolve any
situation involving sexual harassment.
§ 10-1.16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-2
AO:149
The indemnity contained herein is extended to members of the School
Committee and any other person employed by the School Department and
any person appointed to any board, agency or commission by the School
Committee, whether or not such person is compensated for his or her
services. Said indemnification shall continue as to a person who has ceased
to be an elected official, appointed official, or employee of the Town of
Little Compton, and shall inure to the benefit of their heirs, executors and
administrators of such a person.
§ 10-3. (RESERVED)16
Chapter 11
(RESERVED)
[Editor's Note: Chapter 11, Signs and Billboards, was repealed in its
entirety on December 10, 1987.]
Chapter 12
SOIL AND SOIL REMOVAL
§ 12-1. EARTH REMOVAL.17
§ 12-1.1. Issuance of Licenses. [Ord. 11/8/73, § 1]
The Town Council may issue licenses as hereinafter defined, such
permission to be restricted and exercised in accordance with the following
sections.
§ 12-1.2. Definitions. [Ord. 11/8/73, § 2]
a. EARTH REMOVAL – Shall mean the extraction or removal of any sand,
gravel, loam, topsoil, stone, clay or shale, from deposits on any tract of
land, excluding, however, extracting, removing, digging, mining or
quarrying limestone, limerock, or granite and excluding operations of a
sand and gravel plant currently in operation, and immediately
surrounding 20 acres of industrial zoned land upon which the sand and
gravel plant is located, and excluding also earth removal involved in the
process of grading land:
1. For the construction of building for which a building permit has
been issued;
2. For the construction of a roadway; or
16.Editor's Note: Former Section 10-3, Fire Chief and Police Chief/Benefits, previously
codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 2/20/92, was repealed in its
entirety by Ordinance No. 5/9/96.
17.Editor's Note: For State Law as to the authority of the Town Council, passed January, 1973
Session of the General Assembly, An Act Authorizing the Town of Little Compton to Enact
Ordinances Regulating, Controlling, and Licensing Earth Removal.
§ 10-2 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 12-1.2
AO:150
§ 12-1.3. Hours. [Ord. 11/8/73, § 3]
All such earth removal operations shall be carried on only between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday,
Thursday, Friday or Saturday (except a legal holiday). Operations shall not
be carried on at any other hours nor on Sunday nor on a legal holiday except
upon issuance of a special exception from the Town Council.
§ 12-1.4. Setback Requirements. [Ord. 11/8/73, § 4]
Residential areas. The initiation or lateral expansion of earth removal is
prohibited within a distance of:
§ 12-1.5. Fencing. [Ord. 11/8/73, § 5]
Fencing is required around those portions of the boundary of the tract
of land upon which earth removal is being conducted and adjacent to
developed residential property. Such fencing shall be five feet in height and
shall be effective to control access to the area in which such earth removal
is being conducted.
§ 12-1.6. Dust Control. [Ord. 11/8/73, § 6]
Calcium chloride or oil shall be applied to non-paved roads to be used for
vehicular ingress or egress to the tract of land and to the regularly traveled
roads within the tract of land on which earth removal is to be conducted.
§ 12-1.7. Drainage. [Ord. 11/8/73, § 7]
Drainage shall be provided on tracts of land on which earth removal is to be
conducted to prevent the permanent collection and stagnation of surface or
underground waters, and to prevent the flooding and erosion of surrounding
property.
3. For a subdivision in accordance with a plat plan or plans approved
by or in accord with an ordinance of any city, town or any duly
authorized board of authority thereof.
b. ZONING BOARD OF REVIEW – Shall mean the Zoning Board of Review
established by the Town of Little Compton.
c. RESIDENTIAL USE – Shall mean any zone in which no use save
dwellings, including multi-family dwellings, is permitted without first
obtaining a variance, exception or special exception from the Zoning
Board of Review.
a. Twenty-five feet of the boundary of the tract of land upon which earth
removal is to be carried on adjacent to residential use property; or
b. Within 50 feet of any dwelling whichever is greater.
§ 12-1.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-1.8
AO:151
§ 12-1.8. Submission of Plans. [Ord. 11/8/73, § 8]
Except as otherwise provided herein, as a condition precedent to the
issuance of a license for earth removal, there shall be submitted to the Town
Council for its approval:
§ 12-1.9. License Required. [Ord. 11/8/73, § 9]
A condition precedent to any earth removal as herein defined shall be
the obtainment of a license to be issued by the Town Council upon the
submission of the documents required by subsection 12-1.8 and its approval
thereof, and the payment of a license fee of $25.
§ 12-1.10. Exceptions. [Ord. 11/8/73, § 10]
Upon special application and after a showing that the literal enforcement of
this section will work a hardship, the Zoning Board of Review may grant an
exception to the terms of this section upon a finding that such exception will
not result in a substantial depreciation of surrounding property.
§ 12-1.11. Appeals. [Ord. 11/8/73, § 11]
Appeals from the decisions of the Town Council to the Zoning Board of
Review shall be taken in the same manner as other appeals to the Zoning
a. A plan prepared by a registered engineer in compliance with the
provisions of this section and setting forth the existing contours of the
tract of land, and based upon classifications of preliminary samples of
the material to be removed;
1. The final contours of the tract of land upon completion of earth
removal operations; and
2. The type of ground cover to be planted or applied upon completion
of earth removal operations to effectively control wind and water
erosion; provided, however, if there is suitable fertile ground cover
existing at the beginning of earth removal, enough of said ground
cover shall be held in reserve and reapplied for a minimum
thickness of three inches.
b. An opinion by a registered engineer that upon completion of earth
removal operations all slopes on the tract as set forth in the plan
referred to in paragraph a of this section, shall remain at the natural
angle of repose; and
c. A bond not to exceed $100 for each acre of the tract of land to insure
compliance with the requirements of this section.
If the plan set forth in subsection 12-1.8a is not complied with, the Town may
undertake and complete such plan and the owner of the tract of land shall
reimburse the Town for its necessary expenses in connection therewith and the
Town shall have a lien on the tract of land for such expenses.
§ 12-1.8 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 12-1.11
AO:152
Board and the procedure as to notice and hearings shall be the same insofar
as the same are consistent herewith.
§ 12-1.12. Revocation and Penalties. [Ord. 11/8/73, § 12]
Violators of any of the provisions of this section shall pay a fine not
exceeding $100 for each offense, such fine to inure to the Town of Little
Compton. Violations shall be determined and fines imposed by the Town
Council. Each day the violation exists shall be considered a separated
offense.
Suit may be instituted in the Superior Court in the name of the Town of
Little Compton to restrain any violation of, or compel compliance with, this
section.
The Zoning Board of Review shall have the authority following adequate
notice to the licenseholder and a hearing, to revoke any license obtained
under provisions of this section on earth removal for violations of any
provisions of this section.
§ 12-1.13. Operations Already in Existence. [Ord. 11/8/73, § 13]
This section shall apply to earth removal being conducted on the date of its
enactment on any tract of land within the Town of Little Compton 60 days
after enactment. (Ordinance adopted November 8, 1973) Upon submission
to the Town Council of the plan and all other material as required under
subsection 12-1.8, (except that no such plan need set forth existing contours
for that portion of any tract of land on which earth removal has been
completed on the effective date of this ordinance), the Town Council shall
forthwith issue a license for the continuance of earth removal on any such
tract of land.
§ 12-1.14. Property Previously Obtained for Earth Removal
Purposes. [Ord. 11/8/73, § 14]
Real property acquired or leased prior to the effective date of the enabling
act for the purpose of earth removal and held for such purpose on the date
of enactment of this ordinance shall be considered in use for earth removal
whether or not extracting has been actually commenced, and a license
for earth removal on such property shall be issued pursuant to subsection
12-1.9 hereof upon compliance with the provisions of subsections 12-1.8
and 12-1.9. In order for real property to qualify hereunder, the following
conditions shall be considered as conclusive evidence that such real
property was acquired or leased and held for the purpose of later mineral
extraction:
a. Such real property was acquired or leased prior to effective date of the
enabling act; and
§ 12-1.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-1.14
AO:153
§ 12-1.15. Town of Little Compton Operations. [Ord. 11/8/73, § 15]
If the Town of Little Compton shall engage in earth removal for municipal
purposes, it shall comply with the provisions of this section.
Chapter 13
(RESERVED)
[Editor's Note: Prior to December 27, 1995, the Town of Little
Compton's Rules and Regulations for the Subdivision of Land were
set forth in the Little Compton Town Code, Chapter 13, Subdivision
of Land. The Rhode Island Land Development and Subdivision
Review Enabling Act of 1992, Section 45-23-52, requires that the
Little Compton Planning Board shall adopt or repeal, and provide
for the administration, interpretation, and enforcement of land
development and subdivision regulations. In accordance with
Section 45-23-51, the Town Council on December 21, 1995,
empowered the Planning Board to adopt Land Development and
Subdivision Review Regulations and thereby repealed Chapter 13 of
the Little Compton Town Code. The Subdivision regulations for the
Town of Little Compton are now in Appendix C.]
Whereas, R.I.G.L. Section 45-23-51, provides that the Town Council shall
empower by ordinance the Planning Board to adopt, modify and amend
regulations and rules governing land development and subdivision projects
within the Town and to control land development and subdivision projects
pursuant to those regulations and rules; and
Whereas, the Planning Board is authorized by Article VII, Section 701.A of
the Home Rule Charter of the Town of Little Compton, effective January 1,
b. Such real property was acquired or leased by an individual, corporate
or otherwise, engaged at the time of acquisition in the business of
mineral extraction; and
c. Such real property, or the substantial portion of such property has not
been permanently developed, for any residential, commercial (other
than farm or agricultural) or industrial purpose; and
d. Such real property contains mineral deposits of a demonstrable
economic value; and
e. Provided, further, that if the owner or lessee of any such tract of land
shall file in the office of the Town Clerk, as the same may be, on or
before December 31, 1973, a statement setting forth his intention to
engage in earth removal on said tract of land and describing said tract
of land, then such tract of land shall be deemed to qualify under this
section, and as to any tract of land for which such intention is not so
filed then the provisions of this section shall have no force and effect.
§ 12-1.14 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 12-1.15
AO:154
1995, to have the duties and responsibilities provided in State law for such
boards; and
Whereas, the Planning Board and the Town Council have been working
together for a year, together with expert consultants, to draft new
Subdivision Regulations, and such Regulations are now complete:
Now, therefore, the Town Council of the town of Little Compton does hereby
ordain as follows:
1. The Little Compton Planning Board is empowered to adopt, modify and
amend regulations and rules governing land development and subdivision
projects within the Town and to control land development and subdivision
projects pursuant to those regulations and rules.
2. Chapter 13, Sections 13-1 through 13-7.4 inclusive, of the Little Compton
Code of Ordinances entitled "Subdivision of Land" is repealed as provided
for in Subsection 1 above, provided however that it shall remain in effect for
any subdivisions currently in the process of approval as set forth in the new
regulations.
Chapter 14
ZONING
[Editor's Note: History of ordinance. This ordinance was originally
enacted May 13, 1968. It was amended on January 25, 1969; June 23,
1977; August 4, 1977 and December 7, 1978. Chapter 14, Zoning was
amended in its entirety on December 10, 1987 and further amended
January 19, 1989 and January 6, 1994. It was again amended in its
entirety June 23, 1994. Additional amendments will be noted where
applicable.]
§ 14-1. INTRODUCTION.
§ 14-1.1. Preamble. [Ord. 6/23/94, Art. 1]
In accordance with Sections 45-24-27 through 45-24-72 of the General Laws
of Rhode Island, 1956, as amended, also known as the Rhode Island Zoning
Enabling Act of 1991, the zoning ordinance of the Town of Little Compton is
hereby amended to read as follows:
§ 14-1.2. Purpose. [Ord. 6/23/94, Art. 1]
The regulations set forth in this chapter are made in general conformity
with the Comprehensive Community Plan of the Town of Little Compton
adopted on June 23, 1994 and prepared, adopted, and as may be amended
in accordance with chapter 22.2 of the General Laws and shall be designed
to address the following purposes. These purposes have equal priority and
are numbered for reference purposes only.
a. Promoting the public health, safety, and general welfare of the Town.
§ 12-1.15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-1.2
AO:155
b. Providing for a range of uses and intensities of use appropriate to the
character of the Town and reflecting current and expected future
needs.
c. Providing for orderly growth and development which recognizes:
1. The goals and patterns of land use contained in the Comprehensive
Community Plan of the Town of Little Compton;
2. The natural characteristics of the land, including its suitability for
use based on soil characteristics, topography, and susceptibility to
surface or groundwater pollution;
3. The values and dynamic nature of coastal and freshwater ponds,
the shoreline, and freshwater and coastal wetlands;
4. The values of unique or valuable natural resources and features;
5. The availability and capacity of existing and planned public and/or
private services and facilities;
6. The need to shape and balance settled areas of the Town with rural
development; and
7. The use of innovative development regulations and techniques.
d. Providing for the control, protection, and/or abatement of air, water,
groundwater, and noise pollution, and soil erosion and sedimentation.
e. Providing for the protection of the natural, historic, cultural, and scenic
character of the Town or areas therein.
f. Providing for the preservation and promotion of agricultural
production, forest, silviculture, aquaculture, timber resources, and
open space.
g. Providing for the protection of public investment in transportation,
water, stormwater management systems, sewage treatment and
disposal, solid waste treatment and disposal, schools, recreation, public
facilities, open space, and other public requirements.
h. Promoting a balance of housing choices, for all income levels and
groups, to assure the health, safety and welfare of all citizens and their
rights to affordable, accessible, safe, and sanitary housing.
i. Promoting safety from fire, flood, and other natural or man made
disasters.
j. Promoting a high level of quality in design in the development of private
and public facilities.
k. Promoting implementation of the Comprehensive Community Plan of
the Town.
§ 14-1.2 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-1.2
AO:156
§ 14-1.3. Compliance with Chapter. [Ord. 6/23/94, Art. 1]
Except as may be specifically authorized, the uses and dimensional
requirements set forth in this chapter shall govern the following:
§ 14-1.4. Zoning Districts and Zoning Map. [Ord. 6/23/94, Art. 1;
Ord. 8/23/07]
l. Providing for coordination of land uses with contiguous municipalities,
other municipalities, the State, and other agencies, as appropriate,
especially with regard to resources and facilities that extend beyond
municipal boundaries or have a direct impact on that municipality.
m. Providing for efficient review of development proposals, to clarify and
expedite the zoning approval process.
n. Providing for procedures for the administration of the zoning
ordinance, including, but not limited to, variances and special-use
permits.
a. Conformance with Permitted Use. No land shall be used and no
building, structure or sign shall be erected, modified, enlarged or used
unless such action conforms to this chapter. No building or structure or
sign shall be moved to a new site unless that site is zoned to permit the
use intended for such building structure or sign.
b. One Building Per Lot. Every building, structure or sign hereafter
erected and every use hereafter initiated shall be located on a lot as
defined in this chapter and there shall be no more than one main or
principal building, together with its accessory buildings or uses, on one
lot, except where specifically authorized in this chapter.
c. Dimensional Conformance. Except as hereinafter provided, no building,
structure or sign shall be erected, enlarged, or reconstructed to exceed
the dimensional limits established for the zone wherein such building,
structure or sign is located.
d. Lot Area Conformance. No new lot shall be created, nor shall an
existing lot be reduced or diminished except in conformance with the
dimensional requirements of this chapter, nor shall the number of
dwelling units or occupancy thereon be increased in any manner except
in conformance with the dimensional requirements of this chapter. The
lot areas or yard dimensions of buildings existing at the time this
chapter became effective shall not be diminished below the
requirements herein provided. The required yard or parking area for a
building shall not be included as a part of the required yard or parking
area of any other building.
a. Zoning Districts. For the purpose of this chapter the Town of Little
Compton is hereby divided into the following zoning districts:
§ 14-1.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-1.4
AO:157
1. Residence (R) District. This district includes areas which are
considered suitable for residential, agricultural and related
development at densities consistent with the ability of the soils to
yield potable domestic water supplies and provide for domestic
waste disposal.
2. Business (B) District. This district includes areas of existing and
proposed limited business and commercial development within and
in the vicinity of village centers where patterns of business
development have been established. Such development will be
subject to standards of performance with regard to any potentially
disturbing effects upon neighboring uses and subject to all other
requirements of this chapter.
b. Zoning Map. The boundaries of these zoning districts are hereby
established as shown on a set of Town Assessor's Plats entitled "Little
Compton Zoning Map - 2007" at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet; on
file at the office of the Town Clerk. In interpreting this map, the
following guidelines shall apply:
1. Zoning district boundaries which are located within a street, rightof-
way, stream or water body shall be interpreted as following the
center line of such feature.
2. Zoning district boundary lines which are located along shorelines
shall be construed as following the shoreline at the mean high
water line and; where any alteration of the shoreline, either natural
or artificial, is made; shall be interpreted as relocating to the new
shoreline location.
3. Where a zoning district boundary is located approximately parallel
to, in extension of or following a lot line or other mapped feature; it
shall be so construed.
4. Where a lot or parcel is divided by a zoning district boundary, the
regulations of either district may be applied for a maximum
distance of 30 feet either side of said zoning district boundary.
5. Distances not specified on the zoning map shall be determined by
use of the linear scale indicated on the map.
c. Interpretation of Chapter. It shall be the duty of the building official to
interpret and apply the provisions of this chapter including clarification
of the zoning map. Such interpretation and application shall be subject
to appeal to the Board. In interpretation and application, the provisions
of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of health, safety, convenience or the general welfare.
This chapter shall be consistent with the Comprehensive Community
Plan, as amended, of the Town of Little Compton, adopted on June 23,
1994 pursuant to Chapter 45-22.2 of the general laws of Rhode Island,
and in the instance of uncertainty in the construction or application
§ 14-1.4 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-1.4
AO:158
§ 14-2. NONCONFORMANCE.
§ 14-2.1. Definitions. [Ord. 6/23/94, Art. 2]
of any section of this chapter, this chapter shall be construed in a
manner that will further the implementation of, and not be contrary to,
the goals and policies and applicable elements of such Comprehensive
Community Plan.
a. NONCONFORMANCE – A nonconformance is a building, structure,
sign, or parcel of land, or use thereof, which was lawfully established at
the time of the adoption or amendment of this Zoning Chapter, and not
in conformity with the provisions of such ordinance or amendment.
b. LAWFULLY ESTABLISHED – A building, structure, sign, or parcel of
land, or use thereof, was lawfully established if it was in existence prior
to May 13, 1968, or was established in conformance with the Zoning
Chapter in effect at the time the use was first established. For the
purposes of this chapter, the placement or use of a sign, with or without
any other structure or use, is considered a use of land. A lot was
lawfully established if it was shown on a deed or recorded plat prior to
May 13, 1968, or is shown on a legally recorded plat or deed that
conformed to requirements in effect at the time of the recording. Any
building, structure, sign, or parcel of land, or use thereof, that was not
lawfully established at the time of the adoption or amendment of this
Zoning Chapter, is not protected by this section.
c. NONCONFORMING BY USE – A lawfully established use of land,
building, or structure which is not a permitted use in the zoning district
in which it is located, as set forth in § 14-3, is nonconforming by use. A
building or structure containing more dwelling units than are permitted
by the use regulations of this chapter shall also be nonconforming by
use.
d. NONCONFORMING BY DIMENSION – A lawfully established building,
structure, or parcel of land not in compliance with the dimensional
regulations of this chapter is nonconforming by dimension. Dimensional
regulations include all regulations of this chapter, other than those
pertaining to the permitted uses. A lawfully established building,
structure, parcel of land, or use thereof, not in compliance with the
parking regulations of this chapter, as set forth in § 14-8, is also
nonconforming by dimension.
e. SUBSTANDARD LOT OF RECORD, NONCONFORMING BY
DIMENSION – A lawfully established lot that is not in compliance with
the dimensional regulations of the Zoning Chapter, including, but not
limited to, those regulations for minimum lot size, lot width and lot
frontage, also known as a substandard lot of record, is also
nonconforming by dimension.
§ 14-1.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-2.2
AO:159
§ 14-2.2. Most Restrictive Regulations To Apply. [Ord. 6/23/94, Art.
2]
A building, structure or parcel of land nonconforming by more than one
factor, such as by use, dimension, area or parking, shall comply with all
applicable regulations of this section. Where the regulations conflict, the
most restrictive regulations shall apply.
§ 14-2.3. Existence By Variance or Special Use Permit. [Ord. 6/23/
94, Art. 2]
A nonconforming building, structure, sign, or parcel of land or the use
thereof, which exists by virtue of a variance or a special use permit (or
a special exception) granted by the Board, shall not be considered a
nonconformance for the purposes of this section, and shall not acquire the
rights of this section. Rather, such building, structure, sign, parcel of land,
or use thereof, shall be considered a use by variance or a use by special use
permit and any moving, addition, enlargement, expansion, intensification or
change of such building, structure, sign, parcel of land or use thereof, to
any use other than a permitted use or other than in complete conformance
with this chapter, shall require a further variance or special use permit from
the Board.
§ 14-2.4. Building or Structure Nonconforming By Use. [Ord. 6/23/
94, Art. 2]
a. Continuance of Use. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent or be
construed to prevent the continuance of a nonconforming use of any
building or structure for any purpose to which such building or
structure was lawfully established.
b. Maintenance and Repair. A building or structure containing a
nonconforming use may be maintained and repaired except as
otherwise provided in this section.
c. Moving. A building or structure containing a nonconforming use shall
not be moved in whole or in part either on or off the lot on which it is
located unless the use contained within such building or structure is
made to conform to the use regulations of the zone in which it is
relocated.
d. Addition and Enlargement. A building or structure containing a
nonconforming use shall not be added to or enlarged in any manner,
including any addition or enlargement of floor area or volume, unless
the use contained within such building or structure, including such
addition and enlargement, is made to conform to the use regulations of
the zone in which it is located, provided however that limited addition
or enlargement may be granted by the Board as a special use pursuant
to Subsection i below.
§ 14-2.2 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-2.4
AO:160
e. Expansion. A nonconforming use of a building or structure shall not be
expanded into any other portion of the building or structure which
contains a conforming use or which is unoccupied or unused, provided
however that limited expansion may be granted by the Board as a
special use pursuant to Subsection i below.
f. Intensification. A nonconforming use of a building, structure or land
shall not be intensified in any manner. Intensification shall include, but
not be limited to, increasing hours of operation, increasing the number
of dwelling units or increasing the seating capacity of a place of
assembly. However, this section shall not prohibit the reconfiguration of
lawfully established dwelling units within a building or structure so
long as such reconfiguration complies with the requirements of
Subsection e above, provided however that limited intensification may
be granted by the Board as a special use pursuant to Subsection i below.
g. Change of Use. A lawful nonconforming use shall not be changed to
another nonconforming use but may be changed to a use conforming to
the provisions of this chapter, or to a use within the same use code as
listed under § 14-3. Once a lawful nonconforming use is changed to a
conforming use, it may not be changed back to a nonconforming use.
h. Abandonment. If the lawful nonconforming use of any land, building,
structure or sign is abandoned, it shall not be allowed to resume except
in conformity with all applicable provisions of this chapter.
Abandonment of a nonconforming use shall consist of some overt act, or
failure to act, which would lead one to believe that the owner of the
nonconforming use neither claims nor retains any interest in continuing
the nonconforming use unless the owner can demonstrate an intent not
to abandon the use. For the purposes of this section, the intent to
abandon a lawful nonconforming use shall be demonstrated by one or
more of the following actions:
1. Voluntary demolition of the building, structure or sign.
2. Failure to apply for or lapse of any permits, licenses or
certifications required for continuation of the use or failure to
appeal any denial of any such permit, license or certification within
12 months of any such lapse or denial.
3. Removal of fixtures, equipment, machinery or inventory necessary
for the continuation of the use from the site, building or structure.
§ 14-2.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-2.4
AO:161
§ 14-2.5. Building or Structure Nonconforming by Dimension. [Ord.
6/23/94, Art. 2]
An involuntary interruption of a nonconforming use, such as by fire and
natural catastrophe, does not establish the intent to abandon the
nonconforming use. However, if any nonconforming use is discontinued,
which shall include a change in the use of the building, structure, site
or sign to another use or failure to maintain the site, building, structure
or sign in habitable, usable or safe condition or failure to protect said
building, structure or sign from the natural elements, for a period of
one year or more, the owner of the nonconforming use will be presumed
to have abandoned the nonconforming use, unless that presumption is
rebutted by the presentation of sufficient evidence of intent not to abandon
the use.
i. Special Use Permit for Addition, Enlargement, Expansion or
Intensification. As a special use in compliance with the provisions of §
14-9 of this chapter, the lawful nonconforming use of a building,
structure, sign or land may be added to, enlarged, expanded or
intensified provided that such addition, enlargement, expansion or
intensification shall not exceed 50% in excess of the existing floor area
or land or intensity used for the nonconforming use at the time the use
became lawfully nonconforming. Said increased use shall comply with
all other dimensional and area requirements of this chapter. In granting
such a special use permit, the Zoning Board of Review may place such
restrictions on such increase as it may deem necessary to minimize its
effect upon neighboring property and uses.
j. Destruction or Demolition. If a nonconforming use is damaged or
destroyed by accident or act of God, it may be restored or repaired
provided the use, total floor area or land area of use and the location on
the site is not altered or increased. Such repair or restoration shall
comply in all respects with all applicable codes, ordinances and other
applicable regulatory systems.
a. Continuance. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent or be construed to
prevent the continuance of the use of any building or structure
nonconforming by dimension for any purpose to which such building or
structure was lawfully established.
b. Maintenance and Repair. A building or structure nonconforming by
dimension may be maintained and repaired except as otherwise
provided in this section.
c. Moving. A building or structure which is nonconforming by dimension
shall not be moved in whole or in part to any other location on the lot in
which it is located unless every portion of such building or structure is
made to conform to all of the dimensional requirements of the zone in
which it is located.
§ 14-2.4 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-2.5
AO:162
§ 14-2.6. Land Nonconforming by Use. [Ord. 6/23/94, Art. 2]
d. Addition and Enlargement. A building or structure nonconforming by
dimension may be added to or enlarged only if such addition or
enlargement is not more than 50% of the original building or structure,
and only if such addition or enlargement conforms to all of the
dimensional regulations of the zone in which the building or structure is
located.
e. Expansion. A conforming use within a building or structure which is
nonconforming by dimension (other than by lot area per dwelling unit)
may be expanded into any other portion of the building or structure
which is unoccupied or unused.
f. Demolition. If a building or structure nonconforming by dimension is
involuntarily demolished, destroyed, or damaged; it may, by right, be
repaired or rebuilt to the same size and dimension as previously
existed. If a building or structure nonconforming by dimension is
voluntarily demolished or destroyed, it shall not be reconstructed,
unless it conforms with the dimensional regulations of the zone in
which it is located. Provided however, that the Zoning Board may grant
a special use permit to allow any such building or structure, whether
voluntarily or involuntarily demolished, damaged or destroyed, to be
reconstructed not in conformance with the dimensional regulations of
the zone in which it is located, if the Board finds that:
1. In the case of voluntary demolition or destruction, the owner has
applied to the Board prior to demolition, and demolition has not yet
taken place; and
2. In either case, the new building or structure will not be more than
50% larger than the existing building or structure; and
3. In either case, the nonconforming dimensional aspects of the new
building or structure shall be of no greater impact on the
surrounding neighborhood than those of the original building or
structure.
g. Intensification. A conforming use within a building or structure which is
nonconforming by dimension may be intensified, provided that such
intensification is in conformance with the use and lot area per dwelling
unit regulations, if applicable, for the zone in which it is located.
h. Change in Use. A conforming use within a building or structure which is
nonconforming by dimension may be changed to any other conforming
use.
a. Continuance. The lawfully established nonconforming use of land,
where no building is involved, may be continued, provided that no such
nonconforming use of land shall in any way be expanded or intensified
either on the same or adjoining property.
§ 14-2.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-2.6
AO:163
§ 14-2.7. Land Nonconforming by Area. [Ord. 6/23/94, Art. 2]
§ 14-2.8. Buildings and Structure Nonconforming by Parking. [Ord.
6/23/94, Art. 2]
A building or structure is considered nonconforming by parking if the
lawfully established use of the building or structure does not meet the
parking requirements of § 14-8.
b. Change of Use. The nonconforming use of land shall not be changed to
a different use, unless such use conforms to the use regulations of the
zone in which it is located.
a. Enlargement of Undersized Lots. Lawfully established lots which have
less than the minimum area requirements, may be maintained and may
be changed by adding additional land to such lots, if recorded with a
proper plat plan and with the approval of the Planning Board where
otherwise necessary, without prejudice to the rights of the owner of
such resulting lots pursuant to the provisions of this section. Any
lawfully established lots which have been merged by the owner and
shown on the Assessor's Plats as one lot shall be deemed to be one lot
and shall not be redivided, unless in conformance with the dimensional
regulations of this chapter, and with the approval of the Planning
Board.
b. Use of Substandard Lots of Record. A lawfully established lot that is
nonconforming with the dimensional regulations of this chapter, also
known as a substandard lot of record, may be used for any use
permitted in the district provided that all other requirements of this
chapter are met, except that the required side, front and rear yard
depths and the maximum lot coverage for a substandard lot of record
may be reduced to the following:
1. Side yard (each) - Shall be 15% of the lot width measured at the
front yard depth but no less than 10 feet in depth for each side
yard.
2. Front yard depth - Shall be 15% of the average depth of the lot but
no less than 30 feet in depth.
3. Rear yard depth - Shall be 15% of the average depth of the lot, but
no less than 15 feet in depth.
4. Maximum lot coverage - Shall be 10% of the lot area by all
structures; but may be expanded up to a total of 750 square feet of
lot coverage, provided that the total habitable floor space therein
shall not exceed 750 square feet.
a. Addition, Enlargement, Expansion and Intensification. A building or
structure, or use of land, nonconforming by parking, may be added to,
enlarged, expanded or intensified provided additional parking space is
§ 14-2.6 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-2.8
AO:164
§ 14-3. ZONING DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS.
§ 14-3.1. Compliance with Regulations.
The regulations set by this chapter within each district shall be minimum
regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure
or land. In addition, § 14-4 contains dimensional regulations and § 14-5
contains supplementary regulations which apply to specific conditions,
areas or uses.
supplied to meet the requirements of § 14-8 for such addition,
enlargement, expansion or intensification.
b. Change of Use. A building or structure nonconforming by parking, may
be changed to a different use, pursuant to all other provisions of this
chapter, provided that such new use meets the following parking
requirements. The number of additional parking spaces required shall
be the difference between the number of spaces required for the
proposed use and the number of spaces required for the previous use.
In the event that the new use requires less parking spaces than the
previous use, no additional parking spaces need be supplied. However,
none of the existing parking spaces shall be eliminated unless the total
number of spaces required by this chapter for the new use are
provided.
a. Principal Use. Table 1-A - Table of Principal Use Regulations is designed
to regulate principal land uses in two zoning districts in the Town. A
principal use is the main or primary use of the land or building.
b. Accessory Use. Table 1-B - Table of Accessory Use Regulations is
designed to regulate accessory uses. An accessory use is any use of land
or of a building (or portion thereof) that is customarily incidental to and
subordinate to the principal use of the land or building. An accessory
use shall be restricted to the same lot as the principal use and shall not
be permitted without the principal use to which it is related. Home
occupations (see Subsection 14-5.6) are accessory uses.
c. Use Code. Each land use or use group is identified by a use code
number and is a separate use. The use code is a classification system
designed to limit and aid in the interpretation of the use regulations.
Where a use is not specifically listed below, such use is not permitted
unless the Building Official shall, (pursuant to Rhode Island General
Laws § 45-24-54) upon written request, provide written information to
the requesting party as to the determination that the use is included
within the appropriate use code number within 15 calendar days of the
written request. In the event that no response is provided within such
time or if the requesting party disagrees with the response, the
requesting party shall have the right to appeal to the Board for such
determination.
§ 14-2.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-3.1
AO:165
d. Public Utilities and Public Services. The provisions of this chapter shall
not be construed so as to limit or interfere with the construction,
installation, operation and maintenance for public utility purposes of
main line and conduits, including, but not limited to electric light and
electric power transmission and distribution lines, telephone lines,
cable television lines, water and sewer mains, natural gas pipes and
incidental appurtenances and installations.
e. Use Regulations. Permitted uses are denoted with a "Y" for yes. Uses
which are not permitted are denoted with an "N" for no. Uses permitted
only upon approval of the Board are denoted with an "S" for special use
permit. A special use permit shall only be approved in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter. Any number of uses may be located on a
lot provided each use is permitted and all other requirements of this
chapter are met. [Ord. 6/23/94, Art. 3; Ord. 5/31/06, §§ 1 — 3;
amended 7-11-2019]
Table 1-A - Table of Principal Use Regulations
Use
# Principal Uses
Residential
(R)
Business
(B)
A AGRICULTURAL & FISHING
A1 Agricultural uses including the
growing, processing, value added
production, displays, education,
promotion and sales of agricultural
products including, but not limited to
wineries.
Y Y
A2 Agricultural uses-raising of pigs,
provided that there are not more than
2 adult pigs per acre, not to exceed 25
pigs on any 1 lot and that there shall
be a fifty-foot buffer between the pig
pen and property line or a 100-foot
buffer between the pig pen and an
abutting residence.
Y Y
A3 Aquacultural uses - storage of nets,
sealed bait barrels, lobster traps, and
related fishing equipment.
Y Y
A4 Handling and transfer of seafood, but
not processing.
N Y
A5 Aquacultural uses including raising,
harvesting, sales, promotion, and
displays of aquacultural products
including, but not limited to fish
farming providing such operation is
granted a special use permit under §
14-5, Subsections 14-5.10 and 14-5.11.
S S
§ 14-3.1 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-3.1
AO:166
Table 1-A - Table of Principal Use Regulations
Use
# Principal Uses
Residential
(R)
Business
(B)
R RESIDENTIAL
R1 Single-family detached dwelling. Y Y
R2 Duplex (2 household units) on 3 acres,
provided that 1 unit is affordable with
affordability restrictions in place and
subject to development plan review by
the Planning Board.
Y Y
R2A Duplex (2 household units) on 2 acres,
provided that 1 unit is affordable with
affordability restrictions in place and
subject to development plan review by
the Planning Board.
S S
R2B Duplex (2 household units) on any
legally established lot of record less
than 2 acres provided both units shall
be affordable with affordability
restrictions in place, that DEM ISDS
approval is obtained and subject to
development plan review by the
Planning Board.
Y Y
R3 Multiple family dwelling structure
housing a maximum of 6 dwelling
units, with no limitations on number of
bedrooms. Subject to development
plan review by the Planning Board and
provided that DEM ISDS approval is
obtained and affordability restrictions
are in place, for each of the dwelling
units.
N* Y
R3A Conversion of lawfully existing
commercial structures which are legal
nonconforming by use into multiplehousehold
affordable housing units.
Subject to development plan review by
the Planning Board and provided that
DEM ISDS approval is obtained and
affordability restrictions are in place,
for each of the dwelling units.
S S
§ 14-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-3.1
AO:167
Table 1-A - Table of Principal Use Regulations
Use
# Principal Uses
Residential
(R)
Business
(B)
R4 Bed and breakfast establishment,
provided that there shall be no more
than 4 guest bedrooms and that the
proprietor shall reside full time on the
premises.
S Y
R5 Hotel, motel or lodging house
providing accommodations for a
density no more than 10 persons per
acre of site area.
N S
O OPEN SPACE USES
O1 Reservation for the conservation of
animal, plant or marine life or the
protection of a natural or historic
resource.
Y Y
O2 Golf course, including driving range as
part of the golf course and those
facilities normally associated with a
country club, but not including
commercial miniature golf courses.
Y Y
O3 Tennis courts, outdoors and not
lighted.
Y Y
O4 Tennis courts, outdoors and lighted. S Y
O5 Public or quasi-public park,
playground or athletic field.
Y Y
O6 Riding stable. Y S
O7 Public or private bathing beach or
public swimming pool.
S Y
O8 Day camp for children or youth. S S
O9 Cemetery, mausoleum or
columbarium.
S Y
I INSTITUTIONAL
I1 Local government building, facility,
office.
S Y
I2 Public safety building. S Y
I3 Government facility for waste
disposal, waste transfer, or public
works
N S
§ 14-3.1 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-3.1
AO:168
Table 1-A - Table of Principal Use Regulations
Use
# Principal Uses
Residential
(R)
Business
(B)
I4 Local government facility for the
handling or transfer of hazardous
waste.
N S
I5 Church or other place of worship. Y Y
I6 Public transit shelter or station. S Y
I7 Public utility facility for electric power,
natural gas, telephone, cable
television, public water supply or
public sewer service.
Y Y
I8 Public utility facility which is
customarily open for public business.
N Y
I9 Charitable institution, club, lodge or
community center operated by a
nonprofit organization, not including
any commercial activity.
S Y
I10 Medical treatment facility with 3 or
more physicians or providers.
S S
I11 Day care - Family day care home. Y Y
I12 Public, private or quasi-public day
care center, nursery, kindergarten,
elementary, secondary or higher
education facility.
S Y
I13 Nursing home. S Y
I14 Community residence. Y Y
I15 Public utility structure other than an
office.
S S
C COMMERCIAL
C1 Temporary real estate office for an
area under development, limited to a
duration of 1 year.
Y Y
C2 General business office or office
building.
N Y
C3 Bank or other financial institution. N Y
C4 Retail store, drug store or specialty
shop, grocery or other food store
10,000 square feet GFA or less.
N Y
§ 14-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-3.1
AO:169
Table 1-A - Table of Principal Use Regulations
Use
# Principal Uses
Residential
(R)
Business
(B)
C5 Shop providing service to the public
such as: watch repair, small appliance
repair, barber shop, beauty shop, shoe
repair and others of a similar nature.
N Y
C6 Commercial off-street parking facility. N Y
C7 Commercial boat dock, pier or wharf. S Y
C8 Mortuary or funeral home. S S
C9 Trade or professional school. S S
C10 Commercial recreation building,
including indoor tennis.
N S
C11 Commercial school offering
instruction in music, dance, voice and
others.
N S
C12 Office or retail outlet for a wholesale
or manufacturing use.
N S
C13 Restaurant, lunch room, cafe, tavern. N S
C14 Fast food restaurant. N N
C15 Package liquor store. N S
C16 Furniture and similar stores, 10,000
square feet GFA or less.
N S
C17 Dry-cleaning plant or coin-operated
laundry.
N N
C18 Theatre or concert hall. N S
C19 Automotive, trailer or other vehicle
sales or rental establishment.
N S
C20 Gasoline filling station, including
automotive repairs.
N S
C21 Retail or wholesale business involving
the storage of machinery, building
materials, sand, gravel or fuels.
N S
C22 Shop providing repair and related
services for small appliances,
machinery, tools, agricultural
implements and others of a similar
nature.
N Y
§ 14-3.1 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-3.1
AO:170
Table 1-A - Table of Principal Use Regulations
Use
# Principal Uses
Residential
(R)
Business
(B)
C23 General automotive repairs, including
the parking or storage of motor
vehicles and other motorized
equipment.
N S
C24 Kennel. S Y
C25 Principal solar energy systems or
virtual metering systems that produce
electricity to be sold.
N S
M MANUFACTURING
M1 Seafood processing. N N
M2 Manufacturing, packaging,
assembling, fabricating and storage of
products made on the premises from
previously prepared raw materials.
N N
M3 Bakery or catering establishment with
no more than 3,000 square feet of
GFA.
N Y
M4 Manufacture of articles from metal,
wood, stone, clay, glass, ceramics,
paper, leather or similar materials for
display, wholesale or retail sales,
provided that no more than 2,500
square feet GFA be used, and that
there be no more than 5 employees.
N S
*The Town Council will consider zoning amendments from the R Zone
to the B Zone, for affordable housing proposals within 1/4 mile of any
B zone existing on May 31, 2006.
§ 14-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-3.1
AO:171
Table 1-B - Table of Accessory Use Regulations
Use # Accessory Uses
Residential
(R) Business (B)
1 Structures and/or activities
normally accessory to and
required for the operation of
a permitted use. Such an
accessory use or structure
shall be located on the site of
the principal use and may
include such items as
parking facilities,
agricultural buildings, sheds,
garages and similar uses or
structures.
Y Y
2 Structures and/or activities
normally accessory to and
required for the operation of
any special use permit listed
above, provided that such
facility or use shall be
located on the site of the
principal use.
S S
3 Living quarters accessory to
business use for the sole
occupancy of the proprietor,
owner or a representative of
either of the principal
business uses and having a
site area of no less than 1
acre.
N S
4 The renting of no more than
2 bedrooms in an existing
residential structure.
Y Y
5 Roof-mounted accessory
solar system
Y Y
6 Ground-mounted accessory
solar system equal to or less
than 1,000 square feet
Y Y
7 Ground-mounted accessory
solar system greater than
1,000 square feet
S S
8 Accessory-principal
agricultural solar energy
system
S S
§ 14-3.1 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-4
AO:172
§ 14-4. Dimensional Regulations.
§ 14-4.1. Dimensional, Area and Density Requirements. [Ord. 6/23/
94, Art. 4; Ord. 5/6/99, §§ 1, 3; Ord. 6/21/01; Ord. 5/31/06, § 4; Ord.
10/27/11]
The following requirements shall apply to all structures, buildings and
activities hereafter located in or initiated in all zoning districts and to any
extension of an existing structure, building or activity.
Dimension Residence (R) 
Minimum lot area 2 acres, exclusive of
any streets, or rightsof-
way, in all zoning
districts

Minimum lot width at
the building line
175 feet and the 175
feet frontage shall
extend back to a depth
of at least 175 feet and
continue at no less than
a 100-foot width until
the 2 acre requirement
has been met
40 feet
Minimum street
frontage
175 feet. Cul-de-sac
105 feet
None
Minimum front yard
depth from the street
line to the building line
50 feet 30 feet or the average
depth of front yards of
developed adjacent lots
or parcels
Minimum rear yard
depth
25 feet 25 feet
Minimum side yard
width
25 feet, each side yard 25 feet. This minimum
dimension may be
decreased to zero where
adjacent lots or parcels
of land are to be
combined for the
simultaneous
development of 1
business structure or a
series of interconnected
structures, not
exceeding 200 feet with
no break, as part of a
business development
complex
§ 14-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-4.1
AO:173
Dimension Residence (R) Business (B)
Minimum distance from
an R District boundary
N/A 40 feet
Maximum coverage of
lot by all structures
10% 15%
Maximum height of
structure
30 feet*** 30 feet***
Maximum height of
accessory structures,
exclusive of barns, silos
and other agricultural
structures
24 feet. Accessory
barns and other
agricultural structures
shall be 30 feet. Silos
may be a maximum
height of 50 feet
30 feet. Silos may be a
maximum height of 50
feet
*The construction of a second, detached single-family dwelling unit on
a 3-acre parcel is permitted by right, provided that DEM ISDS approval
is obtained and affordability restrictions are in place for 1 unit. See
definitions for "affordable housing" and "affordability restrictions."
**As of October 2011 any new subdivided lots within both Residence (R) or
Business (B) districts must meet the 2 acre minimum if the use will be for
a dwelling unit. Business use shall have no minimum lot size if it is located
within the Business (B) district.
***Reference §§ 14-10b21 and 14-10b51.
§ 14-5. SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS.
§ 14-5.1. Manufactured Homes. [Ord. 6/23/94, Art. 5]
In order to maintain affordable housing in the Town, the placement of a
manufactured home may be permitted in a Residence (R) District subject to
the following requirements:
a. The manufactured home shall comply in all respects with applicable
provisions of the Rhode Island State Building Code and all other
applicable codes, ordinances and regulations.
b. The manufactured home shall be properly affixed to a permanent
foundation and connected to a safe and adequate water supply and
sewage disposal system, approved for the intended use by the Rhode
Island Department of Environmental Management or other agency of
jurisdiction. Wheels and all other running and towing gear shall be
removed and the space beneath the structure shall be fully screened.
c. The lot upon which such manufactured home is to be located shall
conform in all respects to the dimensional, area and density
requirements for the district within which it is located or shall be an
acceptable substandard lot as described in Subsection 14-2.7b of this
chapter.
§ 14-4.1 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-5.1
AO:174
§ 14-5.2. Supplementary Dimensional Regulations. [Ord. 6/23/94,
Art. 5; Ord. 5/6/99, § 2; Ord. 10/27/11]
The following dimensional regulations apply to all uses and lots, in addition
to those regulations of § 14-4 of this chapter.
d. A building permit shall be required for the placement of any
manufactured home, and the permit application shall be accompanied
by a site plan showing the location of the manufactured home on the lot,
access drive(s), accessory structures, the location of the water supply
and sewage disposal system.
a. Vision Clearance at Corners. In all districts, where abutting streets
intersect at an angle of less than 135°, in the triangle formed by the
extension of the front lot lines of a corner lot and a line joining points on
such extended front lot lines 30 feet from their point of intersection,
such triangle shall be clear of all buildings, structures and vegetation
between a height of 2.5 and 10 feet above the plane through the grades
of the intersecting streets. This shall not apply to structures, buildings
or vegetation so located prior to the date of this amendment.
b. Front yards on a through or corner lot. At each street frontage of a
through or corner lot, there shall be a front yard depth maintained as
specified for the district in which such lot is located. At least one of the
front yards shall have at least 175 feet of street frontage.
c. Fences and walls. Fences and walls may be erected in a side or rear
yard area to a height of no greater than six feet. In front yard setbacks,
the maximum height of any fence or wall shall be four feet, subject to
the vision clearance requirement for corner lots.
d. Dimensional requirements for single household residence in Business
District. The minimum lot area coverage and dimensional requirements
for a single-household detached dwelling in the Business (B) District
shall be the same as those required in the Residence (R) District. With
all new subdivisions the minimum lot area shall be two acres for a
dwelling unit in the Residence (R) District or Business (B) District.
e. Minimum lot area in Business District - Requirements. Notwithstanding
the lack of a minimum lot area requirement for nonresidential uses in
the Business (B) District, any lot or site proposed for development or for
the extension of development shall be of sufficient area to
accommodate the required off-street parking and loading area and shall
have a safe and adequate water supply and sewage disposal system,
approved for the intended use by the Rhode Island Department of
Environmental Management or any other agency of jurisdiction.
f. Accessory structures prohibited in yard setbacks. No accessory
building or structure shall be located in or extend into a required front,
side or rear yard setback.
§ 14-5.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-5.2
AO:175
§ 14-5.3. Authorized Departures From the Dimensional
Requirements. [Ord. 6/23/94, Art. 5; Ord. 5/6/99, § 2]
§ 14-5.4. Accessory Uses - Miscellaneous. [Ord. 6/23/94, Art. 5]
g. Screening of trash containers. All commercial and industrial uses, and
residential uses of four families or more, shall provide trash and/or
garbage collection areas enclosed on at least three sides by a solid wall,
opaque fence or compact planting screen of at least five feet in height,
if such area is not within an enclosed building or structure. In order to
provide adequate vehicular access to and from dumpsters, there shall
be a minimum vehicular access of nine feet in width between any such
dumpster and any principal structure.
h. Screening of on ground utilities. Utility structures, substations,
telephone exchange substations, dish antennas and similar uses shall
be enclosed on at least three sides by a vegetative screen of hardy
evergreens or shrubs at least three feet high at time of planting and
which shall be sufficient to effectively provide a visual screen.
a. Projections. Projections of cornices, window sills, bay windows and
other ornamental features may extend up to one foot into any required
yard area.
b. Structures Allowed Above the Height Limits.
1. Attached structures and appurtenances such as flagpoles,
antennas, weather vanes, and the like, shall be allowed to exceed
the maximum height permitted by up to 10 feet.
2. Unoccupied decorative areas of a building such as towers, cupolas,
widows' walks, and the like, shall be allowed to exceed the
maximum height permitted by up to five feet.
3. Detached and freestanding structures and appurtenances, such as
windmills and antennas, and the like, shall be allowed to exceed the
maximum height permitted by up to five feet.
4. (Reserved)
5. Flagpoles used for noncommercial purposes shall be allowed to
exceed the maximum height permitted by up to 20 feet.
a. Private garage or shed. A private garage or shed may be used to store
vehicles, boats, recreational vehicles or similar equipment owned by
the occupant. Storage of tractor trailers is prohibited in the R Zone.
b. Storage of vehicles. No recreational vehicle shall be used for residential
occupancy. No recreational vehicle shall be stored unless owned by the
occupant of the lot, nor stored for a period in excess of one year unless
it is in a condition for safe and effective performance of the function for
§ 14-5.2 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-5.4
AO:176
§ 14-5.5. Accessory Uses - Dwelling Units. [Ord. 6/23/94, Art. 5; Ord.
5/31/06 § 5]
In order to maintain affordable housing in the Town, and provide for the
protection of family living units, the following accessory dwelling units are
allowed, subject to all of the requirements set forth herein.
which it is intended. No unregistered vehicles shall be stored in the
required front yard setback. (See also § 14-8 for further restrictions.)
c. Swimming pools. A residential swimming pool, including portable pools
capable of maintaining a depth of 30 inches of water, shall be classified
as an accessory structure and shall provide the following:
1. A lockable enclosure not less than four feet in height and locked
when not in use or under supervision, surrounding the immediate
pool area.
2. An apron between the enclosure and the edge of the pool not less
than four feet in width.
a. Accessory apartment. A maximum of one accessory apartment shall be
permitted on a lot in certain existing buildings, provided that all of the
following requirements are met:
1. The lot or parcel of land shall have an absolute minimum area of
three acres. The provisions of § 14-2 relating to substandard lots of
record shall not apply to allow any new accessory apartment on a
lot of less than three acres.
2. The accessory apartment shall be located entirely within an owneroccupied
principal residential structure which existed on
December 10, 1987 and which contains no less than 1,500 square
feet of gross floor area (GFA). The accessory apartment shall
occupy no greater than 40% of the total GFA of the principal
structure excluding the basement.
3. There shall be no exterior alteration of the principal structure
except for the development of a separate entry and any required
safety exits.
4. The accessory apartment shall be designed for year-round
occupancy. The accessory apartment shall be provided with a safe
and adequate water supply and an individual sewage disposal
system approved by the Rhode Island Department of
Environmental Management.
5. The existing principal residence and accessory apartment shall
comply with all requirements of the Rhode Island State Building
Code, the Rhode Island Housing Maintenance and Occupancy
Code, all other Federal, State and local codes, ordinances and
regulations and all other applicable provisions of this chapter.
§ 14-5.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-5.5
AO:177
6. All such accessory apartments shall require a building permit and
certificate of occupancy, whether or not any construction is
required.
b. Accessory family dwelling unit. An accessory family dwelling unit shall
be permitted as of right, provided that the following restrictions and
limitations shall be required:
1. Lot Size.
(a) An accessory family dwelling unit is permitted in any
residential structure on a lot containing two acres or more.
(b) An accessory family dwelling unit is permitted in any
residential structure on a lot containing less than two acres but
not less than one acre provided that the Individual Sewage
Disposal System (ISDS) on said lot has been approved by the
Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management
(RIDEM). ISDS approval shall not be required on a lot of less
than two acres if the existing septic system is not
malfunctioning and in good working order, and the number of
bedrooms is not increased.
(c) An accessory family dwelling unit is permitted in any
residential structure on a lot containing one acre, provided
that the unit is affordable and affordability restrictions are in
place and that such accessory unit will be eligible for the
Town's low income and disabled property tax relief.
2. ISDS System.
(a) The Building Official may require that the applicant submit
evidence furnished by a qualified professional that there is no
visible evidence of failure of the existing ISDS system if that
system qualifies for use and is to be used by the accessory
family dwelling unit.
(b) If the accessory family dwelling unit results in an increase in
total number of bedrooms that will require a new or expanded
ISDS system, the applicant must have the system approved by
RIDEM.
3. Only one accessory family dwelling unit is permitted on a lot.
4. The accessory family dwelling unit shall be located on a lot which
has only one principal residential structure. It shall be located
either within the principal structure or within an accessory
structure, both of which have been in existence a minimum of two
years prior to the establishment of the accessory family dwelling
unit.
5. The size of any proposed accessory family dwelling unit shall be
restricted to 40% of the gross floor area of the principal structure,
§ 14-5.5 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-5.5
AO:178
§ 14-5.6. Accessory Uses - Customary Home Occupations. [Ord. 6/
23/94, Art. 5]
In order to maintain the rural agricultural character of the Town, which
is distinctly different from a rural residential character, and which rural
agricultural character traditionally includes a variety of other occupational
uses on the land in combination with and in addition to the agricultural
use and the agricultural accessory uses, the following customary home
occupation uses are allowed as accessory uses in the Residence (R) District,
subject to the following conditions and regulations which shall apply to all
customary home occupations:
but not less than 400 square feet. If the proposed accessory family
dwelling is located in an accessory structure, such accessory
structure shall contain a gross floor area of not less than 400
square feet at the time of the enactment of this amendment; i.e. the
footprint of such structure may not be increased to accommodate
a proposed accessory family dwelling unit. The proposed accessory
family dwelling unit shall comply in all respects with the side, rear,
and front yard requirements for a single family residence as set
forth in this chapter.
6. The principal structure that contains an accessory family dwelling
unit shall maintain the appearance of a single family residential
dwelling. Separate means of ingress and egress, if used, shall only
be located at the rear of the principal structure or along its side,
with adequate screening.
7. Family members shall be limited to persons related by blood,
marriage or other legal means.
8. Once the family member or members vacate the premises, the
accessory family dwelling unit shall cease to exist, unless further
application is made to qualify under this section.
9. An application/affidavit for an accessory family dwelling unit shall
be filed annually with the Town Clerk and recorded in the Little
Compton Land Evidence Records. A copy shall also be placed on file
in the Office of the Building Official and the Office of the Assessors
of Taxes.
a. There shall be a single household detached dwelling on the lot, and the
operator of the customary home occupations shall occupy such dwelling
unit as his or her primary and legal residence and domicile.
b. There shall not be more than one such customary home occupation
accessory use per lot allowed by right. Two or more customary home
occupations shall require approval of a special use permit by the Board
pursuant to Subsection 14-9.5 of this chapter.
c. There shall not be more than two nonresident employees, associates or
partners.
§ 14-5.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-5.6
AO:179
d. There shall be no sale of commodities other than either those
principally created or repaired on the premises or related incidental
retail sales.
e. There shall be a twenty-five foot setback between any structure or
accessory structure containing a home occupation, including any
outdoor activity related to such home occupation, such as a driveway or
parking of vehicles, and the nearest adjoining lot line.
f. Visible alteration of the premises and any exterior display shall
maintain the residential character, and exterior signage shall conform
with the requirements of § 14-7 of this chapter.
g. There shall be off-street parking provided to meet the requirements of §
14-8 of this chapter, both for the principal residential use and for the
customary home occupation as a separate use.
h. All such customary home occupation accessory uses shall require a
zoning certificate from the Building Official and, if any construction is
required, a building permit.
i. The provisions of this section do not relieve the operator of the
requirement to obtain any and all other licenses and permits that may
be required by the Town, State or Federal Government for the operation
of the use.
j. All customary home occupation accessory uses shall comply with
Subsection 14-5.11, General Performance Standards for All Uses.
k. All customary home occupation accessory uses shall comply with
Chapter 3, § 3-1, Disturbing the Peace, of the Little Compton Code of
Ordinances.
l. Requirements for Specific Classes of Home Occupation Accessory Uses.
§ 14-5.6 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-5.6
AO:180
Use or Use Category
By Right
or Special
Use Permit Special Conditions
1. It shall be carried out in an accessory structure
such as a detached garage or barn and/or within the
principal residential structure using no more than
50% of the area of 1 floor.
2. Use of more than 50% of the area and more than
of 1 floor shall require a special use permit pursuant
to Subsection 14-9.5 of this chapter.
3. Customary home occupation shall cease in the
presence of any of the following circumstances:
(a) The proprietor-resident moves from the
premises.
(b) The customary home occupation is abandoned
as defined in Subsection 14-2.4h of this chapter.
(c) Any condition or requirement in Subsection
14-5.11, General Performance Standards for All
Uses, is violated.
(d) The customary home occupation is changed in
scope, intensity or character or is expanded beyond
that which is defined in this chapter.
a. Customary home
occupation limited to
activities customarily
carried out within a
residential structure or an
existing accessory
structure using only tools,
equipment or facilities
normally utilized within a
residence. Examples are
sewing, knitting, painting,
drawing, drafting,
individual tutoring or
instruction, handicraft
manufacture, small
instrument or small
appliance repair,
photography, telephone
answering or sales and
occupations of a similar
nature or intensity.
Y
4. There shall be no more than 5 trips per week by a
commercial vehicle for the delivery and/or pick-up of
material or commodities, excluding the US mail
service.
1. It shall be carried out in an accessory structure
such as a detached garage or barn and/or within the
principal residential structure using no more than
50% of the area of 1 floor.
b. Residential professional
art studio including a
studio operated by a
visual artist, designer, or
craftsperson, for the
purpose of creating and
teaching painting,
sculpture, visual and
industrial design,
ceramics, glass,
woodworking, and
occupations of a similar
nature and intensity.
Y
2. Use of more than 50% of the area and more than 1
floor shall require a special use permit pursuant to
Subsection 14-9.5 of this chapter.
§ 14-5.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-5.6
AO:181
Use or Use Category
By Right
or Special
Use Permit Special Conditions
3. Residential professional art studio shall cease in
the presence of any of the following circumstances:
(a) The proprietor-resident moves from the
premises.
(b) The residential professional art studio is
abandoned as defined in Subsection 14-2.4h.
(c) Any condition or requirement in Subsection
14-5.11, General Performance Standards for All
Uses, is violated.
(d) The residential professional art studio is
changed in scope, intensity or character or is
expanded beyond that which is defined in this
chapter.
4. Teaching of such arts or crafts shall be limited to 6
individual pupils at any 1 time and no more than 12
pupils in any twenty-four hour period.
5. There shall be no more than 5 trips per week by a
commercial vehicle for the delivery and/or pick-up of
material or commodities, excluding the US mail
service.
c. Residential professional
music and performing arts
studio including a studio
operated by a musician or
performing artist for the
purpose of creating and
teaching music, dance,
theater, and occupations
of a similar nature or
intensity.
S 1. It shall be carried out within an accessory
structure such as a detached garage or barn and/or
the principal residential structure.
§ 14-5.6 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-5.6
AO:182
Use or Use Category
By Right
or Special
Use Permit Special Conditions
2. Approval of any residential professional music and
performing arts studio may be subject to any special
conditions deemed necessary to assure compatibility
with neighboring development and the approval of
such a use shall expire upon the initiation of any of
the following circumstances:
(a) The proprietor-resident moves from the
premises.
(b) The residential professional music and
performing arts studio is abandoned as defined in
Subsection 14-2.4h.
(c) Any condition or requirement made in the grant
of approval and Subsection 14-5.11, General
Performance Standards for All Uses, is violated.
(d) The approved residential professional music
and performing arts studio is changed in scope,
intensity or character or is expanded beyond that
which was approved or defined in this chapter.
3. Teaching of such music and performing arts shall
be limited to 6 individual pupils at any 1 time and no
more than 12 pupils in any twenty-four-hour period.
4. There shall be no more than 5 trips per week by a
commercial vehicle for the delivery and/or pick-up of
material or commodities, excluding the US mail
service.
5. Approval shall be subject to compliance with
Chapter 3, § 3-1, Disturbing the Peace, of the Little
Compton Code of Ordinances.
d. Residential professional
photography studio
including a studio
operated by a
photographer, including
laboratory or darkroom
film developing and
processing and
occupations of a similar
nature or intensity.
S 1. It shall be carried out within an accessory
structure such as a detached garage or barn and/or
the principal residential structure.
§ 14-5.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-5.6
AO:183
Use or Use Category
By Right
or Special
Use Permit Special Conditions
2. Approval of any residential professional
photography studio may be subject to any special
conditions deemed necessary to assure compatibility
with neighboring development and the approval of
such a use shall expire upon the initiation of any of
the following circumstances:
(a) The proprietor-resident moves from the
premises.
(b) The residential professional photography studio
is abandoned as defined in Subsection 14-2.4h.
(c) Any condition or requirement made in the grant
of approval and Subsection 14-5.11, General
Performance Standards for All Uses, is violated.
(d) The approved residential professional
photography studio is changed in scope, intensity
or character or is expanded beyond that which was
approved or defined in this chapter.
3. There shall be no more than 5 trips per week by a
commercial vehicle for the delivery and/or pick-up of
material or commodities, excluding the US mail
service.
4. Approval of a residential professional photography
studio shall be based on the submission of a
management plan or procedure indicating the
storage of chemicals on site and the disposal of
wastes containing chemicals used in the photography
developing process.
1. It shall be carried out in an accessory structure
such as a detached garage or barn and/or within the
principal residential structure using no more than
50% of the area of 1 floor.
e. Residential professional
office including an office
operated by an attorney,
engineer, architect,
planner, accountant, real
estate agent or other
professional person
licensed by law or
certified by a recognized
professional organization
or society.
Y
2. Use of more than 50% of the area and more than 1
floor shall require a special use permit pursuant to
Subsection 14-9.5 of this chapter.
§ 14-5.6 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-5.6
AO:184
Use or Use Category
By Right
or Special
Use Permit Special Conditions
3. Residential professional office shall cease in the
presence of any of the following circumstances:
(a) The proprietor-resident moves from the
premises.
(b) The residential professional office is abandoned
as defined in Subsection 14-2h of this chapter.
(c) Any condition or requirement in Subsection
14-5.11, General Performance Standards for All
Uses, is violated.
(d) The residential professional office is changed in
scope, intensity or character or is expanded beyond
that which is defined in this chapter.
4. There shall be no more than 5 trips per week by a
commercial vehicle for the delivery and/or pick-up of
material or commodities, excluding the US mail
service.
1. It shall be carried out within an accessory
structure such as a detached garage or barn and/or
the principal residential structure.
f. Residential medical
professional office
including an office
operated by a physician,
surgeon, dentist,
optometrist, chiropractor,
osteopath, nurse or other
medical professional
licensed by law or
certified by a recognized
professional organization
or society.
S
2. Approval of any residential medical professional
office may be subject to any special conditions
deemed necessary to assure compatibility with
neighboring development and the approval of such a
use shall expire upon the initiation of any of the
following circumstances:
(a) The proprietor-resident moves from the
premises.
(b) The residential medical professional office is
abandoned as defined in Subsection 14-2.4h.
(c) Any condition or requirement made in the grant
of approval and Subsection 14-5.11, General
Performance Standards for All Uses, is violated.
(d) The approved residential medical professional
office is changed in scope, intensity or character or
is expanded beyond that which was approved or
defined in this chapter.
§ 14-5.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-5.6
AO:185
Use or Use Category
By Right
or Special
Use Permit Special Conditions
3. Approval of a residential medical professional
office shall be based on a submission of a
management plan or procedure indicating the
storage and use of related equipment such as devices
used for X-rays, laboratory testing, use of chemicals
on site and the disposal of medicinal wastes.
4. There shall be no more than 5 trips per week by a
commercial vehicle for the delivery and/or pick-up of
material or commodities, excluding the US mail
service.
1. It shall be carried out in an accessory structure
such as a detached garage or barn and/or within the
principal residential structure using no more than
50% of the area of 1 floor.
2. Use of more than 50% of the area and more than
one floor shall require a special use permit pursuant
to Subsection 14-9.5 of this chapter.
3. Residential professional business office shall cease
in the presence of any of the following
circumstances:
(a) The proprietor-resident moves from the
premises.
(b) The residential professional business office is
abandoned as defined in Subsection 14-2.4h.
(c) Any condition or requirement in Subsection
14-5.11, General Performance Standards for All
Uses, is violated.
(d) The residential professional business office is
changed in scope, intensity or character or is
expanded beyond that which is defined in this
chapter.
g. Residential professional
business office including
an office operated for
secretarial, consulting,
interior decorating,
transportation, delivery,
security, employment
services and business
office occupations of a
similar nature or intensity.
Y
4. There shall be no more than 5 trips per week by a
commercial vehicle for the delivery and/or pick-up of
material or commodities, excluding the US mail
service.
§ 14-5.6 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-5.6
AO:186
Use or Use Category
By Right
or Special
Use Permit Special Conditions
1. It shall be carried out in an accessory structure
such as a detached garage or barn and/or within the
principal residential structure using no more than
50% of the area of 1 floor.
2. Use of more than 50% of the area and more than 1
floor shall require a special use permit pursuant to
Subsection 14-9.5 of this chapter.
3. All other outdoor uses shall occupy not more than
50% of the lot area.
4. There shall be no more than 5 trips per week by a
commercial vehicle for the delivery and/or pick-up of
material or commodities, excluding the US mail
service.
5. There shall be no motor vehicle traffic, whether
delivery, customer or client, connected with the use,
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
h. Residential repair shop
for small appliances,
machinery, tools,
agricultural and marine
implements and repair
occupations of a similar
nature or intensity.
Y
6. All vehicles and equipment shall either be stored
inside a building or shall be screened by either a sixfoot
high fence and/or the equivalent visual barrier of
suitable landscaping.
1. It shall be carried out within an accessory
structure such as a detached garage or barn and/or
the principal residential structure.
i. Residential professional
landscape contractor
office, parking, or storage
area operated by a
landscaper, stonewall
mason, excavator and
occupations of a similar
nature or intensity.
S
2. All other outdoor uses shall occupy not more than
50% of the lot area.
§ 14-5.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-5.6
AO:187
Use or Use Category
By Right
or Special
Use Permit Special Conditions
3. Approval of any residential professional landscape
contractor office, parking, or storage area may be
subject to any special conditions deemed necessary
to assure compatibility with neighboring
development and the approval of such a use shall
expire upon the initiation of any of the following
circumstances:
(a) The proprietor-resident moves from the
premises.
(b) The residential professional landscape
contractor office, parking, or storage area is
abandoned as defined in Subsection 14-2.4h.
(c) Any condition or requirement made in the grant
of approval and Subsection 14-5.11, General
Performance Standards for All Uses, is violated.
(d) The approved residential professional landscape
contractor office, parking, or storage area is
changed in scope, intensity or character or is
expanded beyond that which was approved or
defined in this chapter.
4. There shall be no more than 5 trips per week by a
commercial vehicle for the delivery and/or pick-up of
material or commodities, excluding the US mail
service.
5. There shall be no motor vehicle traffic, whether
delivery, customer or client, connected with the use,
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
6. All vehicles and equipment shall either be stored
inside a building or shall be screened by either a sixfoot
high fence and/or the equivalent visual barrier of
suitable landscaping.
7. Approval shall be subject to compliance with
Chapter 3, § 3-1, Disturbing the Peace, of the Little
Compton Code of Ordinances.
§ 14-5.6 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-5.6
AO:188
Use or Use Category
By Right
or Special
Use Permit Special Conditions
1. It shall be carried out within an accessory
structure such as a detached garage or barn and/or
the principal residential structure.
2. Approval of any residential professional or
licensed building contractor or tradesman office,
workshop and parking area may be subject to any
special conditions deemed necessary to assure
compatibility with neighboring development and the
approval of such a use shall expire upon the initiation
of any of the following circumstances:
(a) The proprietor-resident moves from the
premises.
(b) The residential professional or licensed building
contractor or tradesman office, workshop and
parking area is abandoned as defined in Subsection
14-2.4h.
(c) Any condition or requirement made in the grant
of approval and Subsection 14-5.11, General
Performance Standards for All Uses, is violated.
(d) The approved residential professional or
licensed building contractor or tradesman office,
workshop and parking area is changed in scope,
intensity or character or is expanded beyond that
which was approved or defined in this chapter.
3. There shall be no more than 5 trips per week by a
commercial vehicle for the delivery and/or pick-up of
material or commodities, excluding the US mail
service.
4. There shall be no motor vehicle traffic, whether
delivery, customer or client, connected with the use,
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
j. Residential professional
or licensed building
contractor or tradesman
office, workshop and
parking area operated by
a carpenter, plumber,
welder, well driller,
electrician, woodworker,
mason, machinist or
occupations of a similar
nature or intensity.
S
5. All vehicles and equipment shall either be stored
inside a building or shall be screened by either a sixfoot
high fence and/or the equivalent visual barrier of
suitable landscaping.
6. Approval shall be subject to compliance with
Chapter 3, § 3-1, Disturbing the Peace, of the Little
Compton Code of Ordinances.
§ 14-5.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-5.7
AO:189
§ 14-5.7. Requirements for Automobile Service Stations. [Ord. 6/23/
94, Art. 5]
Automobile service stations shall be permitted as a special use permit
subject to the requirements of § 14-9 of this chapter, and only when all of
the following requirements are also met:
a. Lot Requirements.
1. Minimum lot size shall be 17,000 square feet.
2. Minimum lot depth shall be 130 feet.
3. Minimum lot width and frontage shall be 130 feet.
b. Requirements for Service Station Buildings.
1. Minimum setback from all street lines shall be 40 feet.
2. Minimum setback from all interior lot lines shall be 25 feet.
c. Requirements for Curb cuts.
1. Minimum distance between curb cuts shall be 20 feet.
2. Maximum width for any single curb cut shall be 25 feet.
d. Requirements for Other Structures.
1. Minimum setback between pump islands, compressed air
connections and similar equipment and any lot line shall be 25 feet.
2. Minimum setback between the canopy and the street line shall be
12 feet.
3. Minimum setback between any canopy and any interior lot line
shall be 25 feet.
e. Requirements for Underground Tanks.
1. Maximum storage capacity for petroleum products shall be 42,000
gallons.
2. Minimum separation distance required between underground
tanks, adjoining buildings and property lines shall be 50 feet.
Service station buildings are exempt from the separation distance
requirement if there are no basements or pits that extend below the
top of any tank within the separation distance.
f. Requirements for Repairing and Washing Vehicles. Repairing shall be
limited to minor repair work, such as tire or tube repairing, battery
charging, lubrication, engine tune-ups and similar type work, and must
be conducted wholly within a building. Storage of all merchandise, auto
parts and supplies shall be conducted wholly within a building. If
washing of vehicles occurs inside or outside a building, the entire
§ 14-5.7 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-5.7
AO:190
§ 14-5.8. Water Bodies and Wetlands. [Ord. 6/23/94, Art. 5; Ord. 6/
21/01; Ord. 5/31/06; Ord. 9/21/06]
The following are minimum requirements mandated by this chapter. All
other requirements of any other Town agency or commission, the State of
Rhode Island, or of the United States of America shall also be met.
washing area shall be paved and all the water used in such washing
shall be properly drained on-site in compliance with all Rhode Island
Department of Environmental Management regulations, and with no
run-off onto the public right-of-way. All outdoor activities shall be
screened an adjoining R zone by a four-foot high compact evergreen
screen or tight board fence.
a. New Subdivisions: Setbacks from Water Bodies and Wetlands. For all
lots created after the effective date of this subsection, no building,
structure or septic system may be located within 100 feet of any
freshwater or coastal wetland as defined by the Rhode Island
Department of Environmental Management and/or the Coastal
Resources Management Council. Administrative subdivisions shall be
excluded from this provision. For the purposes of this section the term
freshwater wetlands excludes from the definition, Areas Subject to
Storm Flowage (ASSF) and the land area within 50 feet of any
freshwater wetland, defined by DEM as the perimeter wetland and
commonly referred to as the wetland buffer zone. Boat sheds, piers,
bathhouses, cabanas, fences and similar structures are exempt from
these setback provisions.
b. Lots of Record: Administrative Approval. In order to minimize the
impact to the wetland on lots of record existing as of the effective date
of this subsection, no building, structure or septic system shall be
installed within the 100-foot wetland buffer without first obtaining an
administrative approval from the Building Official. The Building Official
may issue an administrative approval, and where applicable a building
permit, for a septic system, building or structure between the 50 foot
RIDEM wetland buffer and the 100-foot Little Compton wetland buffer,
where due to site constraints and/or the configuration of the lot, the
septic system, building or structure cannot meet the requirements of
Subsection a above. Prior to issuing the administrative approval or
building permit, the Building Official must determine that the following
standards have been met. Boat sheds, piers, bathhouses, cabanas,
fences and similar structures are exempt from these setback provisions.
All administrative approvals shall be posted at Town Hall for a period of
10 days.
1. Septic Systems.
(a) The septic system design has been approved by RIDEM and
once in use, will not pose a threat to the public health and
safety nor cause any degradation of ground or any surface
§ 14-5.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-5.8
AO:191
water quality, including adverse effect due to cumulative
impact.
(b) An enhanced on-site wastewater treatment system, approved
by RIDEM, must be installed in order to remove either
increased pathogens and/or nitrogen as determined on a case
by case basis by the Building Official based upon the adjacent
wetland resource.
(c) The type of septic system to be installed must be accepted by
the Rhode Island Onsite Wastewater Training Center or
RIDEM as capable of meeting the following performance
standards:
(1) Denitrification. Minimum total nitrogen removal of 50% or
a reduction to 19 mg/l, and biochemical oxygen demand
and total suspended solids each reduced to less than or
equal to 30 mg/l; all as measured at the outlet of the
treatment unit prior to discharge to a drain field.
(2) Pathogen. Reduces fecal coliform to less than or equal to
1,000 fecal coliform counts/100ml and reduces
biochemical oxygen demand and total suspended solids to
less than or equal to 10 mg/l as measured at the outlet of
the treatment unit prior to discharge to a drain field.
(d) The septic system must be located as far from the water body,
stream, river, shoreline, coastal/tidal wetlands and/or
freshwater wetlands as is practical in the context of the lot.
The RIDEM-verified wetland edge must be shown on the site
plan.
(e) Where, due to site constraints and/or lot configuration, it is
impossible to locate the septic system both 100 feet from a
drinking water well and 100 feet from the wetland, the
distance from the septic system to the well shall be maximized
even if it means constructing the septic system closer to the
wetland.
2. Buildings, Structures and ISDS.
(a) The applicant has provided an erosion and sediment control
plan that also depicts the demarcation of the undisturbed
wetland buffer.
(b) There shall be no net increase in off-site run-off.
(c) Where, due to site constraints and/or lot configuration, it is
impossible to locate both the septic system and the house 100
feet from wetland, the distance from the wetland to the septic
system shall be maximized.
§ 14-5.8 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-5.8
AO:192
c. Failed Systems. Persons with a failed ISDS as defined by RIDEM, within
the 100-foot wetland buffer shall notify the Building Official prior to the
repair or replacement of the system. System repairs that include
replacement of the drainfield shall be subject to the following
performance standards:
1. An enhanced on-site wastewater treatment system, approved by
RIDEM, must be installed in order to remove either increased
pathogens and/or nitrogen as determined on a case by case basis
by the Building Official based upon the adjacent wetland resource.
2. The type of ISDS to be installed must be accepted by the Rhode
Island Onsite Wastewater Training Center or RIDEM as capable of
meeting the following treatment standards. Discharge to a shallow
drainfield shall be required where technically feasible.
Denitrification. Minimum total nitrogen removal of 50% or a
reduction to 19mg/l, and biochemical oxygen demand and total
suspended solids each reduced to less than or equal to 30 mg/l; all
as measured at the outlet of the treatment unit prior to discharge
to a drain field.
Pathogen. Reduces fecal coliform to less than or equal to 1,000
fecal coliform counts/100ml and reduces biochemical oxygen
demand and total suspended solids to less than or equal to 10 mg/
l as measured at the outlet of the treatment unit prior to discharge
to a drain field.
3. The owner is encouraged to locate the septic system as far away
from the wetland as practical within the context of the lot.
d. ISDS Alterations and Upgrades. An ISDS alteration or upgrade within
the 100-foot buffer, required because of improvements to the home and
associated with a RIDEM System Suitability Determination, must
comply with the performance standards in Subsection c above. In
addition the applicant must provide a soil and erosion control plan.
e. Technical Review and Assistance.
1. The contracted services of professionals with expertise in
enhanced onsite wastewater treatment systems, soils, and site plan
review shall be made available to the Building Official by the Town
on an as needed basis.
2. A list and schematic drawings of treatment systems that meet the
treatment standards of Subsection 14-5.8b1(c) of this subsection
shall be kept on file in the Building Official's Office.
3. Guidelines for determining whether an enhanced nitrogen and/or
enhanced pathogen removal system is required shall be kept on file
in the Building Official's Office. In general, denitrification will be
§ 14-5.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-5.8
AO:193
required only when the system is within the buffer of a coastal
wetland.
f. Maintenance. All enhanced onsite wastewater treatment systems shall
be regularly inspected and maintained. A maintenance contract shall be
required on any system with mechanical components such as pumps,
timers and alarms. The owner shall provide a copy of said contract and
subsequent renewals to the Building Official.
g. Fees.
1. The applicant for an administrative determination, building permit
or special use permit under this section shall be charged an
administrative fee as listed in the schedule of fees, which shall be
kept on file in the Building Official's Office.
2. In addition to the administrative fee the applicant shall bear
additional costs that may be incurred by the Town in conjunction
with its evaluation of the application.
h. New Subdivisions. The Zoning Board of Review may issue a special use
permit allowing an exception to Subsection a hereof for a new
subdivision which results in the creation of no more than one additional
lot, with no potential for further subdivision, and otherwise in
accordance with § 2.2.2(a) of the Little Compton Subdivision
Regulations. In order for the Zoning Board of Review to grant a special
use permit, the applicant must demonstrate that the proposal meets the
standards of Subsection 14-5.8b and the general conditions for the
granting of a special use permit as per Subsection 14-9.5 of this
chapter. The fact that the granting of a special use permit would result
in less expense to the applicant in implementing a permitted use shall
not be used by the Zoning Board of Review as a justification for
granting the permit or by the Building Official in issuing a building
permit or an administrative approval.
i. Freshwater Wetlands. No freshwater wetland or associated areas as
defined by Title 2, Chapter 1 of the General Laws of Rhode Island, as
amended, shall be excavated, drained, filled or otherwise disturbed.
Nor shall any extraneous materials be placed into such wetland, or
water flow diverted out of such wetland. Neither shall any other change
or alteration be made to the natural condition of such wetland without a
permit issued by the Rhode Island Department of Environmental
Management under rules promulgated pursuant to said Title 2, Chapter
1.
j. Coastal Resources. In any coastal area subject to the jurisdiction of the
Rhode Island Coastal Resource Management Council, no construction
of any building or structure and no alteration by filling, excavation or
alteration of the natural land forms will be permitted without the
approval of said Council.
§ 14-5.8 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-5.9
AO:194
§ 14-5.9. Special Flood Hazard Areas. [6/23/94, Art. 5; Ord. 5/6/99,
§ 4; Ord. 3/18/10; Ord. 7/25/13]
The purpose of this subsection is to ensure public safety; minimize hazards
to persons and property from flooding, to protect watercourses from
encroachment, and to maintain the capability of floodplains to retain and
carry off floodwaters. The Town of Little Compton elects to comply with the
requirements of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as
amended).
a. Applicability.
1. Special Flood Hazard Areas. The Special Flood Hazard Areas are
herein established as a floodplain overlay district. The district
includes all special flood hazard areas within the Town of Little
Compton designated as Zone A, AE, AH, AO, A99, V, or VE on the
Newport County Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and Digital
FIRM issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) for the administration of the National Flood Insurance
Program. The map panels of the Newport County FIRM that are
wholly or partially within the Town of Little Compton are panel
numbers: 4405C0116H, 4405C0117H, 4405C0118H, 4405C0136H
dated April 5, 2010 and; 4405C0112J, 4405C0114J, 4405C0119J
4405C0138J, 4405CO202J, 4405CO204J, 4405CO206J,
4405CO207J, 4405CO208J, and 4405CO226J dated September 4,
2013. The exact boundaries of the district may be defined by the
100-year base flood elevations shown on the FIRM and further
defined by the Newport County Flood Insurance Study (FIS) report
dated September 4, 2013. The Office of the Building Official is
responsible for floodplain management. The FIRM and FIS report
and any revisions thereto are incorporated herein by reference and
are on file with the Town Clerk and the Building Official, both
located a 40 Commons, Little Compton, Rhode Island. In addition,
the Town of Little Compton's website shall include links to the
FIRMs including Plat and Lot Zones.
b. Administrative Provisions.
1. Building Permit. All proposed construction or other development
within a Special Flood Hazard Area shall require a permit.
The National Flood Insurance Program Special Flood Hazard Area
requires permits for all projects that meet the definition of
development, not just "building" projects. Development projects
include any filling, grading, excavating, mining, drilling, storage of
materials, temporary stream crossings. If the construction or other
development within a Special Flood Hazard Area is not covered
by a building permit, all other nonstructural activities shall be
permitted by either the Rhode Island Coastal Resources
Management Council and/or the Rhode Island Department of
Environmental Management as applicable. Therefore if another
§ 14-5.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-5.9
AO:195
State agency issues a permit, the local Building Official must have
the opportunity for input and keep a copy of the respective permit
in their files.
Prior to the issuance of a building or development permit, the
applicant shall submit evidence that all necessary permits and
approvals have been received from all government agencies from
which approval is required by Federal or State law, including the
Town of Little Compton Zoning Ordinance.
A permit fee (based on the cost of the construction) may be
required to be paid to the Town of Little Compton and a copy of a
receipt for the same shall accompany the application. An additional
fee may be charged if the Code Enforcement Officer and/or Zoning
Board of Review needs the assistance of a professional engineer.
2. Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by
the subsection is considered reasonable but does not imply total
flood protection.
3. Severability. If any section, provision, or portion of this subsection
is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court, the remainder of
the subsection shall not be affected.
4. Abrogation and Greater Restriction. This ordinance shall not in any
way impair/remove the necessity of compliance with any other
applicable laws, ordinances, regulations, etc. Where this ordinance
imposes a greater restriction, the provisions of this subsection shall
control.
5. Enforcement. The Building Official shall enforce all provisions as
applicable in reference to RIGL § 23-27.3-108.1.
6. Penalties. Every person who shall violate any provision of this
ordinance shall be subject to penalties put forth in RIGL
§ 23-27.3-122.3.
c. Notification of Watercourse Alteration.
1. In a riverine situation, the Building Official shall notify the
following of any alteration or relocation of a watercourse.
Adjacent Communities (Tiverton, RI and Westport, MA)
NFIP State Coordinator
Rhode Island Emergency Management Agency
645 New London Avenue
Cranston, RI 02920
§ 14-5.9 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-5.9
AO:196
Risk Analysis Branch
Federal Emergency Management Agent, Region I
99 High Street, 6th Floor
Boston, MA 02110
The carrying capacity of the altered or relocated watercourse
shall be maintained.
d. Use Regulations.
1. Reference to Existing Regulations. The Special Flood Hazard Areas
are established as a floodplain overlay district. All development in
the district, including structural and nonstructural activities,
whether permitted by right or by special permit must be in
compliance with the following:
(a) Rhode Island State Building Code (as established under Rhode
Island General Law § 23-27.3)
(b) Coastal Resources Management Act, Rhode Island Coastal
Resource Management Council (RIGL § 46-23)
(c) Freshwater Wetlands Act, Rhode Island Department of
Environmental Management (RIGL § 2-1-18)
(d) Minimum Standards Related to Individual Sewage Disposal
Systems, Rhode Island Department of Environmental
Management (RIGL § 5-56, 5-56.1, 23-19.15, 23-19.5, 23-24.3,
42-17.1 and 46-13.2)
(e) Town of Little Compton Zoning Ordinance, Subsection 14-5.8
Water Bodies and Wetlands.
(f) Endangered Species Act, Rhode Island Department of
Environmental Management (RIGL § 20-1-2)
(g) Water Quality Regulations, Rhode Island Department of
Environmental Management (RIGL § 42-17.1 and 42-17.6 and
46-12)
Any variances from the provisions and requirements of the above
referenced State regulations may only be granted in accordance with
the required variance procedures of these State regulations.
2. Other Use Regulations.
(a) Within Zones AH and AO on the FIRM, adequate drainage
paths must be provided around structures on slopes, to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
§ 14-5.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-5.9
AO:197
(b) Within Zones AO on the FIRM, new and substantially improved
residential structures shall have the top of the lowest floor at
least as high as the FIRM's depth number above the highest
adjacent grade and nonresidential structures shall be elevated
or flood-proofed above the highest adjacent grade to at least as
high as the depth number on the FIRM. On FIRMs without a
depth number for the AO Zone, structures shall be elevated or
flood-proofed to at least two feet above the highest adjacent
grade.
(c) In Zones A1-30 and AE, along watercourses that have a
regulatory floodway designated on the Newport County FIRM
encroachments are prohibited in the regulatory floodway,
which would result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(d) All subdivision proposals must be designed to assure that:
(1) Such proposals minimize flood damage;
(2) All public utilities and facilities are located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and
(3) Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
(e) Detached accessory structures in Zones A, AE, A1- 30, AO, and
AH (i.e., garages, sheds) do not have to meet the elevation or
dry flood-proofing requirement if one or more of the following
standards are met:
(1) The structure has a value less than $1,000.
(2) The structure has unfinished interiors and must not be
used for human habitation. An apartment, office or other
finished space over a detached garage is considered
human habitation and would require the structure to be
elevated.
(3) The structure is used solely for parking of vehicles and/or
limited storage.
(4) The accessory must be wet flood-proofed and designed to
allow for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater.
(5) The accessory structure shall be firmly anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
(6) Service facilities such as electrical, mechanical and
heating equipment must be elevated or flood-proofed to or
above the base flood elevation.
§ 14-5.9 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-5.9
AO:198
(7) The structure must not increase the flood levels in the
floodway.
(8) The structure is not in the floodway.
(9) The structure is not used for storage of hazardous
materials.
(f) Existing contour intervals of site and elevations of existing
structures must be included on plan proposal.
(g) No person shall change from business/commercial to
residential use of any structure or property located in the
floodway of a Special Flood Hazard Area so as to result in a use
or expansion that could increase the risk to the occupants.
(h) The space below the lowest floor:
(1) Free of obstructions as described in FEMA Technical
Bulletin 5 "Free of Obstruction Requirements for Buildings
Located in Coastal High Hazard Area in Accordance with
the National Flood Insurance Program;" or
(2) Constructed with open wood lattice-work, or insect
screening intended to collapse under wind and water
without causing collapse, displacement, or other
structural damage to the elevated portion of the building
or supporting piles or columns; or
(3) Designed with an enclosed area less than 300 square feet
that is constructed with nonsupporting breakaway walls
that have a design safe loading resistance of not less than
10 or more than 20 pounds per square foot.
3. Variance Regulations. Where strict application of the requirements
of this subsection would create an undue hardship, the Zoning
Board of Review, in accordance with the procedures outlined in §
14-9 of this chapter, may grant a variance from the application of
the provisions of this subsection. In granting such a variance, in
addition to such provisions, the Board of Review shall grant the
least variance required to reduce said hardship and, further, shall:
(a) Make a written decision containing findings that strict
compliance with said provision(s) would result in undue
hardship that is confiscatory in extent and would prevent all
beneficial use of the land or structure.
(b) Describe in its written decision the exact extent of the variance
granted.
(c) Indicate in its written decision that the grant of said variance
may affect the flood insurance rates as they apply to the
subject property.
§ 14-5.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-5.9
AO:199
(d) Forward a copy of its written decision to the applicant, the
Building Official and the Statewide Planning Program of the
State of Rhode Island.
4. Base Flood Elevation and Floodway Data.
(a) Floodway Data. In Zones A, A1-30, and AE, along watercourses
that have not had a regulatory floodway designated, the best
available Federal, State, local, or other floodway data shall be
used to prohibit encroachments in floodways which would
result in any increase in flood levels within the community
during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(b) Base Flood Elevation Data. Base flood elevation data is
required for subdivision proposals or other developments
greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is the lesser, within
unnumbered A zones.
(c) Base Flood Elevations in A Zones. In the absence of FEMA BFE
data and floodway data, the best available Federal, State, local,
or other BFE or floodway data shall be used as the basis for
elevating residential and nonresidential structures to or above
the base flood level and for flood proofing nonresidential
structures to or above the base flood level.
e. Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used
in this ordinance pertain to floodplain management, have the same
meaning as they have in common usage to give this ordinance most
reasonable application. The definitions found below shall prevail for all
properties located within a Special Flood Hazard Area.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — Shall mean a structure which is on the
same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the
use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — Shall mean designated AO, AH, AR/
AO, AR/AH, or VO Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) with a 1% or greater annual chance of flooding to an average
depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not
exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity
flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet
flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — See definition for "Special Flood
Hazard Area."
BASE FLOOD — Shall mean the flood having a 1% chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — Shall mean the elevation of the
crest of the base flood or 100-year flood. The height, as established
in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or
other datum where specified), in relation to mean sea level expected to
§ 14-5.9 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-5.9
AO:200
be reached by the waters of the base flood at pertinent points in the
floodplains of coastal and riverine areas.
BASEMENT — Shall mean any area of the building having its floor sub
grade (below ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING — See definition for "Structure."
COASTAL A ZONE — Shall mean area within a special flood hazard
area, landward of a V Zone or landward of an open coast without
mapped V Zones. The principal source of flooding must be astronomical
tides, storm surges, seiches, or tsunamis, not riverine flooding. During
the base flood conditions, the potential for breaking wave height shall
be greater than or equal to 1.5 feet.
COST — Shall mean as related to substantial improvements, the cost of
any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, alteration, repair or other
improvement of a structure shall be established by a detailed written
contractor's estimate. The estimate shall include, but not be limited to:
the cost of materials (interior finishing elements, structural elements,
utility and service equipment); sales tax on materials, building
equipment and fixtures, including heating and air conditioning and
utility meters; labor; built-in appliances; demolition and site
preparation; repairs made to damaged parts of the building worked on
at the same time; contractor's overhead; contractor's profit and grand
total. Items to be excluded include: cost of plans and specifications,
survey costs, permit fees, costs to correct code violations subsequent to
a violation notice, outside improvements such as septic systems, water
supply wells, landscaping, sidewalks, fences, yard lights, irrigation
systems, and detached structures such as garages, sheds, and gazebos.
DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean any man-made change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including but not limited to the construction of
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED
HOME SUBDIVISION — Shall mean a manufactured home park or
manufactured home subdivision for which the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including, as a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION — Shall mean the
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufacturing homes are to be affixed
(including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
§ 14-5.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-5.9
AO:201
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) — Shall
mean the Federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP).
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — Shall mean the official
map of a community on which the Federal Insurance Administrator
has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium
zones applicable to a community. A FIRM that has been made available
digitally is called a Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM).
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — Shall mean the official study of
a community in which the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) has conducted a technical engineering evaluation and
determination of local flood hazards, flood profiles and water surface
elevations. The Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), which accompany
the FIS, provide both flood insurance rate zones and base flood
elevations, and may provide the regulatory floodway limits.
FLOOD OR FLOODING — Shall mean a general and temporary
condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas
from either the overflow of inland or tidal waters, or the unusual and
rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD PROOFING — Shall mean any combination of structural and
nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which
reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real
property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — Shall mean the channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than a designated height. For the purposes of these
regulations, the term "regulatory floodway" is synonymous in meaning
with the term "floodway."
FREEBOARD — Shall mean a factor of safety usually expressed in feet
above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard"
tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could
contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a
selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge
openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE OR FACILITY — Shall mean a use
or facility that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located
or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only
docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair
facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG) — Shall mean the highest natural
elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the
proposed walls of a structure.
§ 14-5.9 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-5.9
AO:202
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Shall mean any structure that is: (a) Listed
individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (b)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
contributing to the historic significance of a registered historic district
or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a
registered historic district; (c) Individually listed on a state inventory of
historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have
been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (d) Individually listed
on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either: (1) by an
approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior
or (2) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
LIMIT OF MODERATE WAVE ACTION (LIMWA) — Shall mean an
advisory line indicating the limit of the 1.5-foot wave height during the
base flood.
LOWEST FLOOR — Shall mean the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed
area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure,
usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's
lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not building so as to
render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design
requirements of this ordinance.
MANUFACTURED HOME — Shall mean a structure, transportable in
one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is
designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when
attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does
not include a "recreational vehicle."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — Shall mean a parcel or contiguous parcels of land
divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MARKET VALUE — Shall mean the price of a structure that a willing
buyer and seller agree upon. This can be determined by an independent
appraisal by a professional appraiser; the property's tax assessment,
minus land value; the replacement cost minus depreciation of the
structure; the structure's actual cash value.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Shall mean structures for which the "start
of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial
FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain
management purposes, new construction means structures for which
the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date
of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
§ 14-5.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-5.9
AO:203
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — Shall mean a manufactured home park or
manufactured home subdivision for which the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain
regulations adopted by the community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Shall mean a vehicle which is: (a) built
on a single chassis; (b) 400 square feet or less when measured at
the largest horizontal projection; (c) designed to be self-propelled or
permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (d) designed primarily
not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary living quarters
for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — See definition for "Floodway."
SHEET FLOW AREA — See definition for "Area of shallow flooding."
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — Shall mean the land in
the floodplain within a community subject to a 1% or greater chance
of flooding in any given year. After detailed ratemaking has been
completed in preparation for publication of the flood insurance rate
map, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99,
AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, or V1-30, VE or V. For
purposes of these regulations, the term "special flood hazard area" is
synonymous in meaning with the phrase "area of special flood hazard."
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Shall mean for other than new
construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier
Resources Act (P.L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and
means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual
start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition
placement, substantial improvement or other improvement was within
180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as
the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/
or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundations or the erections of temporary forms; nor does it
include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such
as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of
the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of
construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — For floodplain management purposes, a walled and
roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is
§ 14-5.9 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-5.9
AO:204
§ 14-5.10. Availability of Water Supply. [Ord. 6/23/94, Art. 5]
No building permit, other than a foundation permit, shall be issued for
the construction of a building which would necessitate the use of water
therein, unless a well providing a safe and adequate supply of water is
principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. For
insurance purposes, means:
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Shall mean damage of any origin sustained
by a structure, whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its predamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Shall mean any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, additions or other improvements to a structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure
before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term
includes structures that have incurred "substantial damage,"
regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either: (1) any project to correct existing violations
of State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local Code Enforcement Official and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or (2) any
alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not
preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure."
VARIANCE — Shall mean a grant of relief by a community from the
terms of the floodplain management ordinance that allows construction
in a manner otherwise prohibited and where specific enforcement
would result in unnecessary hardship.
VIOLATION — Shall mean failure of a structure or other development
to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management
ordinance. A structure or other development without required permits,
lowest floor elevation documentation, flood-proofing certificates or
required floodway encroachment calculations is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
A building with two or more outside rigid walls and a fully secured
roof, that is affixed to a permanent site;
1.
A manufactured home ("a manufactured home," also known as
a mobile home, is a structure; built on permanent chassis,
transported to its site in one or more sections, and affixed to a
permanent foundation); or
2.
A travel trailer without wheels, built on a chassis and affixed to
a permanent foundation, that is regulated under the community's
floodplain management and building ordinances or laws. For the
latter purpose, "structure" does not mean recreational vehicle or
a park trailer or other similar vehicle, except as described in
Subsection (3) of this definition, or a gas or liquid storage tank.
3.
§ 14-5.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-5.10
AO:205
legally existent, either on the subject lot or on a neighboring lot if such well
meets all local and State requirements. Satisfactory proof of the right to use
the well shall be furnished.
§ 14-5.11. General Performance Standards For All Uses. [Ord. 6/23/
94, Art. 5; Ord. 5/6/99, § 5]
a. General Requirements. The Building Official in issuing a permit or the
Zoning Board of Review in granting a special use permit for the
development or extension of any use may, if appropriate, require the
submission of affidavits or other evidence that the applicant will
observe the standards of performance set forth in this section. All uses
of land are required to comply with these standards and any
noncompliance with said standards will be considered a violation of this
chapter. The Building Official is hereby authorized to have
measurements made of any characteristic covered in these standards to
determine compliance with said standards.
b. Noise. No use shall emit noise which exceeds the requirements of that
part of Chapter 3, entitled Excessive Noise Prohibited, of the Code of
Ordinances of the Town of Little Compton.
c. Air Pollution. Smoke and other airborne emissions of all uses shall
conform to the standards of the "Air Pollution Control Regulations" of
the Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management, issued
under the authority of Title 23, Chapter 25 of the General Laws of
Rhode Island, as amended. Said regulations are hereby incorporated as
part of this chapter.
d. Radiation Emission. No use shall cause the emission of radiation which
exceeds the safe limits established in the rules and regulations of the
United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission or any other agency of
competent jurisdiction. These limits shall apply to emissions from
radioactive materials and wastes, electromagnetic radiation, x-ray
radiation, microwave radiation and other forms of radiation which
present a potential hazard to the health of employees or residents
within or abutting the use.
e. Heat and Glare. No use shall generate heat and/or glare, other than
that associated with illumination, which can be recorded at the
property line of the use. Any exterior illumination of any building,
structure or site shall be oriented so that it reflects light away from any
public highway or adjacent property.
f. Vibration. No use shall generate vibration which is discernible to the
human sense of feeling at the property line of the use or activity for a
cumulative total of three minutes or more duration in any hour between
7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. or for a cumulative total of 30 seconds or more
in any hour between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
§ 14-5.10 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-5.11
AO:206
§ 14-5.12. Wireless Communications Facilities (WCF) [Ord. 5/6/99,
§ 7]
g. Sewage and Liquid Waste Disposal. No discharge of sewage or other
liquid waste shall be permitted into any stream, wetland or other water
body. The Building Official or the Zoning Board of Review, where
appropriate, will require certification from the Rhode Island
Department of Environmental Management that the design of any
disposal system will provide for the proper, safe and sanitary disposal of
any sewage or other liquid waste. The Building Official or Zoning Board
of Review, upon the advice of said department, may require the
pretreatment of liquid waste prior to discharge into the disposal system
or may require that such liquid waste be transported to an approved
treatment or disposal facility in a manner complying with all applicable
State and Federal requirements.
h. Water Supply. The approval of the development or extension of any use
of land will be conditioned upon the submission of evidence of the
availability of a safe and adequate water supply sufficient to meet the
sanitary and processing needs of the intended use or extension. (See
also Subsection 14-5.10.)
i. Solid Waste. The Building Official or the Zoning Board of Review, where
appropriate, may condition the development or extension of any use of
land upon the submission of evidence that any solid waste generated by
such use of land will be stored and disposed of in a manner complying
with all Town, State and Federal requirements. Under no conditions will
the storage or disposal of hazardous waste be authorized or permitted
by any use in the Town of Little Compton.
a. Purpose and Goals. The purpose of this section to minimize the visual
and environmental impacts of wireless communications facilities
(WCFs), by enabling the review and approval of WCFs in keeping with
this Zoning Ordinance and existing patterns of development in Little
Compton, including the size and spacing of structures and open spaces.
The regulation of WCFs is consistent with the purposes of the Little
Compton Comprehensive Community Plan to further the conservation
and preservation of developed, natural and undeveloped areas, wildlife,
flora and habitats for endangered species; the preservation of coastal
resources; protection of the natural resources of Little Compton;
balanced economic growth; the provision of adequate capital facilities;
the coordination of the provision of adequate capital facilities; and the
preservation of historical and cultural values.
b. Definitions.
1. ANTENNA ARRAY – Shall mean one or more rods, panels, discs or
similar devices used for the transmission or reception of radio
frequency signals, which may include omnidirectional antenna
(rod), directional antenna (panel) and parabolic antenna (disc). The
§ 14-5.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-5.12
AO:207
antenna array does not include the support structure defined
below.
2. ATTACHED WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY (ATTACHED
WCF) – Shall mean an antenna array that is attached to an existing
building or structure (attachment structure), which structures shall
include but not be limited to utility poles, signs, water towers, with
any accompanying pole or device (attachment device) which
attaches the antenna array to the existing building or structure and
associated connection cables, and an equipment facility which may
be located either inside or outside of the attachment structure.
3. COLOCATION/SITE SHARING – Shall mean use of a common WCF
or common site by two or more wireless license holders or by one
wireless license holder for more than one type of communications
technology and/or placement of a WCF on a structure owned or
operated by a utility or other public entity.
4. EQUIPMENT FACILITY – Shall mean any structure used to contain
ancillary equipment for a WCF which includes cabinets, shelters, a
buildout of an existing structure, pedestals, and other similar
structures.
5. HEIGHT – When referring to a WCF, shall mean the distance
measured from grade to the highest point on the WCF, including
the antenna array (see also § 14-10b51 of this chapter).
6. SETBACK – Shall mean the required distance from the property
line of the lot on which the WCF is located to the support structure
(see also § 14-10b90 of this chapter).
7. SUPPORT STRUCTURE – Shall mean a structure designed and
constructed specifically to support an antenna array, and may
include a monopole, self-supporting (lattice) tower, guywire
support tower and other similar structures. Any device (attachment
device) which is used to attach an attached WCF to an existing
building or structure (attachment structure) shall be excluded from
the definition of and regulations applicable to support structures.
8. TEMPORARY WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY
(TEMPORARY WCF) – Shall mean a WCF to be placed in use for 90
or fewer days.
9. WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS – Shall mean any personal
wireless services as defined in the Telecommunications Act of
1996, which includes FCC licensed commercial wireless
telecommunications services including cellular, personal
communication services (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR),
enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging and similar
services that currently exist or that may in the future be developed.
§ 14-5.12 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-5.12
AO:208
10. WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY (WCF) – Shall mean any
unstaffed facility for the transmission and/or reception of wireless
telecommunications services, usually consisting of an antenna
array, connection cables, an equipment facility, and a support
structure to achieve the necessary elevation.
c. Applicability. No WCF shall be erected, constructed, altered or
maintained on any lot within the Town after May 6, 1999, without
complying with the terms of this section. Nothing herein shall be
deemed to prohibit or regulate any public antenna or WCF used in the
exercise of a governmental function, or any amateur radio facility that
is owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station
operator or is used exclusively for receive-only antennas. Pre-existing
WCFs for which a permit has been issued prior to the effective date of
this section shall not be required to meet the requirements herein. This
section shall supersede all conflicting requirements of other codes and
ordinances regarding the locating and permitting of WCFs.
d. Use-General. WCFs are permitted in all zones, subject to the following
limitations, prohibitions and conditions:
1. Attached WCFs and equipment facilities that are proposed to be
attached and located within an existing building are permitted by
right and may apply to the Building Official, subject to application
requirements provided herein.
2. WCFs requiring one or more new support structures or any
equipment facility requiring a new structure or any temporary WCF
shall be subject to a special use permit, as provided in Article 9
generally, and specifically in Subsection 14-9.5 of this Ordinance.
3. All WCFs, support structures and equipment facilities are further
subject to the use limitations, application requirements, submission
documentation, dimensional standards, and performance
standards as provided in this section.
e. Use Limitations.
1. Prohibited in certain locations. WCFs are prohibited on any lot west
of West Main Road, south to and including both sides of Sakonnet
Point Road; both sides of Warren's Point Road, and easterly to
Briggs Marsh, and from there, any lot located within one-half mile
of the south shoreline extending easterly to the Little Compton
Town line.
2. Commons. WCFs are prohibited on any lot located within a
1,500-foot radius measured from a point at the western tip of Pike's
Peak.
f. Application Requirements. An application for a permit to construct,
install or erect a WCF (temporary or otherwise), or to install, mount or
erect an attached WCF, shall be subject to a building permit, an
§ 14-5.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-5.12
AO:209
electrical permit, payment of all permit and inspection fees to the
Town of Little Compton, posting of a bond to support the removal of a
WCF upon abandonment (in accordance with Subsection k below) and
proof of ownership of the land upon which the WCF is proposed to be
constructed, installed, erected, mounted or attached or a copy of an
appropriate easement, lease, or rental agreement.
g. Submission Documentation - Attached WCFs. Each applicant
requesting a permit for an attached WCF or an equipment facility
within an existing structure (with no new structure proposed) shall
submit to the Building Official a report prepared by a professional radio
frequency engineer, with the following information:
1. A description of the WCF and the technical, economic and other
reasons for its design;
2. A description of the capacity of the WCF including the number and
type of transmitters and receivers that it can accommodate and the
basis for the calculation of capacity;
3. Demonstration that the WCF proposal complies with this section;
and
4. Any other information required by the Building Official to
determine compliance with the State Building Code, the Zoning
Ordinance and other applicable local, State and Federal laws.
h. Submission Documentation - Unattached WCFs. Each applicant
requesting a special use permit for WCFs requiring one or more new
support structure(s) or a new equipment facility and any temporary
WCF shall submit, in addition to the documentation described in
Subsection g above, a site plan prepared by a Professional Engineer
(PE) registered in the State of Rhode Island, which shall include a
scaled plan at one inch equals 40 feet or larger, with existing and
proposed topography at two-foot contour intervals (limited to areas of
proposed disturbance) and a scaled elevation with other supporting
drawings, calculations and other relevant documentation to the Zoning
Board of Review, that shows the following:
1. The location and dimensions (including height) of the WCFs
support structure and equipment facility;
2. Accessory building(s) for switching equipment;
3. Fencing, landscaping and screening;
4. Access and parking;
5. Lighting;
6. Areas to be cleared of vegetation and trees;
7. Site boundaries;
§ 14-5.12 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-5.12
AO:210
8. Description of adjacent land uses; and,
9. All other improvements associated therewith, including
information concerning support structure specifications, antenna
locations and equipment facilities.
The Board may require additional information relevant to its consideration
of whether the application meets the dimensional and performance
standards provided herein. Following Board approval, the applicant may
file for a building permit as described in Subsection g above.
i. Dimensional Standards. All WCFs and equipment facilities shall comply
with the following dimensional requirements:
1. Maximum height of any WCF shall not be greater than 150 feet.
2. WCFs shall be setback from all property lines a minimum of one
foot for each one foot of support structure height, with a minimum
setback from all property lines of 25 feet.
3. All WCF supports and peripheral anchors shall be located entirely
within the boundaries of the development site.
4. Supports and/or peripheral anchors shall not encroach upon the
minimum landscaped screening area, as required by the Zoning
Ordinance.
5. All supports and anchors shall have at a minimum a ten-foot
horizontal setback from any overhead utility line.
6. Attached WCFs shall be permitted as an accessory use to any
commercial, industrial, office, institutional, multifamily or public
utility structure provided that:
(a) The antenna array is not higher than 20 feet above the highest
point of the structure;
(b) The antenna array complies with applicable FCC and FAA
regulations; and
(c) The antenna array complies with all applicable zoning
requirements and building codes.
7. WCFs shall not be allowed within one mile distance from any
existing WCF and/or WCF that have received a valid building
permit.
j. Performance Standards. All WCFs and equipment facilities shall comply
with the following performance requirements, which shall be the basis
upon which the Building Official and Zoning Board make their
respective findings of fact in either approving or denying the
application for a WCF.
§ 14-5.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-5.12
AO:211
1. For any unattached WCF, the applicant shall demonstrate that no
existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's
proposed antenna array, with the following evidence submitted to
demonstrate the case:
(a) Written proof that owners of existing towers or structures
within service area of the proposed WCF location or within a
one mile radius of the proposed WCF, which ever is greater,
have been contacted and that permission was sought to install
a device on those structures, and that permission was denied
or a reasonable agreement could not be reached.
(b) No existing towers or structures are located within the service
area of the proposed WCF location or within a one mile radius
of the proposed WCF, whichever is greater.
(c) Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to
meet applicant's engineering requirements.
(d) Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural
strength to support applicant's proposed antenna array and
related equipment.
(e) The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the owner
in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an
existing tower or structure for sharing exceed the costs of
construction of a new WCF and support structure.
2. Every WCF approved under this section shall be subject to the
condition that the WCF owner must allow colocation/site sharing,
as defined herein. The application shall contain a statement that
the site will physically support colocation/site sharing, and that any
new applicant willing to sign a commercially reasonable lease, shall
be allowed to collocate at that site.
3. The required report from the radio frequency engineer shall
contain a statement justifying the height of the proposed WCF.
4. Town-owned sites which are located in the prospective
development area and which could potentially accommodate the
proposed WCF shall be identified. Such Town-owned sites shall be
given preference over other sites in locating an unattached WCF. If
the applicant chooses a site other than a Town-owned site, the
applicant shall provide written proof that a Town-owned site is
either unavailable or unsuitable for the WCF.
5. All WCFs shall be constructed and situated in such a manner as to
fit in with the topography and features of the surrounding
environment. WCF Equipment Facilities shall be completely
screened from all adjacent properties and streets, and
appropriately camouflaged, if required. Plantings shall be of such a
height and density to ensure complete screening. Existing
§ 14-5.12 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-5.12
AO:212
§ 14-5.13. Ground Lease Program. [Ord. 5/31/06, § 6]
Any authorized Town agency is permitted to purchase land or lease or
sublease land for 99 years in order to be eligible for State or Federal
funding sources to build or cause to be built affordable housing as defined
herein, and subject to all other provisions of this chapter. This provision
applies to existing Town-owned land.
§ 14-5.14. Solar Energy Systems. [Added 7-11-2019]
vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible and
may be used as a substitute for or supplement towards meeting
the landscaped screening requirement. The owner of the property
shall be responsible for all maintenance and shall replace any dead
plantings within 30 days.
6. Notwithstanding any other provisions in this subsection, WCFs
shall be enclosed by a fence no less than eight feet in height or
more than 10 feet in height from finished grade. Any portion of the
fence, located within 200 feet of a street or an abutting residence,
shall be tightly screened from view by evergreen trees, shrubs or
other suitable plant material. Access shall be through a locked
gate.
7. WCFs shall not be artificially lighted except as required for public
safety purposes, by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), or
by the Town.
8. No signs shall be allowed on any WCF except as required for public
safety purposes, by the Federal Communications Commission
(FCC) or by the Town, or by the property owner.
9. There shall be no symbols, flags, banners or other devices or things
attached to or painted or inscribed upon any WCF.
k. Abandonment and Removal of WCFs. All WCFs which have not been
used for their intended purpose for a period of one year or more shall be
considered abandoned and shall be dismantled, removed and the site
restored to a condition consistent with the character of the surrounding
area, at the owner's expense. The property owner shall remove, or
cause to be removed, the WCF within 90 days of receipt of notice from
the Building Official. The applicant shall post a bond or cash security
with the Town sufficient to cover the cost of removal and restoration of
the site prior to the issuance of a building permit for the WCF. The
amount of said bond or security shall be estimated by the Building
Official. If such WCF is not removed within 90 days of receipt of notice,
the Town may take the necessary action to remove the facility and
restore the site to a condition consistent with the character of the
surrounding area, at the owner's expense.
§ 14-5.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-5.14
AO:213
a. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the installation of
solar energy systems and promote the safe, effective and efficient use of
solar energy systems that are compatible with the neighboring
properties and rural character in which they are located, that minimize
impacts on scenic, natural, and cultural resources, and provide clean,
domestically-sourced alternatives to our existing energy supply.
b. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ABANDONMENT — Ground-mounted solar energy systems which have
not been used for their intended purpose for a period of one year or
more.
ACCESSORY SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A solar energy system for
electrical or thermal energy generation for the benefit of the owner of
the property in support of the primary use of the property. An accessory
solar energy system cannot exist without a principal use on the same
lot.
ACCESSORY-PRINCIPAL AGRICULTURAL SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM
— A solar energy system or virtual metering system that produces
electricity for sale that is on a lot of land enrolled in and classified
as "farmland" in the State of Rhode Island's Farm, Forest Open Space
program. Accessory-principal agricultural solar energy systems are not
permitted without the principal use of an agricultural operation and
shall be incidental and subordinate to that principal use.
AGRICULTURAL OPERATION — Any commercial enterprise that has
as its primary purpose horticulture, viticulture, viniculture, floriculture,
forestry, stabling of horses, dairy farming, or aquaculture, or the raising
of livestock, including for the production of fiber, furbearing animals,
poultry, or bees, and all such other operations.
ARRAY — The entire group or section of PV panels.
ARRAY AREA — The total area occupied by the solar panel array,
including panel area and interpanel spaces.
GROUND-MOUNTED SYSTEM — A solar energy system that is
structurally appended to the ground and is not supported by a structure
or building.
KILOWATTS or KW — A measure of 1,000 watts of electrical power.
PHOTOVOLTAIC (PV) — Panels are solar panels designed to absorb
sunlight as a source of energy to generate electricity. Panels are
comprised of a series of solar cells, using the photovoltaic process.
PRINCIPAL SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — Any solar array/solar energy
system, interconnected with a public utility electrical distribution
system that is the primary use of a lot or lots, designed for commercial
generation of power that is sold.
ROOF-MOUNTED ACCESSORY SOLAR SYSTEM — A solar energy
system that is structurally appended to the roof of a building or
§ 14-5.14 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-5.14
AO:214
structure, for the purpose of electrical or thermal energy generation.
A roof-mounted accessory solar system cannot exist without a principal
use on the same lot.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — The equipment and requisite hardware
that provide and are used for collecting, transferring, converting,
storing or using incident solar energy for water heating, space heating,
cooling, manufacturing and generating electricity, or other applications
that would otherwise require the use of a conventional carbon based
source of energy such as petroleum or natural gas. This shall include
photovoltaic arrays and installations that utilize roof-mounted and/or
ground-mounted systems.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM SIZE — The total area of the solar/collector
panels in a solar energy installation, measured as the length multiplied
by width, and inclusive of inter-row spacing and solar panel/collector
spacing, as well as spacing between solar panel/collector and any
security fencing.
VIRTUAL NET METERING SYSTEM — A system owned by a town or
municipality that is remote from the municipal building it serves.
WOODLANDS — A dense growth of trees, including young regenerating
forest, which has been established either through natural regeneration
or planting.
c. Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to the expansion
of any existing solar energy system and the construction of any new
solar energy system undertaken after the adoption of this section.
d. Application requirements.
1. Prior to the installation of a solar energy system, the property
owner or installer shall receive a building permit from the Building
Official. An application for a solar energy installation shall be made
on the Single Statewide Solar Building and Electric Permit
Application for all sizes of solar projects that are submitted to the
Building Official.
2. The Building Official will determine if the proposed system,
whether roof-mounted or ground-mounted, meets all of the
applicable dimensional standards of this section, or if a dimensional
variance is required, in which case an application shall be
submitted to the Zoning Board of Review.
3. Roof-mounted systems are considered separate from, and shall be
reviewed for compliance independently of, ground-mounted
systems on the same lot. In the event that the system is comprised
of both a roof-mounted system and a ground-mounted system, both
systems shall be included in the same application.
e. Review procedure.
1. Accessory solar systems.
§ 14-5.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-5.14
AO:215
(a) Accessory solar energy systems that are ground-mounted
systems with a solar energy system size equal to or less than
1,000 square feet and roof-mounted accessory solar systems of
any solar energy system size are permitted by right in all
zoning districts unless located within historically critical areas
described in § 14-5.14e4.
(b) Accessory solar energy systems that are ground-mounted
systems with a solar energy system size greater than 1,000
square feet but less than 2,000 square feet require a special
use permit (§ 14-9.5) from the Zoning Board of Review.
(c) Accessory solar energy systems that are ground-mounted
systems with a solar energy system size greater than 2,000
square feet require both a special use permit (§ 14-9.5) from
the Zoning Board of Review and development plan review by
the Planning Board.
2. Accessory-principal agricultural solar energy systems. All
accessory-principal agricultural solar energy systems require a
special use permit (§ 14-9.5) and development plan review by the
Planning Board.
3. Principal solar energy systems. All principal solar energy systems
require a special use permit (§ 14-9.5) and major plan review by the
Planning Board.
4. Historically critical areas.
(a) Any solar energy system to be located within a 1,500 feet
radius of Pikes Peak, also known as Plat 20, Lot 4-A, requires a
special use permit (§ 14-9.5) by the Zoning Board and major
plan review by the Planning Board.
(b) Any solar energy system to be located within the Business
Zoning District of Adamsville requires a special use permit
(§ 14-9.5) by the Zoning Board and major plan review by the
Planning Board.
f. Prohibitions.
1. Principal solar energy systems are prohibited in the Residential
Zone.
2. Ground-mounted solar energy systems and any associated
equipment or structures shall not be allowed on land held under
conservation easement or land for which the development rights
have been sold, transferred, or otherwise removed from the parcel,
unless the conditions of the existing easement, existing deed, or
other existing applicable legal document specifically allow the
installation of a solar energy system.
§ 14-5.14 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-5.14
AO:216
3. Ground-mounted solar energy systems and any associated
equipment or structures shall not be located within 100 feet of any
freshwater or coastal wetland as defined by the Rhode Island
Department of Environmental Management and/or the Coastal
Resources Management Council.
g. Dimensional standards.
1. A minimum front setback of 300 feet and side and rear setbacks of
100 feet are required for accessory-principal agricultural solar
energy systems that are ground-mounted systems.
2. A ground-mounted accessory solar system must meet dimensional
standards set forth in § 14-4.1.
3. A ground-mounted solar energy system shall not exceed 12 feet in
height, as measured from the natural grade to its highest point,
including the top of any support structure or panel when adjusted
to its highest seasonal position.
4. The solar energy system size of ground-mounted systems shall
count towards the maximum lot coverage calculation for the zoning
district in which the system is located, as set forth in § 14-4.1.
5. Solar collectors or panels which are mounted on the roof of a
building are exempt in the calculation of the building's height, but
may not extend above the highest point of the roof, regardless of its
total height, by more than one foot unless a dimensional variance is
obtained. In no case shall a solar panel extend beyond the edge of
the roof. In addition, the distance between the surface of the roof
and the upper surface of the solar panels shall not be more than
four feet, i.e., the panel shall not be higher than four feet above the
plane of the roof.
h. Performance standards for all solar energy systems.
1. Solar energy systems shall be sited and designed to maximize rural
character and minimize negative impact on neighboring properties,
or on prominent viewsheds.
2. All solar energy systems shall be designed and located to minimize
reflective glare toward any inhabited building or roadway.
i. Performance standards for ground-mounted solar energy systems.
1. Clearing of natural vegetation shall be strictly limited to what is
necessary for the construction (drainage, retention ponds,
mechanical storage, etc.), operation and maintenance of the solar
energy system. In no case shall more than 20% of the area inclusive
of inter-row and panel/collector spacing covered by the solar
panels, be on cleared woodlands. In no case shall the total area of
cleared woodland exceed 20,000 square feet.
§ 14-5.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-5.14
AO:217
2. On-site drainage management and erosion and sedimentation
control shall conform to the latest Rhode Island Stormwater Design
and Installation Standards manual, and the Rhode Island Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, as well as applicable
Town regulations.
3. The land beneath the solar energy system should be seeded after
installation with low-growth vegetation suitable for agricultural
grazing and/or pollinator habitat. The opportunity to utilize this
area for additional economic and ecological benefit should be
explored. Design and maintenance of solar energy systems should
encourage minimal use of herbicides. No topsoil shall be removed
from the site. Gravel and/or stone shall not be used as the ground
cover.
4. Anchor footing types shall be used, so as to minimize disturbance of
the soils during installation, and facilitate post-use restoration.
5. All utility connecting lines from the solar energy system shall be
placed underground.
6. Lighting of the solar energy system shall be limited to that required
for safety and operational purposes. All site lighting shall be
directed downwards and incorporate full cutoff fixtures to reduce
light pollution and confine the light footprint to the solar energy
system site.
7. Access to the solar energy system shall be designed to prevent
unauthorized access subject to the review and approval of the
Planning Board as well as the Director of Public Works and the Fire
Marshal.
8. The solar energy system design shall incorporate appropriate
landscaping and design elements to visually screen the installation
from view of public roads and abutting properties. Vegetative
buffers are to be composed of plant materials listed in the
University of Rhode Island's native plant database, with a
preference for pollinator-friendly materials to the maximum extent
practicable.
j. Abandonment and removal.
1. Owners of all ground-mounted principal solar energy systems and
accessory-principal agricultural solar energy systems which have
not been used for their intended purpose for a period of one year or
more shall provide notice to the Town of this lack of use and be
considered abandoned and shall be dismantled, removed and the
site shall be restored at the owner's expense. Stabilization and
revegetation of the site may be required to prevent erosion and/or
reestablish original habitat of the property.
§ 14-5.14 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-5.14
AO:218
§ 14-6. PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS AND OVERLAY ZONES.
(Reserved)
§ 14-7. SIGNS.
§ 14-7.1. Signs Permitted in the Residence (R) District. [Ord. 6/23/
94, Art. 7]
2. The owner shall remove, or cause to be removed, the solar energy
system within 120 days of receipt of notice from the Building
Official.
3. The applicant for a ground-mounted principal solar energy system
shall post a bond or cash security with the Town sufficient to cover
the cost of removal and restoration of the site prior to the issuance
of a building permit for the solar energy system. The amount of said
bond or security shall be determined jointly by the Building Official
and the Planning Board as part of the major plan review.
a. A name plate or identification sign, not exceeding 1 1/2 square feet in
area, indicating the name of the occupant or identifying a permitted
home occupation or residential professional office. Such a sign shall be
illuminated only by continuous, white, indirect light with no animation
or movement and shall be located on the site of the use to which it is
attached.
b. A temporary unlighted sign not exceeding 12 square feet in area nor
exceeding eight feet in height, pertaining to the prospective sale or
lease of the premises upon which it is located. This may also include a
temporary political or voting sign. Such a temporary sign shall be
limited to six months duration.
c. A sign or announcement board, not exceeding 12 square feet in area
nor exceeding eight feet in height, pertaining to a permitted religious,
institutional or government use or to a lawful nonconforming use. Such
sign shall be located on the site of the principal use and may be lighted
only by continuous, white indirect light with no movement or animation.
d. Regulatory signs not exceeding one and one-half square feet in area
indicating restrictions on or prohibitions on the use of public or private
property.
e. Signs required in connection with uses permitted as special use permits
shall be considered as special use permits, subject to authorization by
the Zoning Board of Review.
f. All signs, except regulatory signs, shall be located at least 15 feet from
any side or rear lot line except where such sign is located on the wall of
a building or structure. No sign shall extend over or onto a public rightof-
way and any illumination shall be oriented so as to direct glare away
from neighboring property and highways.
§ 14-5.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-7.1
AO:219
§ 14-7.2. Signs Permitted in the Business (B) Districts. [Ord. 6/23/
94, Art. 7]
§ 14-7.3. Portable or Mobile Signs. [Ord. 6/23/94, Art. 7]
Portable or mobile signs designed for movement to a site by truck or hauled
to a site on its own running gear and not permanently installed at the site
are prohibited in all zoning districts.
§ 14-8. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS.
§ 14-8.1. Off-Street Parking Required. [Ord. 6/23/94, Art. 8; Ord. 5/
6/99 § 6]
Any building, structure or use initiated or enlarged after the effective date
of this chapter shall, at the time of such initiation or enlargement, provide
off-street parking spaces in accordance with the following requirements:
(See Subsection 14-2.8).
g. Billboards or other outdoor advertising devices, not related to a use or
activity on the premises, are prohibited.
a. Signs permitted in the R District as listed in Subsection 14-7.1a through
d.
b. One sign in connection with a permitted or lawful nonconforming use,
provided that such sign shall pertain to and be located on the site of the
principal use. Such signs shall be no greater than 12 square feet in area
and shall be located no closer than 30 feet to any R District. Such signs
shall project no more than 5 feet above the main cornice line of the
structure to which they pertain. Signs shall be located no closer than 5
feet to a front lot line except where they are attached to a structure
housing the principal use. In such cases, no part of any sign shall
project over a public right-of-way and no portion of any projecting sign
shall be less than 10 feet above the grade of the land below. Signs shall
be illuminated only by continuous, white, indirect lighting with no
animation or movement.
c. Signs in connection with a use permitted as a special use permit shall
be considered as special use permit, subject to action by the Zoning
Board of Review.
d. No sign shall exceed 12 square feet in area except where the Zoning
Board of Review grants a dimensional variance to exceed such limit.
e. Billboards or other outdoor advertising devices, not related to a use or
activity on the premises, are prohibited.
a. Requirements for Specific Classes of Use.
§ 14-7.1 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-8.1
AO:220
(a) Dwellings 2 spaces for each dwelling unit
(b) Hotels, motels and lodging
houses
2 spaces for each unit or room to
be rented
(c) Office uses 1 space for each 250 square feet of
gross floor area
(d) Retail and service business 1 space for each 300 square feet of
gross floor area
(e) Restaurants, theatres and
other places of public
assembly
1 space for each 3 seats or 1 space
for each 300 square feet of gross
floor area, whichever is greater
(f) Manufacturing and wholesale 1 space for each 2 employees on
the largest shift
(g) Place of worship 1 space for each 3 seats plus 1 per
room
(h) School or library 1 space per each 500 square feet of
gross floor area
(i) Government building
including police and fire
station
1 space per each 500 square feet of
gross floor area
(j) Outdoor recreation facility 1 per 5 persons that the facility is
designed to accommodate at full
capacity
(k) Other uses Same as for office uses
b. Site Improvements for Off-Street Parking Facilities.
1. For parking facilities requiring 10 or more spaces, the parking area
shall have a dust-free bituminous surface and shall be provided
with wheel stops if abutting a street or body of water.
2. For parking facilities requiring less than 10 spaces, the parking
area may use previous material, such as gravel or crushed stone.
3. Where a parking facility lies within or adjoins an R District, an
opaque fence or a double-row compact evergreen screen not less
than four feet in height shall be erected or planted and maintained
between the parking facility and an adjoining R District.
4. Fixtures used to illuminate any such parking facility shall be
oriented to reflect light away from adjoining properties and streets.
5. Any parking areas with 10 or more spaces shall be landscaped with
one tree per five spaces with vegetation or ground cover at the
street frontage.
c. Off-Street Parking Facility Location. All parking facilities provided
under this subsection shall be developed on the same lot as the
§ 14-8.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-8.1
AO:221
principal use or on an abutting lot. Shared accessory parking for more
than one principal use or parking on noncontiguous lots may be
permitted by special use permit by the Board.
d. Plans and Specifications for Off-Street Parking Facilities. Plans and
specifications for any required parking facility and its access drives
shall be submitted to the Building Official for determination for
compliance with this chapter at the time of application for the permit
for the principal use. Each parking space shall contain the following
minimum dimensions affecting the width and length of individual
parking stalls and the width of aisles in all districts, exclusive of
necessary drives and other access ways. A driveway may be considered
a required parking space only for a single-family dwelling.
Minimum width 8-1/2 feet
Minimum length 18 feet
Minimum aisle width
90° angle 24 feet
60° angle 18 feet
45° angle 13 feet*
30° angle 11 feet*
0° or parallel parking, minimum length 23 feet 12 feet*
*The minimum aisle, or line, width for two-way traffic shall be 18 feet.
Angle parking of less than 90° must be able to exit in the entering
direction. When an exit lane or aisle is not accessible, there shall be a
turnaround beyond the last parking space having a minimum outside
radius of 27 feet.
e. Parking or Storage of Commercial Vehicles in R Districts. Except for the
storage of farm vehicles and the intermittent parking of commercial
vehicles providing emergency service to residential occupants, the
parking or storage of commercial vehicles of over 1 1/2 tons capacity
shall not be permitted in an R District except in connection with a
permitted or lawful customary home occupation or nonconforming use.
f. Parking or Storage of Recreation Vehicles in R Districts. The parking or
storage of recreation vehicles owned by an occupant, including travel
trailers, pickup truck campers, tent trailers, motor homes, boats and
boat trailers; shall be governed by the following requirements:
1. No such recreation vehicle, while parked or stored in an R District,
shall be used for permanent living or house- keeping purposes.
2. No such recreation vehicle shall be stored in a required front yard
area nor closer than 10 feet to a side or rear lot line.
§ 14-8.1 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-8.1
AO:222
§ 14-8.2. Off-Street Loading Space Required. [Ord. 6/23/94, Art. 8]
No land shall be used and no structure shall be erected or used for any
nonresidential purpose which requires provision for the loading and
unloading of goods or equipment unless off-street loading space is provided.
§ 14-9. ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, AND RELIEF.
§ 14-9.1. Enforcement. [Ord. 6/23/94, Art. 9; Ord. 5/31/06, § 7]
3. No such recreation vehicle shall be stored outdoors unless in
condition for its intended function or can be brought to functional
condition within a six-month period.
a. Off-Street Loading Specification.
1. For each nonresidential use or structure under 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area or ground area in which commodities are stored,
sold, displayed, repaired, serviced, fabricated or altered as the
principal use of the land or buildings; one off-street loading space
shall be provided.
2. For each such use of over 1,000 square feet of gross floor area or
more; one off-street loading space for the first 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area and an additional off-street loading space for each
10,000 square feet of gross floor area shall be provided.
3. Each off-street loading space shall consist of the following
dimensions:
Length 60 feet
Width 14 feet
Clearance 15 feet
b. Location of Off-Street Loading Space. Required off-street loading space
shall be on the lot of the principal use or on a contiguous lot and shall be
designed to prevent intrusion of loading or unloading vehicles into any
street or sidewalk during loading or unloading. In no case shall any of
the required off-street loading space be part of the area used to fulfill
the off-street parking requirement associated with the intended use of
the land or structure.
a. Building Official. It shall be the duty of the Building Official to interpret
and enforce the provisions of this chapter in the manner and form and
with the powers provided in the laws of the State and in the Charter and
Ordinances of the Town. The Building Official shall refer all applications
for variances, special use permits and other appeals to the Zoning
Board of Review. The Building Official shall make a determination in
writing, within 15 days, to any written complaint received, regarding a
violation of this chapter. In order to provide guidance or clarification,
the Building Official shall, upon written request, issue a zoning
§ 14-8.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-9.1
AO:223
certificate or provide information to the requesting party within 15 days
of the written request. Any determination of the Building Official may
be appealed to the Board in accordance with Subsection 14-9.7 of this
chapter.
b. Permit.
1. No land shall be used and no building, structure or sign shall be
erected, modified, enlarged or placed into use until all necessary
permits have been issued by the Building Official. This requirement
shall not apply to uses lawfully existing at the time of adoption of
this amendment but shall apply to any new or expanded use of land
or structure initiated subsequent to the effective date of this
amendment. No permit may be issued for any action or use not in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter, except where the
Building Official is notified by the Zoning Board of Review of the
granting of a special exception or variance.
2. Application for a permit shall be made to the Building Official on
forms available for that purpose. If such application is disapproved,
all copies shall be so endorsed and one copy returned to the
applicant stating the reasons for disapproval.
3. A permit shall be valid for the duration of the use which was the
subject of the original issuance and shall expire upon termination
of that use. Where a permit authorizes the construction of a
building, structure, sign or other improvement; said construction
shall be initiated within one year and shall be diligently prosecuted
until completion. Where said construction is not initiated within
one year, the permit shall expire and a new application shall be
submitted.
4. A comprehensive permit is authorized for supportive housing with
disabilities (such as provided under HUD Section 811) and housing
for the elderly (such as provided under HUD Section 202), provided
that public health, safety and welfare concerns are met,
particularly the need for potable water and ISDS suitability,
provided that each structure contain no more than six dwelling
units, regardless of lot size, and be subject to development plan
review by the Planning Board. Rules and regulations governing
comprehensive permits shall be contained in Appendix C
Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Little Compton, Rhode
Island.
c. Vested Rights.
1. Any application for development under this chapter, including an
application for a building permit, special use permit, variance, or
planned development, shall be deemed substantially complete
when all required documents, including plans, together with
required fees, are received by the official designated herein to
receive such applications. Required documents shall include only
§ 14-9.1 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-9.1
AO:224
those documents specified either by this chapter or by rules
adopted and published by the permitting authority prior to the time
the application is filed.
2. Any application for development under this chapter that has been
granted, or that is substantially complete, prior to the enactment or
amendment of this chapter, shall be reviewed according to the
regulations applicable in the Zoning Chapter in force at the time
the application was submitted. If such application has been
granted, or is subsequently approved, the applicant must begin
construction, or exercise the right granted in the application if no
construction is involved, not more than one year after the date of
such approval. All construction must be completed not more than
two years after the date of such approval, unless specifically set
forth to the contrary in the original approval.
d. Other Codes, Ordinances, Regulations and Rules. The requirements of
this chapter shall not relieve the applicant of the responsibility of
obtaining such permits or approvals as may be required under
applicable provisions of other codes, ordinances, regulations or rules of
any unit of local, State or Federal government. Where such codes,
ordinances, regulations or rules require approval as a prerequisite to
the issuance of a permit, evidence of such approval shall be submitted
at the time of application for the permit.
e. Minimum Requirements. In interpreting and applying the provisions of
this chapter, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of health, safety, convenience or the general welfare.
f. Conflicts of Law. All departments, officials and public employees of the
Town which are vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or
licenses shall conform to the provisions of this chapter and shall issue
no permit or license for any use, building or purpose if the same would
be in conflict with the provisions of this chapter. Any permit or license,
issued in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, shall be null and
void.
g. Special Use Permit For Detrimental Reliance. Notwithstanding
Subsection f above, upon application, the Zoning Board shall have the
authority to grant a special use permit to allow a building or structure,
but not a use, that is in conflict with the provisions of this chapter,
where the Board finds, in addition to the findings required in
Subsection 14-9.5:
1. That an error was made by a Town official that directly caused the
owner to rely on such error to the owner's detriment; and
2. That the owner exercised due diligence and did not mislead the
Town official or otherwise contribute to the error; and
3. That the doctrines of "laches" and "clean hands" do not bar the
owner from receiving such relief; and
§ 14-9.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-9.1
AO:225
§ 14-9.2. Zoning Board of Review. [Ord. 6/23/94, Art. 9; Ord. 8/22/
96; Ord. 2/24/00]
4. That the interests of equity and fairness require such relief to be
granted.
h. Penalties. Any person or corporation, whether as principal, agent,
employee or otherwise, who violates or is the owner of property in
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined up to
$500 for each offense, such fine to inure to the Town. Each day of the
existence of any violation shall be deemed a separate offense. The
erection, construction, enlargement, intensification, conversion,
moving or maintenance of any building or structure and the use of any
land or building or structure which is continued, operated or
maintained, contrary to any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby
declared to be a violation of this chapter and unlawful. The Building
Official shall be empowered to levy such fines, with appeal thereupon to
the District Court. The Town Council, through the Town Solicitor, shall
also be empowered to institute an injunction, abatement or any other
appropriate action in any appropriate court to prevent, enjoin, abate or
remove such violation, or compel compliance with the provisions of this
chapter. The Town Solicitor may consolidate an action for injunctive
relief and/or fines under this chapter in the Superior Court for Newport
County. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not
exclusive and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by
law.
a. Establishment and Procedures. A Zoning Board of Review, herein called
the Board, is hereby created. The Board, with the approval of the Town
Council, may engage technical assistance to aid in the discharge of its
duties. The Secretary of the Zoning Board (the "Secretary") shall serve
as staff to the Board. The Town Solicitor or Assistant Town Solicitor
shall serve as legal counsel to the Board. The Board shall establish
written rules of procedure within six months of the adoption of this
chapter. Appeals and correspondence to the Board shall be sent to the
Board in care of the Secretary. The Secretary shall file all records and
decisions of the Board.
b. Membership. The Zoning Board of Review shall consist of five members
who are residents of the Town, appointed by the Town Council, each to
hold office for the term of five years; provided, however, that the
original appointments shall be made for terms of one, two, three, four,
and five years respectively. The Zoning Board of Review for the Town of
Little Compton shall also include three alternates to be designated as
the first, second, and third alternate members for terms of five years.
These alternate members shall sit and may actively participate in
hearings. The first alternate shall vote if a member of the board is
unable to serve at a hearing; the second shall vote if two members of
the board are unable to serve at a hearing; and the third shall vote if
three members of the board are unable to serve at a hearing. In the
§ 14-9.1 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-9.2
AO:226
§ 14-9.3. Powers and Duties. [Ord. 6/23/94, Art. 9]
The Zoning Board of Review shall have the powers and duties described as
follows:
absence of the first alternate member, the second alternate member
shall serve in the position of the first alternate. No member or alternate
may vote on any matter before the Board unless they have attended
all hearings concerning such matter. No member or alternate may
participate in any way whatsoever on any matter for which they would
have a conflict of interest as defined by the Rhode Island law and
the Rhode Island Ethics Commission. Vacancies in unexpired terms of
Board members shall be filled by the Town Council no more than 90
days following the vacancy. Members may be removed by the Town
Council for due cause and for not attending three consecutive meetings.
All members and alternate members of the Board shall be voters of
the Town of Little Compton and no member or alternate member shall
be an elected official or salaried employee of the Town. If any vacancy
occurs in the membership or alternate membership of the Board, the
Town Council shall fill said vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired
term.
c. Prior Members. Members of the Board serving on the effective date of
adoption of this chapter shall be exempt from provisions of this section
respecting terms of originally appointed members until the expiration
of their current terms.
d. Organization. The Board shall organize annually by electing, from its
membership, a Chairperson and a Vice-chairperson. The Board may
engage the services of a secretary using funds available for that
purpose or may elect a secretary from its membership.
e. Rules and Meetings. The Board shall adopt such rules of procedure as it
may deem necessary to perform the duties assigned to it. Meetings
shall be held at the call of the Chairperson, or if absent, the Vicechairperson;
or at such times as the Board may determine. The
Chairperson, or if absent, the Vice-chairperson may administer oaths
and compel the attendance of witnesses and the submission of data
pertinent to the subject of the meeting.
a. To hear and decide appeals in a timely fashion where it is alleged there
is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by
an administrative officer or agency in the enforcement of interpretation
of this chapter.
b. To authorize upon application, in specific cases of hardship, variances
in the application of the terms of this chapter.
c. To authorize upon application, where specified in this chapter, special
use permits.
§ 14-9.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-9.3
AO:227
§ 14-9.4. Voting. [Ord. 6/23/94, Art. 9]
The Board shall be required to vote as follows:
§ 14-9.5. Special Use Permit. [Ord. 6/23/94, Art. 9]
d. To refer matters to the Planning Board and/or to other boards or
agencies of the Town as the Board may deem appropriate, for findings
and recommendations.
e. To provide for issuance of conditional zoning approvals where a
proposed application would otherwise be approved except that one or
more State or Federal agency approvals which are necessary are
pending. A conditional zoning approval shall be revoked, upon motion
of the Board, after a public hearing with due notice, in the instance
where any necessary State or Federal agency approvals are not
received within a specified time period.
f. To hear and decide such other matters, according to the terms of this
chapter or other statutes, and upon which the Board may be authorized
to pass under this chapter or other statutes.
a. Five active members shall be necessary to conduct a hearing. As soon
as a conflict occurs for a member, that member shall excuse himself/
herself, and shall not sit as an active member and shall take no part in
the conduct of the hearing. Only five active members shall be entitled to
vote on any issue.
b. The concurring vote of three of the five members of the Board sitting at
a hearing shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement,
decision or determination of any Zoning Administrative Officer from
whom an appeal was taken.
c. The concurring vote of four of the five members of the Board sitting at a
hearing shall be required to decide in favor of an applicant on any
matter within the discretion of the Board upon which it is required to
pass under this chapter, including variances and special use permits.
a. Findings. In granting a special use permit, the Board shall require that
evidence to the satisfaction of the following standards be entered into
the record of the proceedings:
1. That the special use is specifically authorized by this chapter, and
setting forth the exact subsection of this chapter containing the
jurisdictional authorization;
2. That the special use meets all of the criteria set forth in the
subsection of this chapter authorizing such special use; and
3. That the granting of the special use permit will not alter the
general character of the surrounding area or impair the intent or
purpose of this chapter or the Comprehensive Plan of the Town;
§ 14-9.3 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-9.5
AO:228
§ 14-9.6. Variance. [Ord. 6/23/94, Art. 9; Ord. 4/22/04]
4. That the special use will not create a nuisance or hazard in the
neighborhood.
b. Special Conditions. In granting a special use permit, or in making any
determination upon which it is required to pass after public hearing
under this chapter, the Board may apply such special conditions that
may, in the opinion of the Board, be required to promote the intent and
purposes of the Comprehensive Plan of the Town and this chapter.
Failure to abide by any special conditions attached to a grant shall
constitute a zoning violation. Such special conditions shall be based on
competent credible evidence on the record, be incorporated into the
decision, and may include, but are not limited to, provisions for:
1. Minimizing adverse impact of the development upon other land,
including the type, intensity, design, and performance of activities;
2. Controlling the sequence of development, including when it must
be commenced and completed;
3. Controlling the duration of use or development and the time within
which any temporary structure must be removed;
4. Assuring satisfactory installation and maintenance of required
public improvements;
5. Designating the exact location and nature of development; and
6. Establishing detailed records by submission of drawings, maps,
plats, or specifications.
7. Requirements for additional setback from lot lines and for
landscaping and screening from adjacent properties and elements
of the street system.
8. Limitations on storage and other accessory activities on the site,
both within and outside of a structure, including limitations on the
proportion of total floor area and land area for any activity
permitted by the grant of the special exception.
9. Limitations on access and parking design to avoid potential traffic
and safety problems.
10. The establishment of time limits or working hours on activities to
be carried out on the site.
11. Limitations on external displays, signs or other visible aspects of
the special exception activity.
12. Limitations and time limits on access to the site by service, supply
and delivery vehicles.
§ 14-9.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-9.6
AO:229
§ 14-9.7. Appeal. [Ord. 6/23/94, Art. 9]
a. General Findings. In granting a variance, the Board shall require that
evidence to the satisfaction of the following standards be entered into
the record of the proceedings:
1. That the hardship from which the applicant seeks relief is due to
the unique characteristics of the subject land or structure and not
to the general characteristics of the surrounding area; and not due
to a physical or economic disability of the applicants, excepting
those physical disabilities addressed in section 45-24-30(16) of the
General Laws of Rhode Island, as amended.
2. That said hardship is not the result of any prior action of the
applicant and does not result primarily from the desire of the
applicant to realize greater financial gain.
3. That the granting of the requested variance will not alter the
general characteristic of the surrounding area or impair the intent
or purpose of this Zoning Ordinance or the Comprehensive Plan of
the Town.
4. That the relief to be granted is the least relief necessary.
b. Hardship Findings. The Board shall, in addition to the above standards,
require that evidence be entered into the record of the proceedings
showing that:
1. In granting a use variance, the subject land or structure cannot
yield any beneficial use if it is required to conform to the provisions
of the Zoning Ordinance. Nonconforming use of neighboring land
or structures in the same district and permitted use of land or
structures in an adjacent district shall not be considered grounds
for granting a use variance; and
2. In granting a dimensional variance, that the hardship that will be
suffered by the owner of the subject property if the dimensional
variance is not granted shall amount to more than a mere
inconvenience, which shall mean that there is no other reasonable
alternative to enjoy a legally permitted beneficial use of one's
property. The fact that a use may be more profitable or that a
structure may be more valuable after the relief is granted shall not
be grounds for relief.
c. Conditions. The Board may prescribe in writing any conditions and
safeguards it may deem necessary to promote harmony with
neighboring properties and uses, including but not necessarily limited
to those outlined in Subsection 14-9.5b.
a. Procedure. An appeal to the Board from a decision of any other zoning
enforcement agency or officer, or the Planning Board, may be taken by
an aggrieved party. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days of the
§ 14-9.6 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-9.7
AO:230
§ 14-9.8. Application and Hearing Procedures. [Ord. 6/23/94, Art. 9]
date of the recording of the decision of the officer or agency, or within
30 days of the time when the aggrieved party knew or should have
known of the action or decision of such officer or agency. The appeal
shall be commenced by filing an application with the Board, with a
copy to the officer or agency from whom the appeal is taken, specifying
the ground thereof. The officer or agency from whom the appeal is
taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board all papers, including any
transcript or audio tapes, constituting the record upon which the action
appealed from was taken. Notice of the appeal shall also be transmitted
to the Planning Board and the Town Council.
b. Stay of Proceedings. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance
of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is
taken certifies to the Board, after the appeal shall have been duly filed,
that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would in the
officer's opinion cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case,
proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which
may be granted by a court of competent jurisdiction on application
thereof and upon notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken on
due cause shown.
c. Hearing. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the
appeal, give public notice thereof in the same manner as set forth in
Subsection 14-9.8 of this chapter, as well as due notice to the parties of
interest, and decide the same within 20 days of the hearing. The
hearing of any appeals shall be at a separate meeting from the hearing
of any variance or special use permit applications, although such
hearings may be held on the same day or night. At the hearing, any
party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. The officer or a
designated individual of the agency, commission, or board from whom
the appeal is taken shall appear before the Zoning Board at the hearing
to represent such agency, commission or board. Other members of the
agency, commission or board may appear and be heard, but shall not
represent the agency, commission or board. The cost of any notice
required for the hearing shall be borne by the appellant.
d. Decisions and Records of the Board. In exercising its powers in ruling,
the Board may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse
or affirm wholly or partly and may modify the order, requirement,
decision, or determination appealed from and may make such order,
requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to
that end shall have the powers of the officer or agency from whom the
appeal was taken. All decisions and records of the Board respecting
appeals shall conform to the provisions of Subsection 14-9.8e and f
below.
a. In General. An application for relief from the literal requirements of a
Zoning Chapter because of hardship or an application for a special use
permit may be made by any person, group, agency or corporation,
§ 14-9.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-9.8
AO:231
provided that the owner or owners of the subject property must join in
any application, by filing with the Secretary an application describing
the request and supported by such data and evidence as may be
required by the Board. An application from a corporation must be
signed by its attorney or duly authorized officer of the corporation. The
Secretary shall immediately transmit such application received to the
Board and shall transmit a copy of each application to the Planning
Board and the Town Council.
b. Fees. An appeal or application shall be accompanied by a filing fee in
the amount established by the Town Council, payable to the Town of
Little Compton and returnable only in the event that the appeal or
application is withdrawn prior to the official notice of public hearing.
Said fee may be waived by the Board upon a showing of financial
hardship by the applicant.
c. Limit on Successive Applications. The Board may not accept another
application for substantially the same special exception or variance for
a period of one year after the denial of an application except that the
Board may waive this requirement if the later application is
accompanied by an affidavit presenting facts, to the satisfaction of the
Board, that a substantial change in circumstances exists, justifying a
hearing of the application.
d. Hearing and Notice. The Zoning Board shall, immediately upon receipt
of an application, request that the Planning Board shall report its
findings and recommendations, including a statement on the general
consistency of the application with the goals and purposes of the
Comprehensive Plan of the Town, in writing to the Board within 30
days. The Board shall hold a public hearing on any application for
variance or special use permit in an expeditious manner, after receipt,
in proper form, of an application, and shall give public notice thereof at
least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing, which notice shall include
the precise location of the subject property, including the street
address, and a description of the relief sought, as follows:
1. In a newspaper of general circulation in the Town; and
2. By First Class Mail to:
(a) All owners of the subject property in question; and
(b) All property owners of record of land within 200 feet of the
property, which is the subject of the application, whether
within the Town or within an adjacent city or town; and
(c) The city or town council of any city or town to which one or
more of the following pertain:
(1) Which is located in or within not less than 200 feet of the
boundary of the subject property; or
§ 14-9.8 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-9.8
AO:232
§ 14-9.9. Expiration of Variances and Special Use Permits. [Ord. 6/
23/94, Art. 9; Ord. 7/25/02]
(2) Where there is a public or quasi-public water source, or
private water source that is used or is suitable for use as a
public water source, within 2,000 feet of the subject
property, regardless of municipal boundaries; and
(d) The governing body of any State or municipal water
department or agency, special water district, or private water
company that has riparian rights to a surface water resource
and/or surface watershed that is used or is suitable for use as a
public water source and that is within 2,000 feet of the subject
property, provided, however, that the governing body of any
State or municipal water department or agency, special water
district, or private water company has filed with the Secretary
a map survey, which shall be kept as public record, showing
areas of surface water resources and/or watersheds and
parcels of land within 2,000 feet thereof.
(e) The Chairperson of the Town Conservation Commission.
e. Decision. Following a public hearing, the Board shall render a decision
within 20 days. The Board shall include in its decision all findings of fact
and conditions, showing the vote of each member participating thereon,
and the absence of a member or his or her failure to vote. Decisions
shall be recorded and filed in the office of the Secretary, and a copy
posted in the office of the Town Clerk, within 10 working days from the
date when the decision was rendered, and shall be a public record. The
Board shall keep written minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote
of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations, findings
of fact, and other official actions, all of which shall be recorded and filed
in the office of the Secretary in an expeditious manner upon completion
of the proceeding. For any proceeding in which the right of appeal lies
to the superior or supreme court, the Board shall have the minutes
taken either by a competent stenographer or recorded by a soundrecording
device.
f. Distribution and Recording of Decision. Any decision by the Board,
including any special conditions attached thereto, shall be mailed to the
applicant, to the Planning Board, the Building Official, the Town
Council, the Town Conservation Commission, the Associate Director of
the Division of Planning of the Rhode Island Department of
Administration, and to the Town Clerk who shall post the decision for 20
days pursuant to Subsection 14-9.1. Any decision evidencing the
granting of a variance or special use permit shall also be recorded by
the owner in the land evidence records of the Town, after 20 days have
passed from the filing of the decision, but prior to the issuance of any
building permit or certificate of occupancy.
§ 14-9.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-9.9
AO:233
§ 14-9.10. Appeals to Superior Court. [Ord. 6/23/94, Art. 9]
An aggrieved party may appeal a decision of the Board to the Superior
Court for Newport County by filing a complaint setting forth the reasons of
appeal within 20 days after such decision has been filed and posted with the
Town Clerk. The decision shall be posted in a location visible to the public in
the Town Hall for a period of 20 days following the recording of the decision.
The Board shall file the original documents acted upon by it and constituting
the record of the case appealed from, or certified copies thereof, together
with such other facts as may be pertinent, with the Clerk of the Court within
30 days after being served with a copy of the complaint. When the complaint
is filed by someone other than the original applicant or appellant, such
original applicant or appellant and the members of the Board shall be made
parties to such proceedings. The appeal shall not stay proceedings upon the
decision appealed from, but the court may, in its discretion, grant a stay on
appropriate terms and make such other orders as it deems necessary for an
equitable disposition of the appeal.
§ 14-9.11. Adoption, Amendment and Administration of Zoning
Chapter. [Ord. 6/23/94, Art. 9]
a. Any variance or special use permit shall expire one year after the date
of the filing of the resolution with the Town Clerk unless the applicant
shall, within one year, obtain a legal building permit and proceed with
the construction; or obtain a certificate of occupancy when no legal
building permit is required. The Board may, upon written request and
for cause shown prior to the expiration of the initial one-year period,
renew the variance or special use permit for a second one-year period.
Said request for an extension need not be advertised.
b. Should an applicant fail to begin construction with a legal building
permit, or obtain a certificate of occupancy within the second one-year
period, the Board may upon written request prior to the expiration of
the second one-year period, renew the variance or special use permit
for a third one-year period provided that the applicant can demonstrate
due diligence in proceeding and substantial financial commitment in
promoting the subject of the variance or special use permit since the
date of the filing of the resolution, and notice shall be given in
accordance with Subsections 14-9.8b and 14-9.8d and a hearing shall
be held on the request.
c. None of the year periods shall run during the pendency of any Superior
Court actions seeking to overturn the grant.
a. Procedure. Other than for proposals originated by the Town Council,
the Town Clerk shall be the officer to receive a proposal for adoption,
amendment, or repeal of a zoning ordinance or zoning map(s).
Immediately upon receipt of such proposal, the Town Clerk shall refer
such proposal to the Town Council and the Planning Board for study and
recommendation. If the proposal originates with the Town Council, the
§ 14-9.9 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-9.11
AO:234
Town Council shall refer such proposal to the Planning Board and the
Building Official. The Planning Board shall report to the Town Council
within 45 days after receipt of the proposal, giving its findings and
recommendations. The Town Council shall hold a public hearing within
65 days of receipt of proposal, giving proper notice as prescribed
in Subsection c below. The Town Council shall render a decision on
any such proposal within 45 days after the date of completion of the
public hearing. The provisions of this subsection pertaining to deadlines
shall not be construed to apply to any extension consented to by the
applicant. Except for action initiated by the Town Council or a Town
agency or official, all applications shall be accompanied by a filing fee
as established by the Town Council and payable to the Town of Little
Compton. Said filing fee shall be set in an amount required to cover the
expenses of public hearing notification, stenographic services for public
hearing records and any other expenses incurred in the processing of
the application and the final action thereon. Said fee shall be returnable
only in the event the application is withdrawn prior to the issuance of
official public hearing notice. Said fee may be waived at the discretion
of the Town Council upon the showing of financial hardship by the
applicant.
b. Review by Planning Board. Among its findings and recommendations to
the amendment or repeal of this chapter or zoning map, the Planning
Board shall:
1. Include a statement on the general consistency of the proposal with
the Comprehensive Plan of the Town, including the goals and
policies statement, the implementation program, and all other
applicable elements of the Comprehensive Plan; and
2. Include a demonstration of recognition and consideration of each of
the applicable purposes of zoning as presented in Subsection
14-1.1 of this chapter.
c. Notice and Hearing Requirements.
1. No zoning ordinance shall be adopted, repealed, or amended until
after a public hearing has been held upon the question before the
Town Council. The Town Council shall first give notice of such
public hearing by publication of notice in a newspaper of general
circulation within the Town at least once each week for three
consecutive weeks prior to the date of such hearing, which may
include the week in which the hearing is to be held, at which
hearing opportunity shall be given to all persons interested to be
heard upon the matter to the proposed ordinance. Written notice,
which may be a copy of said newspaper notice, shall be mailed to
the parties specified in Subsections c2, 3, 4 and 5 of this
subsection, at least two weeks prior to the hearing. Such
newspaper notice shall be published as a display advertisement,
using a type size at least as large as the normal type size used by
§ 14-9.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-9.11
AO:235
the newspaper in its news articles, and shall: [Amended
9-5-2019]
(a) Specify the place of said hearing and the date and time of its
commencement;
(b) Indicate that adoption, amendment or repeal of a zoning
ordinance is under consideration;
(c) Contain a statement of the proposed amendments to the
ordinance that may be printed once in its entirety, or
summarize or describe the matter under consideration;
(d) Advise those interested where and when a copy of the matter
under consideration may be obtained or examined and copied;
and
(e) State that the proposal shown thereon may be altered or
amended prior to the close of the public hearing without
further advertising, as a result of further study or because of
the views expressed at the public hearing. Any such alteration
or amendment must be presented for comment in the course of
said hearing.
2. Where a proposed general amendment to an existing zoning
ordinance includes changes in an existing zoning map, public
notice shall be given as required by Subsection c1 of this
subsection.
3. Where a proposed amendment to an existing ordinance includes a
specific change in a zoning district map but does not affect districts
generally, public notice shall be given as required in Subsection c1
of this subsection, with the additional requirements that:
(a) Notice shall include a map showing the existing and proposed
boundaries, zoning district boundaries, and existing streets
and roads and their names, and Town boundaries where
appropriate; and
(b) Written notice of the date, time and place of the public hearing
and the nature and purpose thereof shall be sent by certified
mail, return receipt required, to all owners of real property
whose property is located within 200 feet of the perimeter of
the area proposed for change, whether within the Town or
within an adjacent city or town in which the property is
located.
4. Notice of a public hearing shall be sent by certified mail, return
receipt required, to the city or town council of any city or town to
which one or more of the following pertain:
(a) Which is located within 200 feet of the boundary of the area
proposed for change; or
§ 14-9.11 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-9.11
AO:236
(b) Where there is a public or quasi-public water source, or private
water source that is used or is suitable for use as a public
water source, within 2,000 feet of any real property that is the
subject of a proposed zoning change, regardless of municipal
boundaries.
5. Notice of a public hearing shall be sent to the governing body of
any State or municipal water department or agency, special water
district, or private water company that has riparian rights to a
surface water resource and/or surface watershed that is used, or is
suitable for use, as a public water source and that is within 2,000
feet of any real property which is the subject of a proposed zoning
change, provided, however, that the governing body of any State or
municipal water company has filed with the Building Official a map
survey, which shall be kept as a public record, showing areas of
surface water resources and/or watersheds and parcels of land
within 2,000 feet thereof.
6. No defect in the form of any notice under this section shall render
any ordinance or amendment invalid, unless such defect is found to
be intentional or misleading.
d. Costs. Costs of any notice required under this section shall be borne by
the applicant.
e. Limitations and Conditions. In granting a zoning ordinance
amendment, the Town Council may limit the change to one or more of
the permitted uses in the zone to which the subject land is rezoned, and
impose such limitations, conditions and restrictions, including without
limitation:
1. Requiring the petitioner to obtain a permit or approval from any
and all Federal, State or local governmental agencies having
jurisdiction over the land and use which are subject to the zoning
change;
2. Relating to the effectiveness or continued effectiveness of the
zoning change; and/or
3. Relating to the use of the land as it deems necessary.
§ 14-9.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-9.11
AO:237
§ 14-9.12. Maintenance of Zoning Chapter. [Ord. 6/23/94, Art. 9]
The Town Clerk shall be the custodian of this Zoning Chapter and zoning
map or maps created thereunder. The Chair of the Planning Board shall
be responsible for maintenance and update of the text and zoning map
comprising this chapter. Changes which impact the zoning map shall be
depicted on the map within 90 days of such authorized change(s). The
Planning Board shall be responsible for review of this chapter annually,
and whenever changes are made to the Comprehensive Plan of the Town,
to identify any changes necessary and forward these changes to the Town
Council.
§ 14-9.13. Publication and Availability of Zoning Chapter. [Ord. 6/
23/94, Art. 9; amended 9-5-2019]
Printed copies of this chapter and map(s) shall be available to the general
public through the Town Clerk and shall be revised to include all
amendments. A reasonable charge may be made for copies to reflect
printing and distribution costs. Upon publication of this chapter and map(s),
and any amendments thereto, the Town Clerk shall send a copy, without
charge, to the State Law Library.
§ 14-9.14. Appeal of Enactment of or Amendment to Zoning
Chapter. [Ord. 6/23/94, Art. 9]
An appeal of the enactment of or an amendment to this chapter may be
taken to the Superior Court for Newport County by filing a complaint within
The Chair of the Planning Board and the Town Clerk shall cause the
limitations and conditions so imposed to be clearly noted on the zoning
map and recorded in the land evidence records, provided, however, in
the case of a conditional zone change, the limitations, restrictions, and
conditions shall not be noted on the zoning map until the zone change
has become effective. If the permitted use for which the land has been
rezoned is abandoned or if the land is not used for the requested purpose
for a period of two years or more after the zone change becomes effective,
the Town Council may, after a public hearing as herein before set forth,
change the land to its original zoning use before such petition was filed.
If any limitation, condition, or restriction in an ordinance amendment is
held to be invalid by a court in any action, that holding shall not cause the
remainder of the ordinance to be invalid.
f. Limit on Successive Petitions. Where the Town Council denies or grants
leave to withdraw to an application for amendment of this chapter, the
Council shall not consider another application for substantially the
same amendment for a period of one year from the date of such denial
or withdrawal. This period may be waived if the later application is
accompanied by an affidavit presenting facts, to the satisfaction of the
Town Council, showing that a substantial change in circumstances
exists, justifying a rehearing of the proposed amendment.
§ 14-9.11 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-9.14
AO:238
30 days after such enactment, or amendment has become effective. The
complaint shall set forth with specificity the area or areas in which the
enactment or amendment does not conform with the Comprehensive Plan
and/or the manner in which it constitutes a taking of private property
without just compensation. Such appeal may be taken by an aggrieved party
or by any legal resident or landowner of the Town, or by any association
of residents or landowners of the Town. This appeal shall not stay the
enforcement of the zoning ordinance, as enacted or amended, but the court
may, in its discretion, grant a stay on appropriate terms, which may include
the filing of a bond, and make such other orders as it deems necessary for
an equitable disposition of the appeal.
§ 14-9.15. Conflict with Other Ordinances, Rules and Statutes. [Ord.
6/23/94, Art. 9]
All sections, portions of sections and subsections of the Zoning Chapter
heretofore in force are hereby repealed. Whenever the terms of this chapter
require a higher standard than is required in any other ordinance, rule or
statute; the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. Whenever the provisions
of another ordinance, rule or statute require a higher standard than this
chapter; the provisions of such other ordinance, rule or statute shall prevail.
§ 14-9.16. Partial Invalidity. [Ord. 6/23/94, Art. 9]
If any section or subsection, clause, phrase or other portion of this chapter
shall be held invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction,
such decision shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of this chapter
as a whole or any other section, subsection, clause, phrase or other portion
thereof other than the part so ruled to be invalid or unconstitutional.
§ 14-9.17. Effective Date. [Ord. 6/23/94, Art. 9]
This amendment shall take effect on July 1, 1994.
§ 14-10. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. 6/23/94, Art. 10; Ord. 5/31/06, § 8;
Ord. 2/23/17]
a. In General. Words used in the present tense include the future, the
singular includes the plural and the plural the singular. The word "lot"
includes the word "plot". The word "used" includes "designed" and
"intended to be used". The word "building" includes "structure", the
word "dwelling" includes "residence", the word "person" includes
"corporation", "partnership", "association" and "individual". The word
"shall" is mandatory. The words "zone" and "district", when referring to
a zoning district, shall be interchangeable. Unless otherwise specified,
all distances shall be measured along a horizontal axis, in any direction.
Terms not defined in this chapter shall have the meaning customarily
assigned to them. The following terms, unless a contrary meaning is
specifically prescribed, shall have the following meanings:
b. Terms Defined.
§ 14-9.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-10
AO:239
1. ABUTTER – Shall mean one whose property abuts, that is, adjoins
at a border, boundary, or point with no intervening land.
2. ACCESSORY APARTMENT – Shall mean an accessory dwelling unit
subject to and as set forth in Subsection 14-5.5a and requiring a
minimum lot area of three acres.
3. ACCESSORY FAMILY DWELLING UNIT – Shall mean an accessory
dwelling unit for the sole use of one or more members of the family
of the occupant or occupants of the principal residence, subject to
and as set forth in Subsection 14-5.5b, and requiring a minimum lot
area of one acre.
4. ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE – Shall mean a use or structure
clearly accessory or incidental to the principal use of a lot or
structure and located on the site of the principal use or structure.
Examples include but are not limited to: private swimming pool,
residential garage, carport, tool shed, barn, off- street parking
area, flag pole, radio antenna, windmill, sign and other similar uses
or structures. Such accessory use shall not be permitted without
the principal use to which it is related. Where a substantial part of
the wall of an accessory building is part of the wall of the principal
building or where an accessory building is attached to the principal
building in a substantial manner as by a roof, such accessory
building shall be counted as part of the principal building.
5. ADJACENT LOTS – Shall mean two or more lots of record which
have one or more common boundary.
5A. AFFORDABLE HOUSING – Shall mean residential housing that has
a sales price or rental amount that is within the means of a
household that is moderate income or less. In the case of dwelling
units for sale, housing that is affordable means housing in which
principal, interest, taxes, which may be adjusted by State and local
programs for property tax relief, and insurance constitute no more
than 30% of the gross household income for a household with less
than one 120% of area median income, adjusted for family size. In
the case of dwelling units for rent, housing that is affordable means
housing for which the rent, heat, and utilities other than telephone
constitute no more than 30% of the gross annual household income
for a household with 80% or less of area median income, adjusted
for family size. Affordable housing shall include all types of yearround
housing, including, but not limited to, manufactured
housing, housing originally constructed for workers and their
families, accessory dwelling units, housing accepting rental
vouchers and/or tenant-based certificates under Section 8 of the
United States Housing Act of 1937, as amended and assisted living
housing, where the sales or rental amount of such housing,
adjusted for any Federal, State, or municipal government subsidy,
is less than or equal to 30% of the gross household income of the
§ 14-10 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-10
AO:240
low and/or moderate income occupants of the housing. [See RIGL
42-128-8.1(d)(1)]
5B. AFFORDABILITY RESTRICTION – Shall mean that affordable
housing as defined in Definition 5A above shall remain affordable
through a land lease and/or deed restriction for 99 years or such
other period that is either agreed to by the applicant and town or
prescribed by the Federal, State, or municipal government subsidy
program but that is not less than 30 years from initial occupancy.
[See RIGL 45-53-3 Definitions (5)]
6. AGGRIEVED PARTY – Shall mean, for purposes of this chapter, (a)
any person or persons or entity or entities who can demonstrate
that their property will be injured by a decision of any officer or
agency responsible for administering this chapter; or (b) anyone
requiring notice pursuant to this chapter.
7. ANTENNA – Shall mean equipment designed to transmit or receive
electronic signals.
8. APPLICANT – Shall mean an owner or authorized agent of the
owner submitting an application or appealing an action of any
official, board or agency.
9. APPLICATION – Shall mean the completed form or forms and all
accompanying documents, exhibits and fees required of an
applicant by an approving authority for development review,
approval, or permitting purpose.
10. APPURTENANCES – Shall mean features other than primary or
secondary structures which contribute to the exterior appearance
of a property including, but not limited to, paving, doors, windows,
signs, materials, decorative accessories, fences, and landscape
features.
11. AUTO BODY SHOP – Shall mean a building or portion of a building
in which major repairs are performed on automobile, truck or
motorcycle bodies or chassis, including body repair, painting or
priming.
12. BASEMENT – Shall mean that portion of a building included
between the upper surface of its floor and the upper surface of the
floor next above, having 1/2 or more of its height above the average
elevation of the finished lot grade adjoining the building. A
basement shall be counted as a story.
13. BILLBOARD – Shall mean a sign advertising products, services,
facilities, events or attractions not made, sold, used, served or
available on the premises displaying such sign. (See also "Sign, offpremises").
§ 14-10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-10
AO:241
14. BOARD – Shall mean the Zoning Board of Review, as set forth in §
14-9, unless specifically stated to the contrary.
15. BUFFER – Shall mean land which is maintained in either a natural
or landscaped state, and is used to screen and/or mitigate the
impacts of development on surrounding areas, properties or rights
of-way.
16. BUILDING – Shall mean any structure used or intended for
supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
17. BUILDING, DETACHED – Shall mean a building having no party
wall in common with another building.
18. BUILDING, PRINCIPAL – Shall mean the primary building on a lot
or a building that houses a principal use.
19. BUILDING ENVELOPE – Shall mean the three dimensional space
within which a structure is permitted to be built on a lot and which
is defined by regulations governing: building setbacks, maximum
height, bulk or other regulations, and/or any combination thereof.
20. BUILDING FOOTPRINT – Shall mean that area of a lot covered by a
building or buildings, and their attached appurtenances, such as
decks, porches, and stairs.
21. BUILDING HEIGHT – Shall mean the vertical distance measured
from the grade, as defined herein, at the building line, to the
highest point of the roof structure.
22. BUILDING OFFICIAL – Shall mean the Building Official of the Town
of Little Compton who is also the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
23. CELLAR – Shall mean that portion of a building included between
the upper surface of its floor and the upper surface of the floor next
above, having less than 1/2 its height above the average elevation
of the finished lot grade adjoining the building. A cellar shall not be
counted as a story.
24. CEMETERY – Shall mean land used for the burial of the dead and
dedicated for cemetery purposes, including crematories,
mausoleums and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with
and within the boundary of such cemetery.
25. COMMON OWNERSHIP – Shall mean either (a) ownership by one
or more individuals or entities in any form of ownership of two or
more contiguous lots; or (b) ownership by an association (such
ownership may also include a municipality) of one or more lots
under specific development techniques.
26. COMMUNITY CENTER – Shall mean a building or group of
buildings whose sole purpose is to house a nonprofit service,
§ 14-10 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-10
AO:242
fraternal, or sectarian organization including administrative
offices, child and elderly programs, recreation and assembly.
27. COMMUNITY RESIDENCE – Shall mean a home or residential
facility where children and/or adults reside in a family setting and
may or may not receive supervised care. This shall not include
halfway houses or substance abuse treatment facilities. This shall
include, but not be limited to the following:
(a) Whenever six or fewer mentally handicapped children or
adults reside in any type of residence in the community, as
licensed by the State pursuant to Rhode Island General Laws §
40.1-24-1-1 et seq.
(b) A group home providing care or supervision, or both, to not
more than eight mentally disabled or mentally handicapped or
physically handicapped persons, and licensed by the State
pursuant to Rhode Island General Laws § 40.1-24-1-1 et seq.
(c) A residence for children providing care or supervision, or both,
to not more than eight children including those of the care
giver and licensed by the State pursuant to Rhode Island
General Laws § 42-72.1-1 et seq.
(d) A community transitional residence providing care or
assistance, or both, to no more than six unrelated persons or
no more than three families not to exceed a total of eight
persons requiring temporary financial assistance and/or to
persons who are victims of crimes, abuse or neglect, and who
are expected to reside in such residence not less than 60 days
nor more than two years. Residents will have access to and use
of all common areas, including eating areas and living rooms,
and will receive appropriate social services for the purpose of
fostering independence, self-sufficiency, and eventual
transition to a permanent living situation.
28. COMPREHENSIVE PLAN – Shall mean the Comprehensive
Community Plan adopted by the Town pursuant to Rhode Island
General Laws § 45-22.2-1 et seq.
29. CONSTRUCTION – Shall mean the act of adding to an existing
structure or erecting a new principal or accessory structure or
appurtenances to a structure, including, but not limited to,
buildings, extensions, outbuildings, fire escapes, and retaining
walls.
30. COUNCIL – Shall mean the Town Council of the Town of Little
Compton.
31. DAY CARE - DAY CARE CENTER – Shall mean any other day care
center which is not a family day care home.
§ 14-10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-10
AO:243
32. DAY CARE - FAMILY DAY CARE HOME – Shall mean any home
other than the individual's home in which day care or supervision is
offered at the same time to six or less individuals who are not
relatives of the care giver, but may not contain more than a total of
eight individuals receiving such care.
33. DENSITY, RESIDENTIAL – Shall mean the number of households or
dwelling units per unit of land.
34. DEVELOPMENT – Shall mean the construction, reconstruction,
conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any
structure, any mining, excavation, landfill or land disturbance, any
change in use, or alteration or extension of the use of land.
35. DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW – Shall mean the process whereby
the Planning Board is authorized to review the site plans, maps and
other documentation of a development to determine the
compliance with the stated purposes and standards of this chapter.
36. DISTRICT – See "Zoning use district."
37. DRAINAGE SYSTEM – Shall mean a system of the removal of water
from land by drains, grading or other appropriate means. Such
techniques may include runoff controls to minimize erosion and
sedimentation during and after construction or development, the
means for preserving surface and groundwater and the prevention
and/or alleviation of flooding.
38. DRIVEWAY – Shall mean that portion of a lot that consists of a
travel lane used to access a parking area or garage and which is
bounded on either side by an area that is not part of the parking
area.
39. DWELLING UNIT – Shall mean a structure or portion thereof
providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more
persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping,
eating, cooking, and sanitation and containing a separate means of
ingress and egress. (See "Household").
40. DWELLING, MULTI-HOUSEHOLD – Shall mean a building or
portion thereof used for occupancy by two or more households
living independently of each other.
41. DWELLING, SINGLE-HOUSEHOLD ALSO KNOWN AS A SINGLE
FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING – Shall mean a building, not
attached to another structure, used as living quarters by a single
household, family or a number of individuals living together as a
single housekeeping unit and having sleeping, cooking and bath
facilities together with permitted accessory uses.
42. DWELLING, TWO-HOUSEHOLD – See "Dwelling, multihousehold".
§ 14-10 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-10
AO:244
43. EXTRACTIVE INDUSTRY – Shall mean the extraction of minerals
including: solids, such as gravel, sand, coal and ores; liquids such
as crude petroleum, and gases, such as natural gases. The term
also includes quarrying; well operation; milling, such as crushing,
screening, washing and flotation; and other preparation
customarily done at the extraction site or as a part of the extractive
activity.
44. FAMILY – Shall mean a person or persons related by blood,
marriage or other legal means. (See "Household").
45. FAST FOOD RESTAURANT – Shall mean a commercial
establishment where food or beverages are cooked, prepared or
packaged and offered for sale inside or outside the structure by
means of stand-up counter and/or drive-in service (including selfservice)
and primarily serves or dispenses such food or beverages
in or with disposable containers and/or utensils and take away food
is more than incidental.
46. GARAGE, PARKING – Shall mean any building, except those herein
defined as a private garage, used for parking of vehicles. Such
buildings may include stores and other commercial establishments;
providing they conform to all regulations of the zone in which they
are located.
47. GARAGE, PRIVATE – Shall mean a detached accessory building or
portion of a principal building used for storage of vehicles, and
provided that, if more than two vehicles are stored therein, the
capacity does not exceed one vehicle for each 2,500 square feet of
lot area.
48. GARAGE REPAIR SHOP – Shall mean a building or portion of a
building, in which repairs, other than major structural repairs or
auto body repairs, are made to vehicles.
49. GASOLINE SERVICE STATION – Shall mean a building or portion
of a building, in which automotive repairs or services are
performed; fuel, oil, batteries and accessories are sold; grease
racks, elevators and tire mounting devices are employed; but
excluding automobile body repairing and painting and sale of
automotive body parts.
50. GFA (GROSS FLOOR AREA) – Shall mean the sum of the gross
horizontal area of the several stories of a building measured from
the exterior face of exterior walls, but not including interior
parking spaces, loading spaces for motor vehicles, or any space
where the floor to ceiling height is less than six feet.
51. GRADE – Shall mean a reference plane representing the average of
original ground level adjoining the building at all exterior walls.
When the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior walls,
the reference plane shall be established by the lowest points within
§ 14-10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-10
AO:245
the area between the building and the lot line, or when the lot line
is more than six feet from the building, between the building and a
point six feet from the building.
52. GROUP QUARTERS – Shall mean a dwelling unit in which
individuals requiring supervision are provided living, sleeping,
cooking, eating and sanitation facilities.
53. HALFWAY HOUSE – Shall mean a residential facility for adults or
children who have been institutionalized for criminal conduct and
who require a group setting to facilitate the transition to a
functional member of society.
54. HOME OCCUPATION, CUSTOMARY – Shall mean occupational
activities customarily carried out within a residential structure or
an existing accessory structure subject to and as set forth in
Subsection 14-5.6.
55. HOTEL, MOTEL OR INN – Shall mean a building or portion thereof
where temporary lodging is supplied and where additional services
such as restaurants, meeting rooms and recreational facilities may
be provided.
56. HOUSEHOLD – Shall mean one or more persons living together in
a single dwelling unit, with common access to, and common use of,
all living and eating areas and all areas and facilities for the
preparation and storage of food within the dwelling unit. The term
household unit shall be synonymous with the term dwelling unit for
determining the number of such units allowed within any structure
on any lot in a zoning district. Any individual household shall
consist of any one of the following: (a) a family, which may also
include servants and employees living with the family or (b) a
person or group of not more than three unrelated persons living
together.
57. INFRASTRUCTURE – Shall mean facilities and services needed to
sustain residential, commercial, agricultural, marine, industrial,
institutional, and other activities.
58. JUNK YARD, INCLUDING AUTO WRECKING – Shall mean a lot or
part thereof used for the storage, keeping or abandonment of junk,
including scrap metal or other scrap material, or for the
dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles or other
vehicles or machinery or parts thereof.
59. KENNEL – Shall mean a commercial operation that: (a) provides
food and shelter and care of dogs for purposes not primarily related
to medical care (a kennel may or may not be run by or associated
with a veterinarian), or (b) engages in the breeding of dogs for sale.
60. LAND DEVELOPMENT PROJECT – Shall mean a project in which
one or more lots, tracts, or parcels of land are to be developed or
§ 14-10 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-10
AO:246
redeveloped as a coordinated site for a complex of uses, units, or
structures, including but not limited to: planned development and/
or cluster development for residential, commercial, institutional,
recreational, open space, and/or mixed used as provided for this
chapter.
61. LODGING – Shall mean the provision of a rooming unit or units
rented or leased for compensation.
62. LOT – Shall mean either (a) the basic development unit for
determination of lot area, depth, and other dimensional
regulations, or (b) a parcel of land whose boundaries have been
established by some legal instrument such as a recorded deed or
recorded map and which is recognized as a separate legal entity for
purposes of transfer of title.
63. LOT AREA – Shall mean the total area circumscribed by the
boundaries of a lot, except that when the legal instrument creating
a lot shows the boundary of the lot extending into a public street
right-of-way, then the lot boundary for purposes of computing the
lot area shall be the street right-of-way line, or if the right-of-way
line cannot be determined, a line running parallel to and 20 feet
from the center of the traveled portion of the street.
64. LOT COVERAGE – Shall mean the amount of the area of a lot which
is covered by all principal and accessory structures, usually
expressed as a percent.
65. LOT DEPTH – Shall mean the distance measured from the front lot
line to the rear lot line. For lots where the front and rear lot lines
are not parallel, the lot depth is an average of the depth.
66. LOT FRONTAGE – Shall mean that portion of a lot abutting a street.
Where all lot frontage is not contiguous, then only the largest
single portion of such lot frontage will be considered with regard to
minimum frontage requirements.
67. LOT LINE – Shall mean a line of record, bounding a lot, which
divides one lot from another lot or from a public or private street or
any other public or private space and shall include:
(a) Front: any lot line separating a lot from a street right-of-way.
(b) Rear: the lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot
line, or in the case of triangular or otherwise irregularly
shaped lots, an assumed line at least 10 feet in length entirely
within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the
front lot line, and
(c) Side: any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
§ 14-10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-10
AO:247
On a corner lot, or irregularly shaped lot, there may be more
than one front lot line, and consequently, more than one rear
lot line.
68. LOT WIDTH – Shall mean the horizontal distance between the side
lines of a lot measured at right angles to its depth along a straight
line parallel to the front line at the minimum front setback line.
69. LOT, CORNER – Shall mean a lot at the junction of and fronting on
two or more intersecting streets.
70. LOT, THROUGH – Shall mean a lot which fronts upon two parallel
or approximately parallel streets, or which fronts upon two streets
which do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot.
71. MIXED USE – Shall mean a mixture of land uses within a single
development, building or lot. Under some circumstances, a second
principal use may be regarded as accessory to the first, and thus a
combination use is not established. In addition, when two or more
separately owned or separately operated enterprises occupy the
same lot, and all such enterprises fall within the same principal use
classification, this shall not constitute a mixed use.
72. MANUFACTURED HOME – Shall mean a single-family, detached
dwelling (commonly referred to as a "trailer" or "mobile home"),
transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to appropriate utilities. For
the purpose of development in any special flood hazard area as
defined in Subsection 14-5.9, the term "manufactured home" shall
include all park trailers, travel trailers and similar vehicles placed
on a site for more than 180 consecutive days. This definition is not
intended to include prefabricated or modular dwellings which are
shipped or towed to a site on separate running gear, removed from
said running gear, assembled and permanently erected on a
foundation for dwelling use.
73. MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION, EXISTING –
Shall mean a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots upon which
manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum,
the installation of utilities, either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads, and the construction of streets) are completed
before the effective date of flood plain management regulations
adopted by the Town of Little Compton.
74. MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION, EXISTING,
EXPANSION TO – Expansion to an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision shall mean the preparation of additional sites
by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the
manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
§ 14-10 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-10
AO:248
utilities, either final site grading or pouring of concrete pads, or the
construction of streets).
75. NONCONFORMANCE – Shall mean a building, structure, or parcel
of land, or use thereof, lawfully existing at the time of the adoption
or amendment of this chapter and not in conformity with the
provisions of such chapter or amendment. Nonconformance shall
be of only two types:
(a) Nonconforming by use: A lawfully established use of land,
building or structure which is not a permitted use in that
zoning district. A building or structure containing more
dwelling units than are permitted by the use regulations of this
chapter shall be nonconforming by use;
(b) Nonconforming by dimension: A building, structure, or parcel
of land not in compliance with the dimensional regulations of
this chapter. Dimensional regulations include all regulations of
this chapter, other than those pertaining to the permitted uses.
A building or structure containing more dwelling units than are
permitted by the use regulations of this chapter shall be
nonconforming by use, while a building or structure containing
a permitted number of dwelling units by the use regulations of
the Zoning Ordinance, but not meeting the lot area per
dwelling unit regulations, shall be non-conforming by
dimension.
76. NURSING HOME – Shall mean a facility licensed by the State of
Rhode Island, and maintained for the purpose of providing skilled
nursing care and medical supervision at a lower level than that
available in a hospital.
77. OWNER – Shall mean any person, agent, firm or corporation who,
alone, jointly, or severally with others: a) shall have legal or record
title to any property; or b) shall have charge, care or control of any
property as agent, executor, administrator, trustee or guardian.
78. PARKING SPACE – Shall mean a portion of lot area set aside for the
parking of one vehicle.
79. PARKING, ACCESSORY USE – Shall mean off-street parking of
automobiles on the same or contiguous lot as a principal use where
said parking is established or required in conjunction with the
principal use.
80. PARKING, PRINCIPAL USE – Shall mean off-street parking of
automobiles on one or more lots where parking spaces for more
than four automobiles are available for public use whether free, for
compensation, or to satisfy parking requirements of a principal use
on separate and noncontiguous lots.
§ 14-10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-10
AO:249
81. PERMITTED USE – Shall mean a use by right which is specifically
authorized in a particular zoning district.
82. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) – Shall mean land
development project as defined herein and developed according to
plan as a single entity and containing one or more structures and/or
uses with appurtenant common areas.
83. PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE – Shall mean a review meeting
of a proposed development held between applicants and the
Building Official and/or other Town officials, before formal
submission of an application for a permit or for development
approval.
84. REPAIR – Shall mean a change meant only to remedy damage or
deterioration of a structure or its appurtenances.
85. RESIDENTIAL PROFESSIONAL OFFICE – Shall mean an office
operated by a physician, surgeon, dentist, optometrist, attorney,
engineer, architect, planner, accountant or other professional
person licensed by law or certified by a recognized professional
organization or society, as set forth in Subsection 14-5.6.
86. REST HOME – Shall mean group lodging for convalescing people,
including elderly, where basic services are provided.
87. ROOMING UNIT – Shall mean a room or suite of rooms having an
independent means of access within a building, with facilities
intended for sleeping and living, with or without individual
sanitation, and without cooking facilities.
88. SALES, RETAIL – Shall mean on-premises sales of goods primarily
to customers for their personal or household use or consumption.
89. SALES, WHOLESALE – Shall mean on-premises sales of goods
primarily to customers engaged in the business of reselling the
goods.
90. SETBACK LINE OR LINES – Shall mean a line or lines parallel to a
lot line at the minimum distance of the required setback for the
zoning district in which the lot is located that establishes the area
within which the principal structure must be erected or placed.
91. SIGN – Shall mean any device that is sufficiently visible to persons
not located on the lot where such device is located to attract the
attention of such persons or to communicate information to them.
92. SIGN, FREESTANDING – Shall mean a sign that is attached to,
erected on, or supported by some structure (such as a pole, mast,
frame, or other structure) that is not itself an integral part of or
attached to a building or other structure having a principal function
other than the support of a sign. A sign that stands without
§ 14-10 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-10
AO:250
supporting elements, such as a "sandwich sign," is also a
freestanding sign.
93. SIGN, OFF-PREMISES – Shall mean a sign that draws attention to
or communicates information about a business, service, commodity,
accommodation, attraction, or other activity that is conducted,
sold, or offered at a location other than the premises on which the
sign is located. (See also "Billboard").
94. SIGN, TEMPORARY – Shall mean a sign that (a) is used in
connection with a circumstance, situation, or event that is
designed, intended or expected to take place or to be completed
within a reasonably short or definite period after the erection of
such sign, or (b) is intended to remain on the location where it is
erected or placed for a period of not more than 15 days. If a sign
display area is permanent but the message displayed is subject to
periodic changes, that sign shall not be regarded as temporary.
95. SITE PLAN – Shall mean the development plan for one or more lots
on which is shown the existing and/or the proposed conditions of
the lot.
96. SPECIAL USE – Shall mean a regulated use which is permitted
pursuant to a special use permit issued by the Zoning Board of
Review. Formerly referred to as a "special exception."
97. STORY – Shall mean that portion of a building included between
the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor
next above; also, any portion of a building used for human
occupancy between the topmost floor and the roof. A basement may
be counted as a story but a cellar shall not be so counted.
98. STREET – Shall mean a public right-of-way established by or
maintained under public authority, a private way open for public
uses, and a private way plotted or laid out for ultimate public use,
whether or not constructed.
99. STREET LINE – Shall mean the line dividing a lot from any street,
except a limited or controlled access highway to which the lot has
no access.
100.STRUCTURE – Shall mean a combination of materials to form a
construction for use, occupancy, or ornamentation, whether
installed on, above, or below the surface of land or water, including,
but not limited to, buildings, gazebos, signs, billboards,
outbuildings, and swimming pools.
100A. TENT – Shall mean any temporary enclosure of canvas, strong
cloth or synthetic materials stretched and sustained by poles,
designed and used for temporary human occupancy that can easily
be assembled and disassembled and easily removed from the
premises. [Ord. 2/23/17]
§ 14-10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-10
AO:251
101. TOWER, ANTENNA – Shall mean any structure whose principal
function is to support transmitting or receiving antennas and
related electronic devices.
102. TOWN – Shall mean the Town of Little Compton.
103.USE – Shall mean the purpose or activity for which land or
buildings are designed, arranged, or intended, or for which land or
buildings are occupied or maintained.
104. USE, ACCESSORY – See "Accessory use or structure."
105. USE, PRINCIPAL – Shall mean the primary or predominant use of
any lot.
106. UTILITY FACILITIES – Shall mean any above-ground structures or
facilities (other than buildings, unless such buildings are used as
storage incidental to the operation of such structures or facilities)
owned by a governmental entity, a nonprofit organization, a
corporation, or any entity defined as a public utility for any purpose
by the State of Rhode Island and used in connection with the
production, generation, transmission, delivery, collection, or
storage of water, sewage, electricity, gas, oil, or electronic signals.
107. VARIANCE – Shall mean permission to depart from the literal
requirements of this chapter. An authorization for the construction
or maintenance of a building or structure, or for the establishment
or maintenance of a building or structure, or for the establishment
or maintenance of a use of land, which is prohibited by this chapter.
There shall be only two categories of variance, a use variance or a
dimensional variance:
(a) Use Variance: Permission to depart from the use requirements
of this chapter where the applicant for the requested variance
has shown by evidence upon the record that the subject land or
structure cannot yield any beneficial use if it is to conform to
the provisions of this ordinance (See Subsection 14-9.6b1);
(b) Dimensional Variance: Permission to depart from the
dimensional requirements of this ordinance, where the
applicant for the requested relief has shown, by evidence upon
the record, that there is no other reasonable alternative way to
enjoy a legally permitted beneficial use of the subject property
unless granted the requested relief from the dimensional
regulations. However, the fact that a use may be more
profitable or that a structure may be more valuable after the
relief is granted shall not be grounds for relief, although it may
be an incidental result of the relief. (See Subsection 14-9.6b2.)
108. VEHICLE, COMMERCIAL – Shall mean automobile vehicle used
for commercial transportation purposes, including but not limited
to trucks (all types and weights), van used for delivery and service,
§ 14-10 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 14-10
AO:252
Chapter 15
TAXATION
§ 15-1. EXEMPTION FOR REAL PROPERTY HELD BY
CONSERVATION ORGANIZATIONS.
§ 15-1.1. Exemption. [Ord. 7/11/74; Ord. 1/9/75; Ord. 6/18/15]
Real properties held in fee by conservation organizations in Little Compton
which are recognized by the Internal Revenue Service as tax exempt per
IRS Code 501(c)(3), shall be exempt from taxation. Currently, the eligible
organizations are the Sakonnet Preservation Association, the Little
Compton Agricultural Conservancy Trust, the Audubon Society of RI and
the Nature Conservancy. Within 60 days of acquisition, written notification
that includes plat and lot number(s) of conserved parcels shall be sent to the
tractor trailer, garbage pick-up or dump truck, dumpster truck, or
similar type vehicle.
109. YARD, FRONT – Shall mean the open, unoccupied space extending
across the full width of the lot between the front lot line of the lot
and the nearest wall of a principal or accessory structure located
on said lot. On a corner lot, both yards abutting a street shall be
defined as front yards.
110. YARD, SIDE – Shall mean the open, unoccupied space extending
from the front yard to the rear yard between the side lot line and
the nearest point of the wall of a principal or accessory structure
located on said lot.
111. YARD, REAR – Shall mean the open, unoccupied space extending
across the full width of the lot between the rear lot line and the
nearest wall of a principal or accessory structure. On a corner lot,
the rear yard shall be defined as both yards not abutting the street.
112.ZONING CERTIFICATE – Shall mean a document signed by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer, which acknowledges that a use,
structure, building or lot either complies with or is legally
nonconforming to the provisions of this chapter or is a duly
authorized variance or approved special use; as set forth in
Subsection 14-9.1a of this chapter.
113.ZONING MAP – Shall mean the Little Compton Zoning Map which
is a part of this chapter and which delineates the boundaries of all
mapped zoning districts within the physical boundary of the Town
as provided in Subsection 14-1.4b of this chapter.
114.ZONING USE DISTRICT – Shall mean the basic unit in zoning to
which a uniform set of regulations applies, or a uniform set of
regulations for a specified use.
§ 14-10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-1.1
AO:253
Town Council by the conserving organization. Included in that notification
shall be a statement certifying that all taxes owed on the property for the
current tax year are paid in full.
§ 15-1.2. Effective Date. [Ord. 6/18/15]
This section shall take effect as of the assessment date of December 31,
2015.
§ 15-2. EXEMPTION FOR VETERAN.
§ 15-2.1. Exemption. [Ord. 7/1/91; Ord. 11/6/03]
Any person who is a legal resident of the Town of Little Compton and
who qualifies as a veteran, pursuant to the provisions of Section 44-3.4.
Rhode Island General Laws 1997 as amended, or is the unmarried widow of
such veteran, shall be entitled to an exemption of $18,000 on real property
owned by said veteran or said widow, or $1,000 on personal property to
said veteran or widow located within the Town, provided that said veteran
or said widow makes application for such exemption on forms prescribed
for such purpose by the Board of Assessors. This exemption of $1,000 shall
be in addition to any exemption granted to such veteran or such widow,
provided by the provisions of the General Laws of the State of Rhode Island.
§ 15-2.2. Effective Date. [Ord. 7/1/91; Ord. 11/6/03]
This section shall take effect as of the assessment date of December 31,
2003.
§ 15-3. EXEMPTION FOR VETERAN-PRISONER OF WAR.
§ 15-3.1. Exemptions. [Ord. 10/23/83; Ord. 11/6/03]
Any person who is a legal resident of the Town of Little Compton and
who qualifies as a veteran of the military, naval, and maritime service of
the United States of America pursuant to the provisions of Section 44-3-4,
Rhode Island General Laws, 1997 as amended, and who has been, or shall
be classified as, or determined to be a prisoner of war by the Veterans
Administration of the United States, shall be entitled to an exemption of
$30,000 from local taxation on real or personal property owned by said
veteran prisoner of war and located within said Town, provided that said
veteran prisoner of war makes application for such exemption on forms
prescribed for said purpose by the Board of Assessors. This exemption shall
be in addition to any exemption granted to such veteran prisoner of war
pursuant to the provisions of the General Laws of the State of Rhode Island
1997 as amended.
§ 15-3.2. Effective Date. [Ord. 10/23/86; Ord. 11/6/03]
This section shall take effect as of the assessment date of December 31,
2003.
§ 15-1.1 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 15-4
AO:254
§ 15-4. EXEMPTION FOR PERSON VISUALLY IMPAIRED.
§ 15-4.1. Exemption. [Ord. 3/24/94; Ord. 11/6/03]
Any person who is a legal resident of the Town of Little Compton and
who qualifies for an exemption under Section 44-3-12 Rhode Island General
Laws, 1997, as amended, shall be granted an exemption not to exceed
$18,000 on real property owned by the person and located within the Town.
Application for said exemption shall be made to the Board of Assessors.
§ 15-4.2. Effective Date. [Ord. 3/24/94; Ord. 11/6/03]
This section shall take effect as of the assessment date of December 31,
2003.
§ 15-5. EXEMPTION FOR LOW INCOME ELDERLY.18
§ 15-5.1. Exemption. [Ord. 11/6/03]
Any person who meets the following requirements:
§ 15-5.2. Effective Date. [Ord. 11/6/03]
This section shall take effect as of the assessment date of December 31,
2003.
§ 15-6. EXEMPTION FOR TOTALLY DISABLED.19
§ 15-6.1. Exemption. [Ord. 11/6/03]
Any person who meets the following requirements:
1. Is a legal resident of Little Compton for five years or more;
2. Sixty-five years or older;
3. Lives in a household that is subject to real estate taxes for which he/she
is liable;
4. Earns no more than the scheduled household income, may qualify for a
tax exemption. Application for said exemption shall be made on forms
prescribed for such purpose by the Board of Assessors.
1. Is a legal resident of Little Compton for five years or more;
2. Is 100% disabled and unable to work as of the date of such disability;
18.Editor's Note: Please note the size of each exemption for sections 15-5 and 15-6 above will
be based on household income and real estate assessed value in accordance with the
schedule as prescribed by the Board of Assessors.
19.Editor's Note: Please note the size of each exemption for sections 15-5 and 15-6 above will
be based on household income and real estate assessed value in accordance with the
schedule as prescribed by the Board of Assessors.
§ 15-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-6.1
AO:255
§ 15-6.2. Effective Date. [Ord. 11/6/03]
This section shall take effect as of the assessment date of December 31,
2003.
§ 15-7. TAX ASSESSMENTS. [Ord. 5/5/05]
3. Lives in a household that is subject to real estate taxes for which he/she
is liable;
4. Earns no more than the scheduled household income, may qualify for a
tax exemption. Application for said exemption shall be made on forms
prescribed for such purpose by the Board of Assessors.
a. Upon the completion of any comprehensive revaluation update in
accordance with Rhode Island General Laws § 44-5-11.6, and any other
General Law affecting a revaluation update, the Little Compton Board
of Assessors may adopt a tax classification plan, in accordance with the
following limitations:
1. The designated classes of property shall be limited to the four
classes as defined below in paragraph b.
2. The effective tax rate applicable to any class shall not exceed by
50% the rate applicable to any other class. However, in the year
following a reevaluation or statistical reevaluation or update, the
Board of Assessors may adopt tax rates for all ratable tangible
property no greater than twice the rate applicable to any other
class. The State Office of Municipal Affairs must give written
approval for this rate, that this rate is necessary to avoid a loss of
revenue due to the reevaluation.
3. Any tax rate changes from one year to the next shall be applied
such that the same percentage rate change is applicable to all
classes.
4. Notwithstanding paragraphs 2 and 3 above, the tax rates
applicable to motor vehicles within Class 4 as defined in paragraph
b are governed by the Rhode Island General Laws § 44-34.1-1.
b. Classes of property.
1. Class 1: Residential real estate consisting of no more than five
dwelling units, land classified as open space, and dwellings on
leased land including mobile homes.
2. Class 2: Commercial and industrial real estate, residential
properties containing partial commercial or business uses and
residential real estate of more than five dwelling units.
3. Class 3: All ratable tangible personal property.
§ 15-6.1 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 15-7
AO:256
Chapter 16
RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR THE POLICE DEPARTMENT
AND THE FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 16-1. RULES AND REGULATIONS OF THE POLICE DEPARTMENT.
§ 16-1.1. Foreword.
The primary mission of the police force is crime prevention and the
protection of life and property. The laws and police procedures related to
them are promulgated by police agencies for the purpose of maintaining
order and continuity. The basis, however, of all police action is the law, and
the credibility of the law enforcement profession will be measured by its
contribution to the welfare of man, its concern for excellence, and by the
guidance it provides to its members toward a high level of ethical practice.
The purpose of this section is to establish the principles for the management
of the Little Compton Police Department, and the standards of behavior to
which every member of the department shall be held accountable. Its goals
are to increase the quality of police service, to elevate the standards of the
profession, and to strengthen the public confidence in law enforcement; to
encourage officers individually and collectively to fully appreciate the total
responsibilities of their office; to earn the support and cooperation of the
general public in these endeavors.
Police officers have a sworn obligation to respect and defend the rights
guaranteed to the people in the Constitution. In the performance of those
duties they may command obedience or prohibit behavior which tends to
irritate and conflict with the expectations of free men in a free society,
and particular attention must be given to ensure its just and impartial
application. Violations of law by those sworn to defend it will bring down
the system more surely than all other forms of crime combined. Positive
police action, while intended to serve the department's peace keeping
mission, must be administered without prejudice; always mindful that in the
execution of their duties they act not for themselves, but for the public.
Consistent with that responsibility they should be constantly aware that it
is not a proper police function to prohibit or stop dissent. Civil disturbance
and dissent are not synonymous. While civil disobedience and disturbance
are illegal; dissent is not. Only violations of law and actions inimical to
public safety are within the purview of the police. Proper understanding of
the relationships between the maintenance of order in the community as the
principle objective, and the enforcement of the law as a tool to be used in
achieving it, is a distinction well made.
4. Class 4: Motor vehicles and trailers subject to the excise tax
created by chapter 34.1 of title 44 of the Rhode Island General
Laws.
§ 15-7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-1.1
AO:257
The rules, regulations and job descriptions should serve as a guide to the
police officer and impress upon him the importance of his public service.
The uniqueness of his role identifies him as a member of a profession
capable of performing that service with dedication and wisdom.
§ 16-1.2. Preface.
Pursuant to these provisions, the Chief of Police, all superior officers and
patrolmen have and shall exercise within the limits of the Town of Little
Compton all common law and statutory power of constables except the
power to serve civil process, as granted to them by the statutes, ordinances,
regulations and the inherent police power of the State.
The regulations herein set forth are compiled for the guidance and
government of the Little Compton Police Department and the members and
employees thereof. These rules and regulations supersede and cancel any
orders previously in effect that are inconsistent to the adoption of these
regulations.
§ 16-1.3. Rules and Regulations.
a. Introduction. The regulations in this section are adopted as a guide for
the discipline and government of the Police Department.
It cannot be expected that any set of regulations will cover all situations
or emergencies which arise. In a role as complex as that of a police
officer, intelligence and discretion will often be the only available
guidelines.
There is a need for standards of conduct and general rules in any
organization, especially one in an area as important as law
enforcement. These regulations are formulated to meet that need.
Department members and employees are required to read and be
familiar with the contents of this section.
The purpose of this section is not to provide the Chief or appointing
authority with a tool for punishing officers. Rather it is an attempt at
improving the effectiveness of the Police Department by making clear
to all officers and employees what is expected of them, and what they
can expect of fellow officers and employees.
If any part of these regulations is rendered inoperable or declared
illegal by any court or tribunal of competent jurisdiction, the balance of
the entire manual will remain in full force and effect.
b. Definitions. As used in this section:
CHIEF — Shall mean the Chief of Police.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the Police Department.
EMPLOYEE — Shall mean a civilian employee of the Department.
§ 16-1.1 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 16-1.3
AO:258
GRAMMAR — Shall mean wherever context permits, the use of the
masculine will also include the feminine and the use of the singular will
also include the plural.
MANUAL — Shall mean the Police Manual of the Department.
MEMBER — Shall mean a duly appointed police officer in the
Department.
OFFICER-IN-CHARGE — Shall mean a Commanding Officer of a shift
or the Commanding Officer of any given situation.
ORDERS — Shall mean commands or instructions, oral or written,
given by one member to a member of lesser rank.
POLICE CONSTABLE — Shall mean a duly appointed Constable, as
provided by law, who is not required to give bond nor authorized to
serve process in civil actions. Police Constables while on duty shall be
subject to the same rules and regulations as the full-time members of
the Little Compton Police Department.
SENIOR OFFICER — Shall mean a member in any given rank with the
longest service in that rank.
SHIFT — Shall mean a regular tour of duty, unless otherwise ordered
by the Chief of Police.
SUPERIOR OFFICER — Shall mean any rank above Patrolman.
c. Professional Responsibilities. Police officers are professionals, and as
such are expected to maintain exceptionally high standards in the
performance of their duties.
Effective and efficient performance of his duty requires that a police
officer maintain the respect and cooperation of his community. This
requirement dictates that the conduct of all police officers be above
reproach in all matters both within and outside the Department.
General professional responsibilities include taking appropriate action
to:
1. Protect life and property;
2. Preserve the peace;
3. Prevent crime;
4. Detect and arrest violators of the law;
5. Enforce all laws coming within departmental jurisdiction;
6. Supervise public functions (such as parades or dances) where
public order requires police presence;
7. Respond to all public emergencies;
8. Endeavor to maintain good community relations.
§ 16-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-1.3
AO:259
d. Conflict of Interest. Since the position of a police officer is a public
trust, it is important to avoid all situations involving conflicts of interest
whether in fact or only in appearance.
1. Membership in Organizations. A member or employee of this
Department shall not affiliate with or become a member of any
organization if such affiliation or membership would in any way
interfere with or prevent him from performing his duty.
2. Employment Outside of Department.
(a) Officers may engage in off-duty employment subject to the
following limitations:
(1) Such employment shall not interfere with the officers'
employment with the Department, or impair his
independence of judgment in the exercise of official duties;
(2) Officers shall submit a written request for off-duty
employment to the Chief, whose approval must be granted
prior to engaging in such employment; and
(3) Officers shall not engage in any employment or business
involving the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages,
bail bond agencies, security or alarm services, or
investigative work for insurance agencies, private guard
services, collection agencies or attorneys.
(b) In addition to the above restrictions, approval may be denied
where it appears that the outside employment might:
(1) Render the officers unavailable during an emergency;
(2) Physically or mentally exhaust the officers to the point that
their performance may be affected;
(3) Require that any special consideration be given to
scheduling of the officers' regular duty hours; or
(4) Bring the Department into disrepute or impair the
operation or efficiency of the Department or officer.
3. Political Activities. A member of the force shall not engage in
political activity in behalf of, or against, any candidate or political
question. While on duty, a civilian employee of the Department
shall not engage in political activity or discussion on behalf of, or
against, any candidate or political question. All actions which could
even give the impression that a member or employee is using his or
her official position to influence the electoral process are to be
avoided. Members and employees who become candidates for
salaried elective office shall take a leave of absence without pay.
Such leave shall encompass both the campaign and the tenure of
office, if elected.
§ 16-1.3 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 16-1.3
AO:260
Nothing contained in this regulation shall be construed to mean
that a member or employee of the Department is prohibited from
exercising his or her legal voting rights.
4. Gifts and Gratuities. Members and employees shall not under any
circumstances solicit or accept any gift, gratuity, loan, service
reward or fee where there is any direct or indirect connection
between the solicitation and their departmental membership or
employment, except as may be specifically authorized by the Chief.
Members and employees must pay for all meals and beverages.
5. Unauthorized Transactions. Members and employees are
prohibited from entering into any transactions of material value at
substantially lower than fair market value, or the value at which
such goods or services are being offered to the general public,
when such transaction takes place between themselves and any
person involved in any matter or case which arose out of their
employment with the Department, except as may be specifically
authorized by the Chief. This section shall not preclude officers
from taking advantage of standard police discounts available to all
departmental members.
6. Use of Official Position. Officers shall not use their official position,
official identification cards or badges: (a) for personal or financial
gain; (b) for obtaining privileges not otherwise available to them
except in the performance of duty, or (c) for avoiding consequences
of illegal acts.
Officers shall not lend to another person their identification cards
or badges or permit them to be photographed or reproduced
without the approval of the Chief. Officers shall not authorize the
use of their names, photographs, or official titles which identify
them as officers, in connection with testimonials or advertisements
of any person, commodity or commercial enterprise, without the
approval of the Chief.
e. Orders. An order is a command or instruction, written or oral given by a
superior officer. All lawful orders, written or oral, shall be carried out
fully and in the manner prescribed.
1. General Orders. General orders are permanent written orders
issued by the Chief of Police outlining policy matters which affect
the entire Department. A general order is the most authoritative
written order the Chief issues, and may be used to amend,
supersede or cancel any previous order. General orders remain in
full effect until amended, superseded or cancelled by the Chief.
Arrangements shall be made to include general orders in the Police
Manual.
2. Special Orders. Special orders are temporary written orders issued
by the Chief of Police outlining instructions covering particular
§ 16-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-1.3
AO:261
situations. Special orders are automatically cancelled when their
objective is achieved.
3. Unlawful Orders. No member shall knowingly issue an order in
violation of any law or any departmental regulation. Unlawful
orders shall not be obeyed. The officer to whom the order was given
shall notify the ordering officer of the illegality of his order.
Responsibility for refusal to obey rests with the officer to whom the
order was given. He shall be strictly required to justify his action.
4. Unjust or Improper Orders. Lawful orders which appear to be
unjust or improper shall be carried out. After carrying out the
orders, the officer to whom the order was given may file a written
report to the Chief via the chain of command indicating the
circumstances and reasons for questioning the orders, along with
his request for clarification of departmental policy.
5. Conflicting Orders. Should any order given by a superior officer
conflict with any previous departmental order, the member to
whom such order is given will call attention to the conflict. If the
superior officer does not change his order to avoid such conflict his
order will be obeyed, but the member obeying such order will not
be held responsible for disobedience of the previous order. It
should later be reported to the Chief in writing for clarification.
6. Personnel Orders. Orders pertaining to assignments, change of
duty assignments, administrative matters related to conditions of
employment, and employee rights and benefits.
7. Instructions from Dispatcher. All personnel shall promptly respond
to and execute all instructions from the Dispatcher. These
communications shall be considered as direct orders from higher
authority.
f. Required Conduct. In addition to the specific duties of each individual
rank and assignment, as set forth in subsections 16-1.4 through
16-1.17, the following provisions are applicable to all members and
employees of the Department.
1. Reporting for Duty. Report for duty whenever so ordered by proper
police authorities. Upon reporting for duty, be physically and
mentally fit, properly uniformed and equipped and not absent
himself from duty without leave.
2. Awareness of Activities. Upon reporting for duty or returning to
duty from any absence inform himself about all new orders,
regulations, memoranda, previous shift activities, and all other
important matters governing his assignment.
3. Submitting Reports. Promptly and accurately complete and submit
all reports and forms as required.
§ 16-1.3 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 16-1.3
AO:262
4. Identification. Officers shall carry their badges and identification
cards on their persons at all times, except when impractical or
dangerous to their safety or to an investigation. They shall furnish
their name and badge number to any person requesting that
information, when they are on duty or while holding themselves out
as having an official capacity, except when the withholding of such
information is necessary for the performance of police duties or is
authorized by proper authority.
5. Address and Telephone. An officer shall have a telephone in his
residence or a phone number at which he can be reached and shall
promptly report any change of phone number or address to his
superior officer.
6. Truthfulness. An officer shall truthfully state the facts in all reports
as well as when he appears before any judicial, departmental or
other official investigation, hearing, trial or proceeding. He shall
cooperate fully in all phases of such investigations, hearings, trials
and proceedings.
7. Physical Fitness. Maintain good physical condition in accordance
with a standard determined by the Chief, after consultation with a
physician.
8. Examinations. A member shall submit to a physical or psychological
examination at any time, at the expense of the Department, when
so ordered by the Chief of Police.
9. Civil Suits for Personal Injuries. Any claims for damage to clothing
or other personal property belonging to a member or employee
caused by the performance of duty shall be made in accordance
with departmental procedures. Members and employees shall not
seek in any way, nor accept from any persons, money or
compensation for damages sustained or expenses incurred by them
in the line of duty without first notifying the Chief of Police in
writing. Members or employees who have received municipal
salaries for illness or for personal injuries sustained off duty shall
notify the Chief of Police in writing of any intent to seek, sue,
solicit, or accept compensation as damages for such illness or
injury.
Notice shall be filed before the action is taken. It shall include the
facts of the claims and the name of the defendant. Keep the Chief
informed of the status of the case and the final court determination.
This provision shall not apply to private insurance policies held by
members or employees for which premiums are not paid for in part
or in whole by the municipality.
10. Line of Duty Disability. Any injury, illness or disability incurred in
the line of duty shall be reported in accordance with departmental
procedures. Final disposition as to line-of-duty injuries, illnesses or
§ 16-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-1.3
AO:263
disabilities shall be made by the Chief after consultation with a
physician. In each case of illness, injury or disability incurred in the
line of duty, no officer shall be returned to duty until his ability to be
placed on full duty status is certified by proper medical authority.
11. Leaving the Town. Whenever a member of this Department, during
his tour of duty, is about to leave the Town limits for the purposes of
investigations, pursuit, or any other reason, he shall inform his
Shift Commander or Dispatcher prior to his leaving and again on
his return.
12. Property Identification. All personal property including all money
that comes under an officer's control whether lost, stolen,
confiscated or given to the department shall be tagged and turned
over to the Officer-in-Charge according to current departmental
procedures.
13. Public Defects. Every member shall observe and forthwith report in
writing to the Officer-in-Charge any defect, obstruction, or
nuisance in the streets, sidewalks or other public areas which may
cause a hazard to the general public or create a civil liability upon
the City or Town. Appropriate notification shall be made to the
radio dispatcher for more immediate remedial action where
necessary.
14. Report Use of Weapons. A member of the Department who finds it
necessary to use his nightstick, blackjack or discharges his firearm
in making an arrest or attempting to make an arrest shall
immediately notify his Commanding Officer and the said
Commanding Officer shall conduct an immediate investigation as to
the possibility of injury to any person or property and the propriety
of the member's use of his weapon. Officers shall make a written
report of any deliberate or accidental discharge of firearms
(excluding authorized target practice).
g. Prohibited Conduct. The following acts by a member or employee of the
Department are prohibited or restricted:
1. Criminal Conduct. Violation of any law of the United States or of
any State and local jurisdiction in which an officer is present. A
conviction of the violation of any law shall be prima facie evidence
of a violation of this section.
2. Conduct Unbecoming an Officer. Conduct unbecoming an officer
shall include that which brings the Department into disrepute or
reflects discredit upon the officer as a member of the Department,
or that which impairs the operation or efficiency of the Department
or officer.
3. Neglect of Duty. Being absent from assigned duty without leave or
failing to take suitable and appropriate police action when any
crime, public disorder or other incident requires police attention.
§ 16-1.3 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 16-1.3
AO:264
4. Insubordination. Failure or deliberate refusal to obey a lawful order
issued by a superior officer.
5. Unnecessary Force. The use of more physical force than that which
is necessary to accomplish a proper police purpose. Officers shall
use force in accordance with law and departmental procedures.
6. Discourtesy. Discourtesy, rudeness, or insolence to any member of
the public. An officer shall be courteous and tactful in the
performance of his duties and shall control his temper, exercising
the utmost patience and discretion, even in the face of extreme
provocation.
7. Use of Alcohol and Drugs. Consumption of intoxicating beverages
while in uniform or on duty except in the performance of duty and
while acting under proper and specific orders from a superior
officer. Appearing for duty, or being on duty, while under the
influence of liquor, controlled substances or drugs to any degree
whatsoever, or with an odor of intoxicants on their breath.
8. Improper Associations. Voluntarily maintaining or establishing
relationships with persons engaged in unlawful activity, except in
the discharge of official duty and without prior knowledge of the
member's Commanding Officer or the Chief of Police.
9. Undue Influences. Seeking the influence or intervention of any
person outside the Department for purposes of personal
preferment, advantage, transfer or advancement.
10. Recommending Private Services. Recommending or suggesting in
any manner the employment or purchase of any particular
professional or commercial service or product, such as lawyers,
bondsmen, undertakers, towing services or burglar alarm
companies, except in the transaction of personal business.
11. Personal Business. Conducting personal business while on duty.
12. Departmental Letterhead. Use of the departmental letterhead for
private correspondence or sending official correspondence out of
the Department without the permission of the Chief of Police.
13. Mailing Address. Use of the Department as a mailing address for
private purposes, especially for the purpose of a motor vehicle
license or registration.
14. Possessing Keys to Private Buildings. Having keys to private
buildings or dwellings on a member's area of patrol without the
permission of the Chief.
15. Sleeping. Sleeping while on duty.
16. Reading. Recreational reading while on duty, except during meals.
§ 16-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-1.3
AO:265
17. Smoking. Conspicuous smoking while on duty.
18. Notices. Altering, defacing or removing any posted notice of the
Department. No notice shall be posted on the Department bulletin
board without the permission of the Chief of Police or the Officer-in-
Charge.
19. Report of Loss or Damage. In the event that departmental property
is lost or found bearing evidence of damage which has not been
reported, the last person using the property may be charged with
failure to report and may be held responsible for damages.
20. Incompetence. An officer shall maintain sufficient competency to
perform his duty and to assume the responsibilities of his position.
Incompetency may be demonstrated by the following:
(a) A lack of knowledge of the application of laws required to be
enforced;
(b) An unwillingness or inability to perform assigned tasks;
(c) The failure to conform to work standards established for the
officer's rank, grade, or position;
(d) Repeated poor evaluations or repeated infractions of the rules
and regulations.
21. Dissemination of Information. An officer shall treat the official
business of the Department as confidential and shall conform to the
following guidelines:
(a) Information regarding official business shall be disseminated
only to those for whom it is intended, in accordance with
established departmental procedures.
(b) An officer shall not remove or copy official records or reports
from a police installation except in accordance with
established departmental procedures.
(c) An officer shall not divulge the identity of a person giving
confidential information except as authorized by proper
authority in the performance of police duties.
(d) An officer shall not release to the press or news media
information concerning departmental policy or the evidentiary
aspects of any criminal investigation without prior approval of
the Chief or Commanding Officer. Consult with the Chief of
Police when in doubt.
22. Feigning Illness. An officer shall not feign illness or injury, falsely
report himself ill or injured, or otherwise deceive or attempt to
deceive any official of the Department as to the condition of his
health.
§ 16-1.3 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 16-1.3
AO:266
23. Towing Services. No member shall solicit or assist in any way for a
towing service. All requests for towing shall be referred to the
station. It shall be the responsibility of the Dispatcher to follow the
directions of the Chief of Police.
24. Use of Telephones. Use of departmental phone for private toll calls.
Complete required departmental forms for all toll calls. Permission
of the Commanding Officer shall be obtained prior to making any
toll calls.
25. Gambling in Station. No game of chance, card playing or gambling
of any kind shall be permitted in any police building or station.
26. Withholding or Destroying Evidence. A member or employee shall
not fabricate, withhold or destroy evidence of any kind.
27. Incurring Department Liability. A member or employee of the
Department shall not incur a liability chargeable to the Town of
Little Compton unless with the knowledge and consent of the Chief
of Police.
h. Uniforms and Appearance. Members shall be neat appearing and well
groomed while in uniform. All articles of clothing shall conform to the
departmental uniform regulations. Civilian clothing shall not be worn
with any distinguishable part of the uniform while on duty.
1. Hair Styles. All members shall report for duty clean shaven and
with neat and trimmed haircuts. The following diagram shall be
adhered to:
§ 16-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-1.3
AO:267
2. Mustache and Beards. The face will be clean shaven except that
mustaches are permitted. If a mustache is worn it will be kept
neatly trimmed and tidy, no portion extending beyond the corners
of the mouth will fall below a line parallel with the bottom of the
lower lip. Goatees and beards are not authorized.
3. Wearing the Uniform. Uniforms shall be kept neat, clean, and well
pressed at all times. Care should be taken not to wear threadbare
or faded items. The uniform cap shall be worn out-of-doors unless
otherwise directed by competent authority. The Chief shall
periodically issue special orders pertaining to daily or seasonal
wear.
4. Civilian Clothing. Male members and employees permitted to wear
civilian clothing during a tour of duty shall wear either a business
suit or sports coat and slacks. A dress-style shirt with tie shall be
worn. Commanding Officers may prescribe other types of clothing
when necessary to meet particular police objectives. Unless
otherwise directed, female members and employees permitted to
wear civilian clothing shall conform to standards normally required
of office personnel in private business firms.
i. Departmental Property and Equipment. Equipment issued to members
of the Department shall remain the property of the Department.
Members and employees shall maintain departmental property and
equipment assigned to them in good condition. Damaged or lost
property may subject the responsible individual to reimbursement
charges and/or appropriate disciplinary action.
1. Damaged Inoperative Property and Equipment. Members and
employees shall immediately report to their Commanding Officer
on designated forms any loss or damage to departmental property
or equipment assigned to them. The immediate superior shall be
notified of any defects or hazardous conditions existing in any
departmental property or equipment.
2. Care of Departmental Buildings. Members and employees shall not
mar, mark or deface any surface in any departmental building. No
material shall be affixed in any way to any wall in departmental
buildings without specific authorization from a Commanding
Officer.
3. Surrender of Departmental Property. Members and employees are
required to surrender all departmental property in their possession
upon separation from the service, or when otherwise ordered.
4. Departmental Vehicles. A valid driver's license is required of all
members. Members shall not use departmental vehicle without
permission of the Commanding Officer. Departmental vehicles shall
never be used for personal business or pleasure.
§ 16-1.3 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 16-1.3
AO:268
5. Transporting Citizens. Citizens shall be transported in
departmental vehicles only when necessary to accomplish a police
purpose. Such transportation shall be done in conformance with
departmental policy or at the direction of a Commanding Officer,
immediate supervisor or the communications center.
6. Authorized Equipment. While on duty, a member shall carry only
such equipment as is issued by the Department or authorized by
the Chief of Police.
7. Reporting Accidents. Accidents involving departmental property,
personnel and/or equipment must be reported in accordance with
procedures established by the Chief of Police.
8. Upkeep of Police Manual. All members and employees who are
issued the Police Manual are responsible for its maintenance and
knowledge of its contents and they are required to make
appropriate changes or inserts as issued by the Chief. The Manual
shall be considered departmental property.
j. Disciplinary Actions. The Law Enforcement Officers Bill of Rights
outlines various rights and responsibilities of the appointing authority,
Chief of Police, and law enforcement officers in a variety of situations.
Specific attention should be paid in the following provisions regarding
the disciplinary powers of the Chief of Police:
The provisions of this act are not intended to prohibit summary
punishment by the Chief or the highest ranking officer of the law
enforcement agency.
1. Summary punishment of two days' suspension without pay may be
imposed for minor violations of departmental rules and regulations
when the facts which constitute the minor violation are not in
dispute. If the aggrieved officer believes the punishment of the
Chief or the highest ranking officer of the law enforcement agency
is unreasonable, he may appeal such punishment directly through
the provisions of this subtitle.
2. Emergency suspension may be imposed by the Chief or the highest
ranking officer of the law enforcement agency, when it appears that
such action is in the best interest of the public. Any emergency
suspension of any law enforcement officer shall consist of the law
enforcement officer being relieved of duty and he shall receive all
ordinary pay and benefits, as he would have, if he were not
suspended. Any such law enforcement officer so suspended shall be
entitled to a prompt hearing before a hearing committee upon his
request. The time period for said hearing is not to exceed 14 days.
If, after hearing, the hearing committee does suspend or dismiss
the law enforcement officer, he shall not be entitled to his pay and
benefits; however, if the enforcement officer is reinstated by a
subsequent hearing, he shall be entitled to be reimbursed for all
salary and benefits that have not been paid.
§ 16-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-1.4
AO:269
§ 16-1.4. Duties of the Chief of Police.
a. Summary. The Chief of Police is the chief administrative officer of the
Department and the final departmental authority in all matters of
policy, operations, and discipline. He exercises all lawful powers of his
office and issues such lawful orders as are necessary to assure the
effective performance of the Department.
Through the Chief of Police the Department is responsible for the
enforcement of all laws coming within its legal jurisdiction. The Chief of
Police is responsible for planning, directing, coordinating, controlling
and staffing all activities of the Department. He is also responsible for
its continued and efficient operation, for the enforcement of rules and
regulations within the Department, for the completion and forwarding
of such reports as may be required by proper authority and for the
Department's relations with local citizens, the local government and
other related agencies.
The Chief is responsible for training of all members of the Department.
The Chief shall have general charge of the station house and all
property of the Police Department.
b. General Duties and Responsibilities. It is the duty and responsibility of
the Chief of Police to:
1. Ensure compliance with all laws which the Department or its
officers have the authority to enforce.
2. Organize, direct and control all resources of the Department to
preserve the peace, protect persons and property and enforce the
law.
3. Develop a professional organizational structure for the
Department.
4. Establish a routine of daily duties to be performed by officers.
Designate an officer to serve as Commanding Officer in his
absence.
5. Assign, detail or transfer any member or employee of the
Department to or from any unit or assignment whenever he shall
deem such action to be in the best interest of the efficiency,
discipline or morale of the Department.
6. Institute an adequate and progressive program of training for
members and employees of the Department.
7. Ensure that all members have available to them copies of the
Department's Police Manual.
8. Promulgate all general and special orders of the Department and
issue on his own authority orders, written and oral, not inconsistent
with his powers, duties and responsibilities.
§ 16-1.4 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 16-1.4
AO:270
§ 16-1.5. Duties of the Lieutenant/Inspector-Executive Officer.
9. Plan and execute police programs designed to prevent and repress
crime, to apprehend and prosecute offenders and to recover
property. Modify these programs to meet current trends.
10. Provide for investigation into all cases of alleged or apparent
misconduct by departmental personnel.
11. Enlist the suggestions of members and employees of the
Department to ensure maximum relevance and acceptance of all
departmental regulations.
12. Keep himself informed as to the affairs of the Department, ensuring
that the duties and responsibilities of members and employees are
being properly discharged.
13. Be responsible for the necessary delegation of authority to those
under his command, commensurate with their duties and
responsibilities.
14. Exercise general supervision and inspection of all licensed public
places within the community.
15. Develop or adopt new techniques to improve effectiveness in the
discharge of police obligations of the Department.
16. Adopt a policy covering the safekeeping of all evidence and any
property recovered, found or confiscated. Designate a member of
the Department as Evidence Officer.
17. Be responsible for the preparation and justification of the annual
departmental budget and for the control of all departmental
expenditures.
18. Maintain a personnel record system in which shall be kept all
pertinent information on all departmental members and
employees.
a. Summary. The Inspector and Executive Officer serves as the assistant to
the Chief in carrying out the responsibilities, duties and policies of the
Department as directed by the Chief of Police.
b. General Duties and Responsibilities. It is the duty and responsibility of
the Lieutenant/Inspector-Executive Officer to:
1. Prepare monthly duty schedule and assign replacements when
necessary. Maintain a time book listing vacations, sick leave,
overtime worked, etc., of all full-time members of the Department.
2. Maintain property condition file:
§ 16-1.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-1.5
AO:271
§ 16-1.6. Duties of the Sergeant. [Ord. 11/19/87]
(a) Survey all departmental equipment (including vehicles) and
prepare a Department Inventory. Also weapons, handcuffs,
etc., belonging to the Town; to be identified as to whom issued.
(b) Keep a vehicle condition report. Log all repairs and note
condition.
3. Act as the Court Officer or Prosecution Officer for the Little
Compton Police.
(a) Maintain pending case list of Department cases;
(b) Keep an outstanding warrant file (persons wanted by this
Department);
(c) Maintain an arrest log and provide a semi-annual report
(January 1 and July 1) with persons arrested in the following
categories:
(1) Criminal.
(2) Motor vehicle.
(3) Adults.
(4) Juveniles.
(5) Persons prosecuted.
(6) Detentions.
(7) Arrest for other departments.
4. Prepare Uniform Crime Report monthly for the Department.
5. Supervise members of the Department in all areas which require
their performance as Law Enforcement Officers.
6. Perform such other duties as may be assigned by the Chief.
a. Summary. The Sergeant supervises patrolmen in the Little Compton
Police Department. He directs its members in the performance of their
duties and coordinates the activity of the Department in an efficient and
effective manner.
b. General Duties and Responsibilities. It is the duty and responsibility of
the Sergeant to:
1. Maintain a personnel file which will contain:
(a) Full information and identification of each member;
(b) Complete physical description and fingerprint card;
§ 16-1.5 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 16-1.6
AO:272
(c) Member's photograph;
(d) A log with badge number, date of enlistment, dates of
promotion, special assignments, schooling, commendations,
certificates of accomplishment and any other pertinent data.
2. Keep and file reports of all traffic matters concerning the
Department.
(a) Submit daily transmittal on tickets to Adj. Div.;
(b) Forward motor vehicle summonses to proper court;
(c) Maintain an accident log listing last names of persons involved,
date and location of accident;
(d) Submit report monthly to the Chief of Police on the number of
motor vehicle arrests, number of equipment violations cited
and amount of accidents investigated.
3. Keep an account of all complaints to the Department and maintain
files as:
(a) Complaints received current month;
(b) Complaints active;
(c) Dog complaints;
(d) Vacant house checks;
(e) Closed complaints;
(f) Report monthly on complaints received, complaints closed for
month, complaints closed previous months;
(g) Direct members of the Department in follow-up attention to be
given these matters.
4. Coordinate patrol efforts whereby members exchange information
of a police related nature apprising each other at the change of
shifts of any matter of concern regarding activity which a police
officer should be aware of.
5. Assist the Lieutenant/Inspector in drafting warrants, taking of
statements and preparing cases for court with information
charging.
6. Review day sheets and pass on to patrols information which is
deemed relevant.
7. Maintain a log of all evidence seized (seizure report folder) and
inventory all evidence kept in the evidence room. See that all
evidence seized is tagged with the date, time, location, defendant
or victim and officer's name seizing same.
§ 16-1.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-1.6
AO:273
§ 16-1.7. Duties of the Patrol Officer.
8. Check uniform and appearance of members; direct member to
correct whatever infraction you observe concerning the rules and
regulations applying to same. If member does not comply with
suggested correction, certify in writing, to the Chief of Police the
officer cited, date and time and the infraction.
9. Perform such other duties as may be assigned by the Chief.
a. Summary. A Patrol Officer shall be responsible for the efficient
performance of required duties in conformance with the rules,
regulations, and policies contained in this Section.
Duties shall consist of, but are not necessarily limited to, a number of
general police responsibilities necessary to the stability and safety of
the community. A Patrol Officer shall be expected to:
1. Identify criminal offenders and criminal activity and, where
appropriate, apprehend offenders and participate in subsequent
court proceedings.
2. Reduce the opportunities for the commission of crime through
preventive patrol and other measures.
3. Aid individuals who are in danger of physical harm.
4. Facilitate the movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
5. Identify problems that are potentially serious law enforcement or
governmental problems.
6. Create and maintain a feeling of security in the community.
7. Promote and preserve the peace.
8. Provide other services on an emergency basis.
b. General Duties and Responsibilities. It is the duty and responsibility of a
Patrol Officer to:
1. Exercise authority consistent with the obligations imposed by the
oath of office and be accountable to superior officers. Promptly
obey legitimate orders.
2. Coordinate efforts with those of other members of the Department
so that teamwork may ensure continuity of purpose and maximum
achievement of police objectives.
3. Communicate to superiors and to fellow officers all information
obtained which is pertinent to the achievement of police objectives.
4. Respond punctually to all assignments.
§ 16-1.6 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 16-1.7
AO:274
5. Acquire and record information concerning events that have taken
place since the last tour of duty.
6. Record activity during tour of duty in the manner prescribed by
proper authority.
7. Maintain weapons and equipment in a functional, presentable
condition.
8. Assist citizens requesting assistance or information. Courteously
explain any instance where jurisdiction does not lie with the Police
Department and suggest other procedures to be followed.
9. Be accountable for the securing, receipting, and proper
transporting of all evidence and property coming into custody.
10. Answer questions asked by the general public, counsel juveniles
and adults when necessary and refer them to persons or agencies
where they can obtain further assistance.
11. Preserve the peace at public gatherings, neighborhood disputes
and family quarrels.
12. Serve or deliver warrants, summonses, subpoenas, and other
official papers promptly and accurately when so directed by a
superior officer.
13. Confer with court prosecutors and testify in court.
14. Accomplish other general duties as they are assigned or become
necessary.
15. Perform such other duties as may be assigned by the Chief.
c. Specific Duties and Responsibilities, Preventive Patrol.
1. Patrol an assigned area for general purposes of crime prevention
and law enforcement. Patrol includes:
(a) Being thoroughly familiar with the assigned route of patrol.
Such familiarity includes knowledge of residents, merchants,
businesses, roads, alleyways, paths, etc. Conditions that
contribute to crime should be reported. The location of fire
boxes, telephones and other emergency services should be
noted.
(b) Apprehending persons violating the law or wanted by the
police.
(c) Completing detailed reports on all crimes, vehicle accidents
and other incidents requiring police attention. In cases where
an arrest is made, an arrest report is submitted along with the
required crime reports. When property is recovered or
§ 16-1.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-1.7
AO:275
additional information is discovered pertaining to a previously
reported offense, the officer completes an investigation report.
(d) Preserving any crime scene until an Officer-in-Charge or
Detective arrives when such crime scene is encountered or
when dispatched to the scene as the first responding officer.
(e) Public assembly checks.
(f) Building security checks.
(g) Observing and interrogating of suspicious persons.
(h) Issuing traffic citations.
(i) Being alert for and reporting fires.
(j) Reporting street light and traffic signals out-of-order, street
hazards and any conditions that endanger public safety.
(k) Checking of schools, parks and playgrounds.
(l) Responding to any public emergency.
2. Conduct a thorough investigation of all offenses and incidents
within the area of assignment and scope of activity. Collect
evidence and record data which will aid in identification,
apprehension, and prosecution of offenders, as well as the recovery
of property.
3. Be alert to the development of conditions tending to cause crime or
indicative of criminal activity. Take preventive action to correct
such conditions, and inform superiors as soon as the situation
permits.
4. Respond to situations brought to the officer's attention while in the
course of routine patrol or when assigned by radio. Render first aid,
when qualified, to persons who are seriously ill or injured. Assist
persons needing police services.
5. Remain on assigned route throughout the tour of duty except when
a police emergency necessitates a temporary absence, or when an
Officer-in-Charge or the Dispatcher has issued authorization for a
temporary absence.
6. Patrol area giving particular attention to and frequently rechecking
locations where the crime hazard is great. Insofar as possible, a
Patrol Officer shall not patrol an area according to any fixed route
or schedule, but shall alternate frequently and backtrack in order
to be at the location least expected.
7. Be alert for all nuisances, impediments, obstructions, defects or
other conditions that might endanger or hinder the safety, health or
convenience of the public within the patrol area.
§ 16-1.7 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 16-1.7
AO:276
8. If assigned to operate a motor vehicle:
(a) See that it is well maintained mechanically and that it is kept
clean both inside and out.
(b) Inspect the vehicle at the beginning of the tour of duty for any
defects or missing equipment. Immediately report all defects
and damages sustained to the vehicle to the proper authority
and complete all reports and forms required by current
procedures.
(c) Remove the keys whenever the patrol car is left unattended for
any reason.
(d) Use only vehicles assigned by the Officer-in-Charge.
(e) Use the call number assigned to the car to contact
headquarters.
(f) Operate the radio in line with FCC regulations and current
departmental procedures.
(g) Ensure that the assigned vehicle's gas tank is full prior to
completion of each tour of duty.
9. Keep radio equipment in operation at all times and be thoroughly
familiar with departmental policy concerning use of the radios.
10. Take measures to direct the flow of traffic in the area during
periods of congestion.
11. Notify the Officer-in-Charge if more than a temporary absence from
regular duties is required.
12. Make periodic reports to the station house.
d. Specific Duties and Responsibilities, Traffic Patrol.
1. Direct and expedite the flow of traffic at assigned intersections
keeping in mind the duty as a traffic officer in preventing accidents,
protecting pedestrians and ensuring the free flow of traffic.
2. Enforce the parking ordinances and motor vehicle laws in the
patrol areas.
3. Be alert for traffic safety conditions which may endanger or
inconvenience the public and report such conditions to the Safety
Officer.
4. Respond immediately when called from a traffic post to render
emergency police service. Notify the station at the earliest possible
opportunity.
5. Wear the prescribed traffic safety clothing and equipment.
§ 16-1.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-1.8
AO:277
§ 16-1.8. Duties of the Officer-in-Charge.
a. Summary. An Officer-in-Charge is normally a ranking officer from the
Department who has been designated by the Chief to command a shift.
He is responsible for the immediate supervision and control of all
officers under his command and is personally responsible for their
efficiency and effectiveness as members of the Department.
b. General Duties and Responsibilities. It is the duty and responsibility of
the Officer-in-Charge to:
1. Provide for the daily inspection by Patrol Supervisors of members
assigned to patrol. Correct any non-compliance with departmental
standards of uniform or equipment.
2. Provide for all significant changes in departmental rules,
regulations, policies and procedures to be explained first at roll call
and later by the Patrol Supervisors.
3. Provide for the proper and complete upkeep of the daily log.
4. Coordinate the deployment and activities of Traffic and Patrol
personnel.
5. Be responsible for dissemination of information and/or materials,
and inspection of officers for only such equipment as has been
authorized by the Chief of Police.
6. Ensure the proper use of radio procedures by all members under
his command.
7. Ensure the efficient operation and maintenance of the
Department's communications system.
8. Periodically evaluate the adequacy of the communications
equipment to meet the Department's needs. Report any inadequacy
using current departmental procedures and recommend the
procurement of needed equipment.
9. Ensure that inspections of motor vehicles and equipment are
carried out and that the results of such inspections are properly
reported by current departmental procedures.
10. Ensure that uniformed patrol personnel not use unmarked cars
without the approval of the Chief of Police.
11. Provide for the security, cleanliness, and maintenance of the station
house and its equipment, during his tour of duty.
12. Ensure that all persons coming into the station house are treated
courteously.
13. Ensure proper processing of all complaints by citizens.
§ 16-1.8 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 16-1.8
AO:278
14. Oversee the prompt and accurate entry of all official police
business submitted to the desk that is to be included in the records
kept at the desk.
15. Ensure that the desk files are maintained.
16. Maintain the order and security of the station house and the proper
conduct of officers.
17. Oversee and direct officers who are assigned to desk duty.
18. Take special measures to ensure that the departmental procedures
are carried out regarding the handling of lost, stolen or abandoned
property required as evidence or taken from a prisoner.
19. Examine for approval or disapproval all reports or records
submitted to the desk. If approved, initial the report or record in
the proper place. If disapproved, order the police officer to correct
the deficiencies and resubmit the report or record.
20. Be responsible for the care and handling of prisoners in accordance
with departmental policies and procedures and State law.
Responsibilities include, but are not necessarily limited to, the
following guidelines:
(a) Examine each prisoner upon his arrival at the station house for
injuries. If any are found, record the fact in writing and submit
the report to the Chief of Police. Determine whether any of the
injuries were inflicted by a member of the Department. If they
were, note such in the report.
Investigate the circumstances of the incident for possible
disciplinary action and require the officer who inflicted the
injury to submit a detailed report describing the incident.
Forward such report to the Chief.
(b) If the prisoner requires medical attention, summon a physician
or, if necessary, have him conveyed to a hospital.
(c) When a prisoner is unconscious for any cause, immediately
attempt to restore consciousness. Failing to do so within a
reasonable time, call a physician and be guided by his
instructions. Allow no unconscious person to be placed in a cell
except with the approval of a physician.
(d) Inform a prisoner charged with operating a motor vehicle
while intoxicated, of his right to be examined immediately by a
physician selected by him at his expense. Afford him a
reasonable opportunity to exercise the right.
21. Oversee arrests of juveniles and immediately notify the parents and
the Probation Office; if there is no parent, the guardian or person
with whom the juvenile resides and the Probation Office.
§ 16-1.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-1.8
AO:279
§ 16-1.9. Duties of the Training Officer.
22. See that any person, including a juvenile, arrested for a felony, a
narcotics violation or an offense arising from a civil disorder is
fingerprinted and photographed. Also, have palm prints taken of
persons arrested for capital or possible life sentence offenses.
23. Be responsible for ensuring the prompt and effective service of all
summonses, subpoenas, warrants and other official documents
forwarded by proper authority.
24. Contact a Matron when a female is brought into the station house
under arrest. Ensure that departmental procedures surrounding
the handling of female prisoners are followed.
25. Oversee the booking process. If an arrested person has been taken
directly to a hospital and is remaining there, see that proper
booking procedures are carried out at the hospital.
26. Inform any prisoner upon his being booked of his right to use the
telephone.
27. Oversee the bonding procedures and release of prisoners on bond.
28. Designate work assignments in conjunction with the Chief of
Police.
29. Inform the relieving officer of all police business that is pending or
would otherwise be of interest or importance to him.
30. Perform such other duties as may be assigned by proper authority.
a. Summary. Under the general supervision of the Chief, the Training
Officer develops and prepares other officers and recruits to effectively
handle the realities of police work by promoting the skills, the
professional attitude and a high sense of duty necessary to the police
profession.
b. General Duties and Responsibilities. It is the duty and responsibility of
the Training Officer to:
1. Prepare recruits for police service through indoctrination in
departmental policies, procedures and requirements of job
performance.
2. Prepare in-service training programs for regular officers in areas of
crime detection, firearms, regulations and policies, leadership,
human relations, crisis intervention, and the latest developments in
all other aspects of law enforcement.
3. Provide officers the information needed in the performance of duty
or in otherwise meeting their responsibilities by furnishing them
§ 16-1.8 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 16-1.9
AO:280
§ 16-1.10. Duties of the Evidence and Identification Officer.
with changes in the laws, new police methods, Supreme Court
decisions and other topics which affect police operations.
4. Schedule training classes to be set up in prescribed units of
instruction and prepare lesson plans on material to be covered in
each class.
5. Solicit experts from the criminal justice system to conduct classes
of instruction and ensure that they are given sufficient time for
preparation and presentation of the material.
6. Utilize external resources to develop specialized skills that will
increase the overall effectiveness of the Department.
7. Inform the Chief of the activities and progress of the training
program.
8. Keep a written record of all training activities.
9. Perform other duties as assigned by the Chief.
a. Summary. The Evidence and Identification Officer performs
departmental functions relating to the processing, filing, storage and
security of crime scene and related evidence and the collection and
maintenance of general identification files. The Evidence and
Identification Officer acts as custodian of all controlled substances
handled by the Department.
b. General Duties and Responsibilities. It is the duty and responsibility of
the Evidence and Identification Officer to:
1. Become proficient in techniques of fingerprinting, photography,
and the collection, preservation and presentation of all physical
evidence.
2. Take and classify fingerprints, and maintain the fingerprint files on
all arrested persons. Take palm prints of all persons arrested for
any crime punishable by death or life imprisonment.
3. Take any non-criminal fingerprints and photographs as required for
firearm permits or identification purposes, etc.
4. Act as custodian of all controlled substances seized in the course of
any arrest or investigation.
5. Photograph persons taken into custody by the police. Maintain the
photography files.
6. Photograph as required:
(a) Sites of fires of suspicious origin;
§ 16-1.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-1.10
AO:281
§ 16-1.11. Duties of the Prosecutor.
(b) Homicides;
(c) Sudden deaths and suicides if there is a possibility of an
inquest;
(d) Safe breaks;
(e) Autopsies when requested by the medical examiner;
(f) Serious accidents and accidents involving Town-owned
vehicles;
(g) Take other photographs as requested by the Officer-in-Charge
or the Chief.
7. Search crime scenes systematically and carefully for physical
evidence in conformity with established and approved procedures
of the Department.
8. Preserve for court any and all physical evidence found at the scene
of a crime. Make any enlargements of photographs as may be
required for presentation in court.
9. Process all physical evidence collected by or brought to the unit.
10. Preserve the security and custody of evidence by giving or
receiving a standardized receipt whenever evidence is received or
transferred. Transfer evidence only to persons authorized to
receive it and only according to departmental policy regarding
handling of evidence.
11. Receive, mark for identification, prepare, package, record and
forward to the laboratories, all evidence that requires further
scientific processing.
12. Be responsible for conducting authorized searches of the various
files maintained by the Department. Refrain from divulging
information contained in such files to persons other than those
specifically authorized by the Commanding Officer or the Chief to
receive such information.
13. Keep himself informed of all improvements in scientific
investigative techniques with regard to police identification and
laboratory processes.
14. Prevent the destruction or removal of any records, fingerprint
cards or photographs from the files, except upon the order of the
Chief of Police.
a. Summary. The Police Prosecutor is responsible for the preparation and
presentation of cases on the District Court level. As the Department's
§ 16-1.10 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 16-1.11
AO:282
§ 16-1.12. Duties of the Police Constables.
liaison with the court, the Prosecutor coordinates the scheduling of
cases and witnesses.
b. General Duties and Responsibilities. It is the duty and responsibility of
the Police Prosecutor to:
1. Maintain an effective working relationship between the court and
the Department.
2. Coordinate the scheduling of cases for the Police Department.
3. Assure that witnesses are notified and that evidence is available
when needed.
4. Minimize the time spent in court by police officers. Maintain a
record of time spent in court by police officers.
5. Notify the Chief of any unusual occurrences requiring his personal
attention.
6. Cooperate with the Attorney General's Office in the scheduling and
presentation of cases to the Grand Jury or in the Superior Court.
7. Be responsible for ensuring the punctual attendance of all
departmental members and their effective preparation and
presentation of cases before the courts.
a. Summary. Police Constables shall be appointed from time to time as
provided by law. They shall not be required to give bond, nor shall they
be authorized to serve process in civil actions, but in all other matters
they shall have the same power and authority as other constables. The
Chief of Police may request the Town Council to either add or diminish
the number of Constables as he deems necessary.
b. General Duties and Responsibilities. It is the duty and responsibility of
Police Constables to:
1. Be responsible for the efficient performance of his duties in
conformity with the policies of the Department and obey the
directions of the Chief of Police and other superior officers.
2. Familiarize himself with all instructions and regulations governing
the duties, responsibilities, conduct and demeanor of a patrolman.
3. Maintain a well-groomed appearance, and maintain his clothing
and equipment in a proper state of cleanliness and repair.
4. Exercise care in the use of police premises, property and
equipment.
5. May be suspended or dismissed from duty for any infraction of the
rules of conduct applicable to a patrolman.
§ 16-1.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-1.12
AO:283
§ 16-1.13. Duties of the Animal Control Officer. [Ord. 3/5/87]
6. May be dismissed for inability to grasp police procedures and
practices, or failure to satisfactorily meet requirements of the
police service or attendance at police training sessions.
a. Summary. The Animal Control Officer has the responsibility for the
enforcement of the laws of the State of Rhode Island, and the
ordinances of the Town of Little Compton pertaining to the licensing
and control of dogs. He answers complaints pertaining to dogs and
patrols the Town as may be necessary.
b. General Duties and Responsibilities. It will be the duty and
responsibility of the Animal Control Officer to:
1. Check with the Dispatcher on a daily basis to ascertain if there are
any complaints awaiting action:
(a) Lost Dogs — Information only.
(b) Stray Dogs — To be picked up.
(c) Dog Bites — Follow up on complaint.
(d) Nuisance Complaint — Animal Control Officer to be made
aware of complaint, but no action to be taken unless requested
by Chief or Police Officer in charge as stated on complaint.
2. Pick up complaints requiring action and take appropriate action to
pick up dogs, transport dogs to the dog pound, and issue
summonses.
3. Patrol those areas of Town in which there have been dog
complaints or problems and take appropriate enforcement action.
4. File necessary activity reports and report on all incidents and
complaints investigated.
5. Appear in Court as may be necessary.
6. Perform such other duties as may be required by proper authority.
c. Miscellaneous. The Animal Control Officer and Deputy Animal Control
Officer are Special Constables appointed in connection with those
duties as Animal Control Officer and Deputy only. They will come under
the supervision of the Police Chief. On occasion the Animal Control
Officer or Deputy Animal Control Officer may have to issue a summons.
They will have the assistance and cooperation of the Police Department
whenever necessary. A Town owned vehicle and gasoline will be
provided for use of Town business only.
d. Rabies Clinic. The Animal Control Officer will be in charge of any rabies
clinic run by the Rhode Island Veterinary Society in the Town.
§ 16-1.12 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 16-1.14
AO:284
§ 16-1.14. Duties of the Safety Officer.
a. Summary. The Safety Officer has the primary responsibility for
cooperating with the schools in developing and improving safety
education programs. He supervises the training of safety patrol units at
each school and oversees the maintenance of safety patrol equipment.
b. General Duties and Responsibilities. It is the duty and responsibility of
the Safety Officer to:
1. Conduct safety education programs for school personnel regarding
child molesters, playground and water safety, traffic safety and
general first aid. Supervise the training of safety patrol units.
2. Work with school personnel and make recommendations to the
Officer-in-Charge regarding school zones, crossing, signs,
markings and the elimination of street hazards.
3. Lecture at high school driver education classes when requested.
4. Enforce laws in and around schools which may affect the health and
safety of students and faculty.
5. Issue seasonal safety bulletins for radio and TV.
6. Address P.T.A. and other civic and service organizations on the
subject of school safety.
7. Act as liaison officer between all schools and the Police
Department. Recommend a course of action to the Officer-in-
Charge which will minimize any chance of conflict between the
Department and youth in the community.
8. Submit to the Officer-in-Charge, at the beginning of each week, a
schedule of work expected to be done during that week.
9. Supervise school crossing guards.
10. Inspect school bus stops, routes and related facilities periodically,
and make any required recommendations to proper authorities.
11. Develop a bicycle safety program, if necessary, in cooperation with
school authorities.
12. Formulate a positive crime prevention program aimed at young
persons in conjunction with the local schools and social agencies.
13. Maintain a list of social agencies to which juveniles can be referred
for such things as counselling, employment, and medical services.
14. Investigate reported crimes which are likely to have involved young
persons.
15. Coordinate the processing of juveniles with the local court
authorities, including the Clerk's Office and Probation Office.
§ 16-1.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-1.14
AO:285
§ 16-1.15. Duties of the Matrons. [Ord. 7/8/93]
§ 16-1.16. Secretary/Clerk/Dispatcher. [Ord. 7/8/93]
16. Be available to speak to community groups on youth problems.
Assemble pamphlets and films on delinquency.
17. Answer calls to the station from parents and others seeking
assistance with problem youngsters.
a. Summary. The Matron assists female prisoners as directed by the
Officer-in-Charge.
b. General Duties and Responsibilities. It is the duty and responsibility of
the Matron to:
1. Search all female prisoners when ordered to do so by the Officer-in-
Charge, taking possession of all articles which might be used to
effect an escape or suicide or be used as weapons. Handle all
property taken in accordance with regular departmental
procedures.
2. Be responsible, under the direction of the Officer-in-Charge, for the
well-being and safekeeping of all female prisoners.
3. Communicate all significant information to the Officer-in-Charge of
the desk.
4. Care for lost children brought into the station house when
requested to do so by the Officer-in-Charge.
5. Perform such other duties as may be assigned by the Chief.
a. Summary. The Secretary/Clerk/Dispatcher functions much the same as
a Secretary-Clerk would in the business world, i.e. General office duties
including typing, filing and record keeping. This position however
requires the additional duties of the Police Dispatcher. It is specialized
work and requires general clerical skills of varied complexity in the
Police Department.
An employee in this class is responsible for operating radio equipment
and telephones for the purpose of receiving and transmitting messages
to police and ambulances, and performing duties required of the Police
Dispatcher. Additionally, this employee shall possess considerable
knowledge of departmental practices and procedures.
b. General Duties and Responsibilities. It is the duty and responsibility of
the Secretary/Clerk/Dispatcher to:
1. Provide for the efficient operation of the office and maintain
sufficient supplies.
§ 16-1.14 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 16-1.16
AO:286
§ 16-1.17. Public Safety Dispatcher. [Ord. 7/7/88; Ord. 7/8/93]
2. Receive calls, complaints, request, emergency calls, and other
information from general public and police and transmit such calls
or request to police or ambulance service or appropriate personnel
or agency.
3. Operate radios, utilize computer and telephone, various police
manuals, and records in the receiving and transmission of
messages, operate typewriter, calculator, copier, facsimile, and
perform related work as required.
4. Maintain daily log of work activities, type and maintain files
belonging to the Chief, except those of a confidential nature, and
maintain files for letters, memos, contracts, accident reports, gas
log, and day sheets; maintain some fiscal records.
5. Prepare and post the monthly duty schedules of police department
personnel, keep a record of all sick leave, vacation days, and
replacement hours.
6. Maintain log for Animal Control Officer, prepare and submit
monthly report to Division of Agriculture Animal Health.
7. Prepare and type reports and correspondence as requested by the
Chief.
8. Act as liaison between Town Hall and Police, i.e. Town Council,
Town Clerk, Town Treasurer. Submit slips and vouchers to
Treasurer, and forward reports, bills and/or correspondence to
Clerk as directed by the Chief. Arrange to pick up whatever checks,
reports or correspondence may be forthcoming from Town Hall.
9. Maintain petty cash file for department as directed by the Chief.
10. Address and post all department correspondence and arrange for
daily pickup of mail.
11. Perform those duties set forth in the job description for
Dispatchers.
12. As required by the Chief of Police, train and direct dispatchers, and
from time to time notify dispatchers of any changes in department
rules or procedures.
a. Summary. The Dispatcher receives all oral communications from the
public and law enforcement personnel coming into the police station.
By following established procedures and employing common sense, he/
she transmits request for service to the appropriate location. The
employee is responsible for operating radios, computer equipment and
telephones for the purpose of receiving and sending messages to police,
fire and ambulance personnel.
§ 16-1.16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-1.17
AO:287
b. General Duties and Responsibilities. The employee shall keep and
maintain a computer log of all telephone and radio calls, and of all
persons entering and leaving the police station. When appropriate a
description as to the nature of each call will be included. Should the
contact be the basis of a complaint the employee will generate a
computer record with the necessary basic information, if an officer is
given a complaint to handle the officers badge number and name will be
assigned that record.
Dispatchers will from time to time be given records to be entered into
the computer during his/her shift. In addition to the police files the
Dispatcher will maintain files for the Fire Department, Animal Control
Officer and Harbormaster as the Police Chief shall designate.
The employee on duty each night at midnight will change the computer
daylog record of that date so as to reflect the next date as of one
minute after midnight. The first record to then be entered will be that of
the Duty Schedule of Officers and Dispatchers. The employee will then
print out the computer record of the day log.
Dispatchers will learn the 10/Code System and when appropriate will
use it for radio transmission. This system contains codes for licenses
and registration checks to NCIC (National Crime Information Center)
checks. Employees will acclimate themselves with these codes so as
to become proficient in obtaining the record information and relaying
same to the officer making inquiry. All license, registry and NCIC
records printed out will be saved for that officer.
The Duty Dispatcher will at all times know the identity of the officers on
duty and their car assignment. This is to be made a record of the log.
As changes are made throughout each shift it will be reflected in that
log. Dispatch employees are responsible for entering their own date
and time on and off duty.
In the event that Fire/Rescue personnel leave their station unmanned
and Dispatch is so informed the Dispatcher will answer the Fire
Department telephone and radio, relaying those messages accordingly.
Further, it is the duty and responsibility of the Dispatcher to:
1. Report any deployment of police officers beyond their regularly
assigned routes or sectors to the Officer-in-Charge.
2. Inform the Officer-in-Charge whenever a police vehicle is out of
service.
3. Announce the call letters of the Department as issued by the
Federal Communications Commission.
4. Be thoroughly familiar with the Department's procedures relating
to use of radio and other communications equipment.
§ 16-1.17 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 16-1.17
AO:288
§ 16-1.18. Police Department Entrance Requirements. [Ord. 8/6/87]
5. Acquire a thorough knowledge of the location and layout of streets,
buildings, and other significant areas of the community so as to
maximize the accuracy and speed of dispatchers.
6. Respond to all complaints received in a calm and civil manner.
7. Be familiar with emergency procedures that relate to matters
requiring urgent police attention so as to be capable of activating
them immediately.
8. Keep personnel who have been dispatched on calls fully informed of
all facts affecting the safety or efficiency of their response to the
call.
9. Inform the Officer-in-Charge when contact with an officer on patrol
cannot be made after a reasonable amount of time.
10. Maintain equipment, especially the emergency call lines, in
working order and immediately report any malfunctions or defect
to the Officer-in-Charge.
11. Record all significant communications as required by current
department procedures.
12. Answer all telephone calls promptly and respond by stating, "Little
Compton Police."
a. Candidates for the position of patrolman will be required to meet the
following minimum standards:
1. The candidate shall be at least 18 years of age; proof of age will be
required.
2. The candidate shall be of good character.
3. The candidate shall have a valid Rhode Island drivers license.
4. The candidate shall have a high school diploma or a State
recognized equivalent.
5. The candidate shall receive a passing grade on a written
examination administered by the Little Compton Town Council or
its designee. This examination will measure the general aptitude of
the candidate.
6. The candidate shall pass the medical and physical fitness
requirements of the Town of Little Compton.
7. Candidates will be graded and ranked according to their abilities in
the written examination, the physical fitness test, and an oral
interview.
§ 16-1.17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-1.18
AO:289
§ 16-2. RULES AND REGULATIONS OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT.
§ 16-2.1. Preface. [Ord. 3/24/11]
All members of the Fire Department are hereby directed to make
themselves thoroughly acquainted with the Rules and Regulations of the
Fire Department and all general and special orders. These Rules and
Regulations are intended for the general guidance of the entire Fire
Department and cannot be expected to cover every specific act of duty.
Ignorance of the Rules and Regulations will not be considered as an excuse
for noncompliance; it is the duty of all members to thoroughly familiarize
themselves with the rules of the service, and whoever neglects to do so
thereby neglects his duty.
In addition to their duties as hereinafter set forth, members of the
Department shall perform such other duties as may be required of them by
their superior officers.
§ 16-2.2. Administration. [Ord. 9/20/90; Ord. 1/24/91, § 1; Ord. 3/24/
11]
b. Candidates whose names are placed on an eligibility list as a result of
the above requirements will be required to meet the following
additional standards prior to employment:
1. The candidate shall be found psychologically fit for duty as a
patrolman.
2. Candidate shall pass a medical examination by a State designated
physician.
3. Any candidate who has had a weight loss or gain of 10 pounds or
more subsequent to placement on the eligibility list will require to
resubmit a test of their physical fitness.
c. Upon acceptance into the Police Department as a probationary
employee, candidates will be required to contract with the Town of
Little Compton to:
1. Maintain a valid Rhode Island drivers license.
2. Maintain their physical fitness in accordance with minimum
entrance requirements.
3. Attend any school and/or training as required by the Town.
a. Organization. The organization of the Fire Department is set according
to the following: a Department consisting of Chief, Captain, two
Lieutenants, and any full-time or part-time firefighters as may be
appointed by the Town Council.
b. Duties. The principal duties of the full-time and part-time members of
the Fire Department shall consist generally of the prevention, control,
§ 16-1.18 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 16-2.2
AO:290
§ 16-2.3. Chief of the Department. [Ord. 9/20/90; Ord. 1/24/91, § 2;
Ord. 2/20/97; Ord. 4/23/97; Ord. 3/24/11]
and extinguishing of fires, together with all necessary service functions
as are presently conducted by the Fire Department (Job Description,
subsection 16-2.6c) and as set forth in the Rules and Regulations of the
Fire Department.
a. Duties of the Chief. The Fire Chief shall make rules and regulations
concerning the operation of the Department and the conduct of all
members thereof. He shall assign all subordinates to their respective
posts, shifts, details, duties, and shall be responsible for their efficiency,
discipline, and good conduct, and for the care and custody of all
property used by the Department.
b. Management at Fires. The Fire Chief shall perform such duties as may
be required by law and ordinance and shall have control and
management of the Department at fires and all other emergencies and
shall have the power to direct and assign all subordinates, companies,
and appurtenances belonging to the Department and shall direct such
measures as he shall deem proper and necessary for the control and
extinguishment of fires. In the absence of, or until the arrival of the
Chief, the highest ranking officer or, in the absence of an officer, the
senior full-time firefighter in attendance shall be in command and have
control over all operations at all fires and emergencies to which the
department responds.
c. Maintenance of Equipment. The Fire Chief shall, by personal inspection
or through assignment to an officer or another full time firefighter,
satisfy himself that all apparatus and equipment in the Department is
maintained in good condition and available for instant use. When it is
necessary to place equipment or apparatus out-of-service for repairs, he
shall have the authority to transfer any equipment or apparatus that he
may have at his command.
d. Maintenance of Buildings. The Fire Chief shall, by personal inspection
or through assignment to an officer or another full-time firefighter,
satisfy himself that the fire station is kept clean and in good repair and
that all furnishings therein are well maintained.
e. Dispatching Apparatus. The Fire Chief shall have the authority to
dispatch apparatus out of the Town whenever he deems it necessary
provided the security of the Town is not jeopardized. The Town Council
President is to be notified of such action.
f. Inspections. The Fire Chief shall frequently inspect the station and
records required by him and, when necessary, give instructions for
keeping such records and the proper making of reports.
g. Inspection of Public Buildings. The Chief and/or the Fire Prevention
Officer shall make complete inspection coverage of all public buildings
§ 16-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-2.3
AO:291
and shall encourage public acceptance of residential inspections on a
volunteer basis. He shall make all efforts to further safety facilities
in public buildings, manufacturing plants, business occupancies,
hospitals, and convalescent homes.
h. Fires of Suspicious Origin. The Chief and the Fire Prevention Officer
shall investigate all building fires and any other fires of suspicious
origin to determine probable cause, and in any cases of criminal intent,
work with the Police Department and the State Fire Marshal's Office to
bring the offenders to justice.
i. Reports. The Fire Chief shall make all reports to the Town Council as
required and shall make special reports on any matter which requires
the Council's attention. He shall require his officers and firefighters to
furnish him such reports and data as will enable him to be prepared at
any time to inform the Town Council concerning the conduct or
efficiency of any individual or group and the condition of the building,
apparatus, or equipment of the Department and of work accomplished.
j. Orders. The Fire Chief may issue such orders for the government of the
Department as he may deem necessary.
k. Absence of Chief. During the times that the Chief of the Department
shall be unavailable, the Chief shall designate an officer, normally the
Captain, to act in his stead. He shall perform all duties of immediate
concern that would normally be performed by the Chief. In the absence
of or until the arrival of the Chief of the Department, the Acting Chief
shall be in command and have control of all fires to which he responds.
He shall discharge and perform such other duties as the Chief shall
prescribe.
l. Duties of the Captain. The Captain shall have the duties that are
assigned to him by the Chief from time to time and shall work the hours
as prescribed by the Chief of the Fire Department. The Captain shall
also perform all other normal day to day duties as shall be required on a
normal shift.
m. Duties of the Lieutenant. The Lieutenant shall have the duties that are
assigned to him by the Chief or Captain. The Lieutenant(s) and any
Acting Lieutenants shall also perform all other normal day to day duties
as shall be required on a normal shift.
n. Duties of the Training Officer. There shall be a Training Officer of the
Department under the direction and control of the Fire Chief. He will
have the responsibility of developing and instituting training programs
for both paid and volunteer members of the Department. Any training
program(s) will meet national standards and/or accepted Fire
Department practices. Training records shall be maintained by the
Training Officer and copies of any and all records shall be given to the
Chief on a monthly basis.
§ 16-2.3 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 16-2.3
AO:292
§ 16-2.4. General Duties. [Ord. 1/10/85; Ord. 9/20/90; Ord. 3/24/11]
o. Duties of the Fire Prevention Officer. The Chief shall appoint the Fire
Prevention Officer of the Department who shall have the general
supervision of all types of fire prevention activities. The Fire Prevention
Officer shall take whatever action necessary to have removed or
alleviated any accumulation of rubbish or combustible material or other
hazards. The Fire Prevention Officer shall cooperate with the Building
Official in surveying plans for new construction with the intent of
incorporating fire preventive construction, exit facilities, and other
protection devices that come under this jurisdiction.
a. Station Duties. Officers or firefighters on duty shall be in direct charge
of and be responsible for the care, cleanliness and preservation of the
station, apparatus, and all other equipment and material assigned to
the station, and shall keep grounds around the station neat and clean,
the grass mowed, and sidewalks adjacent to the station clear of snow
and ice or other encumbrances. Also, they may be assigned other duties
at the direction of the Chief of the Department.
b. Undesirable Visitors. Officers or firefighters shall not allow intoxicated
or undesirable persons in or about their station nor allow the use of the
station for any purposes except by permission of the Chief of the
Department.
c. Gasoline Storage. Each officer or firefighter shall see that no gasoline is
used in or about the station for cleaning purposes nor shall any smoking
be allowed, or naked flame be made, while or where gasoline is being
pumped or handled.
d. Property and Equipment. Each officer or firefighter shall not allow any
addition to, alteration of, or destruction of any part of the station,
apparatus, or equipment except when properly ordered or authorized
by the Chief of the Department.
e. Injury Report. Each officer or firefighter shall make a written report to
the Chief when any member of their command is injured or taken
seriously ill stating details of such injury or illness.
f. Accident Reports. Each officer or firefighter shall make an immediate
report, in person or by telephone, to the Chief of all accidents,
collisions, or other occurrences resulting in the loss of life, injury to
persons, or damage to property, however slight, and all other
extraordinary or unusual occurrences of any nature when happening to
members or property of the Department, or to persons or property of
others, in connection with the operations of the Department and shall,
as soon as circumstances and time permit, forward to the Chief of the
Department a complete report in writing of each such accident,
collision or other occurrences. The Chief shall immediately notify the
President of the Town Council.
§ 16-2.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-2.4
AO:293
§ 16-2.5. General Rules. [Ord. 12/20/84; Ord. 1/10/85; Ord. 3/5/87;
Ord. 2/9/89; Ord. 9/20/90; Ord. 1/24/91, § 3; Ord. 3/24/11]
g. Daily Report Sheets. Each officer or senior duty man will be responsible
for keeping record of all fires to which he responds as well as a record
of all radio and telephone messages received in the station.
h. Requisitions. Each officer or firefighter shall make proper requisitions
to the Chief of the Department for all necessary supplies, needed
appliances, tools, and furnishings.
i. Use of Utilities. Each officer or firefighter shall prevent waste or
unnecessary use of water, gas, electricity, or fuel allowing sufficient
usage for comfort, being careful to turn off all lights not required.
j. Visitors to Station. Each officer or firefighter shall politely escort
visitors or see that they are escorted through the station and see that a
courteous explanation concerning the apparatus and equipment is
made to them.
k. Repairs to Apparatus. Each officer or senior duty man shall report to
the Chief whenever apparatus is placed out of service for repairs and
also when repairs are completed and apparatus is ready for service,
entering upon the Daily Report Sheet the time it was placed out-ofservice,
the nature of repairs, the time it was placed in service, and
their initials.
l. Condition of Apparatus. Each officer or firefighter shall see that all
vehicles and equipment in the station, whether or not in service,
including motor and pump, is kept clean, polished and is in condition
and ready for immediate use. In case a vehicle or any equipment is, at
any time, in need of repairs, they shall, at once, report the same to the
Chief.
m. Drivers. Only authorized personnel shall be allowed to operate any
Town-owned vehicle or equipment. Said personnel shall be required to
possess a valid operator's license.
n. Obstruction to Driveway. No person, whether or not a member of the
Fire Department, shall park his automobile in the driveway in front of
any door where it will obstruct the responding of fire apparatus or
rescue vehicles to a fire or other emergency duties.
a. Fire Service. All members of the Fire Department should bear in mind
that they have been employed and sworn to render fire service and
other related duties to the Town, which service the Town has a legal and
moral right to demand at whatever time and occasion it becomes
necessary.
b. Sick Leave. Whenever a member of the Fire Department shall be on sick
leave, he shall be confined to his residence, going to, at, or returning
from a doctor's office or at a place that is known to the Chief. The Chief
§ 16-2.4 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 16-2.5
AO:294
may request a doctor's certificate of illness after five consecutive sick
leave days.
c. Annual Leave. In order for consideration to be given for any annual
leave request it is required that the request be submitted at least two
weeks prior to the dates being requested. All requests must be in
writing and signed by the member requesting annual leave. Only one
member will be allowed on annual leave at a time. In the case of
conflicting dates seniority will dictate so long as the request has been
made within the proper time.
d. Orders. Any order given by a superior officer must be carried out as
ordered. After the order has been carried out, if it appears to have been
improper or unreasonable, an appeal may be made to the proper
authorities. However, any refusal or evasion of such order shall
constitute a breach of the Rules and Regulations and will be dealt with
as such.
e. Chain of Command. There shall be a "chain of command" within the
Department as follows:
Chief
Captain
Lieutenant
Firefighter
In the case of equal rank, length of service within said rank, shall
determine the senior officer.
This "chain of command" shall pertain to all decisions as well as to the
solving of any problems or grievances that may arise.
f. Off-Duty Personnel. All members of the Department shall maintain a
telephone and shall keep the Chief informed as to the correct number
and address of such member.
g. Use of Title. No member of the Department shall use the Department,
his title, or uniform for any purpose not approved by the Chief of the
Department.
h. Smoking. No member of the Department shall smoke while driving a
fire apparatus. No member of the Department shall smoke while driving
or riding in the rescue truck while responding to a call or while
transporting a patient.
i. Sleeping Quarters. All members of the Department when in the station
shall rise not later than 7:00 a.m. and beds shall not be used between
7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. except in case of illness, injury, or with
permission of the Chief. No visitors shall be allowed in sleeping
quarters.
§ 16-2.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-2.5
AO:295
j. Hydrants and Water Supply; Street Locations. All members of the
Department must make themselves familiar with the location and
operation of all hydrants and available water supplies in the Town.
Members of the Department must memorize the names and location of
all streets in the Town, and the location of schools, churches, and other
public buildings.
k. Defects in Equipment. In the interest of the Department, all members
are required to keep their superior officers informed of all matters that
should be brought to their attention concerning troubles or defects in
the Department's equipment or information pertaining to outside
conditions that might affect the running of the Department.
l. Conduct of Personnel. All members are required to observe a courteous
and respectful demeanor in dealing with officers and men. Officers shall
be addressed by their proper titles. Religion or politics shall not become
a matter for argument in or about the fire station.
m. Attitude. Criticisms of superior officers, discourtesies to the public or
members, unjust treatment of officers or members, and movements
tending to create dissensions or appearing to ignore responsible
officials will be considered breaches of discipline and shall be dealt with
accordingly.
n. Improper Language. Members shall not use profane, immoral, or
improper language in or about the fire station nor shall they be guilty at
any time of conduct prejudicial to the good reputation of the
Department. Intoxicating liquors shall not be brought, kept, or drunk in
or about the fire station.
o. Gambling. Gambling or games of chance shall not be allowed in the
station.
p. Care of Property. Members of the Department will be held responsible
for the safe keeping, proper use, and return of all Department property
entrusted to their care. They shall not loan it to any person either in or
out of the Department or use it for anything but its legitimate purpose
in the Department except by order of the Chief of the Department.
q. Station Duties. Members shall see that beds are made, dishes washed,
and all Department premises are kept clean at all times. Any member
finding anything broken in the station shall report the same to the
Chief.
r. Sleeping on Apparatus. Members shall not lay or sleep on any
apparatus or in any automobile used by the Fire Department while it is
in the station.
s. Off Station Duty. Members of the Department who are off station duty
shall not interfere with members who are on station duty or other Fire
Department duty.
§ 16-2.5 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 16-2.5
AO:296
§ 16-2.6. Miscellaneous Provisions. [Ord. 1/10/85; Ord. 7/9/87; § 1;
Ord. 9/20/90; Ord. 3/24/11]
t. Care of Equipment. Drivers of apparatus under the direction of their
superior officer shall be responsible for the care and management of
the apparatus. They shall at all times use proper caution for safety.
Motor apparatus or other vehicles of the Department shall not be
operated at a speed that will endanger the lives of the public or
members of the Department or cause injury to property or equipment.
No apparatus shall be driven over any hose unless it cannot be avoided.
u. Changing Tour of Duty and/or Leaving Station. No member of the
Department shall trade or exchange his designated tour of duty except
by permission of the Chief. No member of the Department shall leave
the station while on duty except for fire or emergency duty or unless
directed or given permission to do so by the Chief or senior officer on
duty.
v. Protective Clothing. All members of the Department shall make use of
and wear protective clothing when responding to alarms of fire and
shall take all efforts to protect themselves from injury or exposure by its
use.
w. Surrender of Property. Upon any member of the Department resigning,
being discharged, or in any other manner vacating his position, he shall,
prior to the final settlement of his accounts, surrender all property in
his possession belonging to the Fire Department to the Chief.
x. Firearms of any type are forbidden in the fire station or on the
immediate surrounding premises unless on the person of a Town, State
or Federal law enforcement official. Furthermore, no full time or
volunteer firefighter or any other person shall violate any Town
ordinance or State law while in or on the above mentioned premises. It
shall be the responsibility of the firefighter on duty to report any
suspected violations of the above to the Chief immediately.
y. Routine Administration. Routine administration of the Department shall
be directed by various general orders as issued by the Chief of the
Department as the need arises.
z. Violation of Rules and Regulations. A strict observance of all rules,
regulations, and orders is insisted upon, and failure on the part of any
member to promptly report violations of the Rules and Regulations to
the Chief of the Fire Department or the superior officer, or to fully
comply with all Rules and Regulations shall be considered neglect of
duty and cause for suspension. Charges against a member for the
violation of Rules and Regulations of the Fire Department shall be made
in writing to the Chief of the Fire Department, who will, in turn, forward
said charges to the Town Council.
§ 16-2.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-2.6
AO:297
§ 16-2.7. Fire Department Entrance Requirements. [Ord. 3/5/87;
Ord. 7/9/87; Ord. 7/20/89; Ord. 3/24/11]
a. Partial Invalidity. If any subsection or part of these Rules and
Regulations shall be held invalid by a Court of competent jurisdiction,
such holding shall not affect the remainder of these Rules and
Regulations nor the context in which such subsection so held invalid
may appear except to the extent that an entire article or part of an
article may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the
article or part of an article to which such holdings shall directly apply.
b. Residence. No member of the Fire Department shall be permitted to
claim any fire station as his place of residence.
c. Job Description. Any full-time employee of the Little Compton Fire
Department shall be required to be:
1. Firefighter/Dispatcher - to be familiar with and know how to use all
pieces of fire fighting equipment; to be familiar with and know how
to use all dispatching equipment; to know the location of all roads
in Town and be familiar with the house numbering system; all
firefighters shall hold a valid driver's license.
2. A Certified EMT - to be familiar with and know how to use all pieces
of emergency life saving equipment, to take all courses and pass all
requirements in order to keep EMT certification current.
3. In addition any full-time Fire Department employee shall be
required to perform other duties upon order of the Fire Chief that
from time to time the Chief may deem necessary for the orderly and
efficient operation of the Fire Department and the overall good of
the Town.
a. Candidates for the Position of Firefighter/Emergency Medical
Technician Will Be Required to Meet the Following Minimum
Standards:
1. The candidate shall be at least 18 years of age; proof of age will be
required.
2. The candidate shall be of good character.
3. The candidate shall have a valid driver's license.
4. The candidate shall have a high school diploma or a State
recognized equivalent.
5. The candidate shall receive a passing grade on a written
examination administered by the Little Compton Town Council or
its designee. This examination will measure the general aptitude of
the candidate.
§ 16-2.6 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 16-2.7
AO:298
§ 16-2.8. Ambulance Reimbursement Fund. [Ord. 8/21/03]
Chapter 17
CEMETERIES
6. The candidate shall pass the medical and physical fitness
requirements of the Town of Little Compton.
7. Candidates will be graded and ranked according to their abilities in
the written examination, the physical fitness test, and an oral
interview.
b. Candidates Whose Names Are Placed on an Eligibility List as a Result of
the Above Requirements Will Be Required to Meet the Following
Additional Standards:
1. Having successfully completed a course of study to meet the
eligibility standards of the Rhode Island Health Department, the
candidate must submit to an examination for licensure as an
Emergency Medical Technician-Ambulance before completion of
probationary employment.
2. The candidate shall be found psychologically fit for duty as a
Firefighter/Emergency Medical Technician.
3. Any candidate who has had a weight loss or gain of 10 pounds or
more subsequent to placement on the eligibility list will be required
to resubmit to a test of their physical fitness.
c. Upon Acceptance into the Fire Department as Probationary Employee,
Candidates Will Be Required to Contract with the Town of Little
Compton to:
1. Maintain a valid driver's license.
2. Maintain their physical fitness in accordance with the minimum
entrance requirements.
3. Attain and maintain Rhode Island Certification as an Emergency
Medical Technician at the skill level selected by the Town of Little
Compton as appropriate to the needs of the community.
4. Attend any Dispatcher, EMT, and Firefighter school and/or training
as required by the Town.
a. Creation. An ambulance reimbursement fund is hereby created that
shall be authorized to receive and expend monies from reimbursement
payments received from third party billers. All revenues generated by
said reimbursement payments shall be deposited in the Ambulance
Reimbursement Fund and expended by the Town Council for Fire
Department equipment and other related expenses.
§ 16-2.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-1
AO:299
§ 17-1. LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY. [Ord. 7/23/87]
In pursuance of the powers conferred upon the Town Council of the Town
of Little Compton by Title 23, Chapter 18 Section 10 of the General Laws of
Rhode Island as amended.
§ 17-2. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 17-2.1. Cemeteries to Be Approved by Town Council. [Ord. 7/23/
87]
No cemetery, nor any extension of an already existing cemetery, shall
hereafter be established in the Town of Little Compton without the consent
and approval of the Town Council.
§ 17-2.2. Disinterment of Human Corpse. [Ord. 7/23/87]
No person shall remove from its place of burial in this Town the body of
any human being without first securing a permit from the Town Clerk.
No cadaver or remains shall be removed as aforesaid unless the owner of
such land shall give notice by certified mail to the nearest of kin known to
him, and by advertising in one or more daily newspapers having circulation
within the Town at least once a week for three successive weeks. In the
event there shall be no nearest of kin known to such owner or that the
nearest of kin shall neglect or refuse to approve the removal and interment,
the Department of Health shall cause the cadavers or remains to be
removed, transferred and interred in such other cemetery in accordance
with the laws, rules and regulations of the religious denomination, if any
shall be known or ascertained, to which the deceased subscribed.
§ 17-2.3. Provisions of Chapter Supersede Town Zoning Laws. [Ord.
7/23/87]
The provisions of this chapter shall be construed to supersede any provision
of the zoning laws of the Town, or any amendment or addition thereto,
relative to the use of land for cemetery purposes.
§ 17-2.4. Burial to Be Done in Approved Cemeteries. [Ord. 7/23/87]
It shall be unlawful for any person to bury, or cause to be buried any dead
body or dig or cause to be dug any grave in the Town except in an already
existing cemetery or one hereafter established by the Town Council.
§ 17-3. ESTABLISHMENT, EXTENSION OF CEMETERIES.
§ 17-3.1. Application Required; Fees. [Ord. 7/23/87]
Any application for the establishment of a cemetery or the establishment
of an extension to an existing cemetery shall set forth the name and post
office address of the owner of the land, the part or parts thereof to be used
for burial purposes, and the part or parts thereof to be used for screening
§ 17-1 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 17-3.1
AO:300
purposes, and such other information as may be helpful to the Town Council
in its consideration of the application. Such applicant shall pay to the Town
Council a sum sufficient to pay for the cost of advertising the application.
This information shall be submitted on a plat plan and said plan if approved
shall be filed in the Land Evidence Records of the Town.
§ 17-3.2. Referral of Application to Planning Board. [Ord. 7/23/87]
Any application for the establishment of a cemetery or for an extension to
any already existing cemetery shall be referred to the Planning Board for its
consideration and recommendations.
§ 17-3.3. Consideration by Planning Board; Recommendations;
Bond. [Ord. 7/23/87]
The Planning Board shall consider, among other things, the need for the
proposed cemetery or extension, and the desirability of its location, as to
population density and public health, and report its findings to the Town
Council.
The Planning Board may also consider and recommend to the Town Council
any conditions that should be imposed on the applicant relative to
landscaping and the setting aside of part of the proposed area for screening
purposes. It may also recommend that a bond be furnished by the applicant
for the fulfillment of any conditions imposed by the Town Council, and the
amount thereof.
§ 17-3.4. Notice of Hearing on Application. [Ord. 7/23/87]
On receipt of the report of the Planning Board the application required by
this section shall be set down for a public hearing to a day certain, and
the Town Clerk shall cause notice thereof to be mailed, postage prepaid,
to every person owning land within 200 feet of the proposed cemetery or
extension and public notice thereof by advertisement once in a newspaper
having a general circulation in the Town.
§ 17-3.5. Conditions of Approval to Be Specified. [Ord. 7/23/87]
In case the Town Council grants the application to create or extend a
cemetery, it shall set forth specifically the area to be used for burial
purposes and such other conditions as it may see fit to impose on the
applicant.
Chapter 18
PLAT PLANS
§ 17-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-1
AO:301
§ 18-1. DEEDS FILED FOR RECORDING. [Ord. 10/22/87, § 1; Ord. 8/
5/93; Ord. 2/23/17; Ord. 11/2/17]
All deeds filed for recording in the Land Evidence Records of the Town shall
refer to the current assessor's plat and lot number.
If a subdivision approved by the Planning Board results in a change in the
size and/or shape of a lot of record, a new deed shall be prepared reflecting
the change and accompany the plat plan to be recorded. After the plan is
reviewed and signed by the Chairman of the Planning Board, the new plan
and deed will be recorded in the Town Land Evidence Records with the
Office of the Town Clerk.
§ 18-2. PREPARATION OF PLAT PLANS. [Ord. 10/22/87, § 2; Ord. 11/
9/89]
All plat plans shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer or
land surveyor and shall contain the following information and data:
§ 18-3. FEE FOR RECORDING. [Ord. 10/22/87, § 3]
Any plan presented for recording shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth
in Rhode Island General Laws, 1956, as amended, 34-13-7.
a. A title block in the lower right hand corner showing the name of the
subdivision, name and address of the owner of record, name and stamp
of the registered professional engineer or land surveyor, date, north
point, scale, and plat and lot number of the property being subdivided
as shown on the Tax Assessors Maps on file in the Town Hall. Lots
created by subdivision shall be numbered using the number of the lot
being subdivided followed by a dash (-) one, dash (-) two, etc. The scale
of the plan shall be 100 feet to one inch. The title block shall provide
space for dates of revision. The sheet size shall be 18 inches by 24
inches, including a minimum 1/2 inch border on three edges and a 1 1/2
inch border on the binding edge, which shall be the left twenty-fourinch
edge. Five plat plans are required.
b. Five plat plans reduced to a scale of one inch equals 200 feet on the
same size paper as specified in above will also be required.
c. All plat plans submitted for recording shall be accompanied by a copy of
the present Tax Assessor's map for plat and lot involved.
d. All plat plans submitted for recording shall identify any existing
structures on any and/or all lots.
e. All plat plans submitted for recording shall identify areas of easements
and/or buffer zones and show acreage involved in said areas.
§ 18-1 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 18-4
AO:302
§ 18-4. APPLICATION FOR RECORDING. [Ord. 10/22/87, § 4]
An application in a form approved by the Town requesting that a plan be
recorded shall be signed by the owner(s). If the owner is being represented
by counsel, the aforementioned form shall so state. Signatures shall be
notarized.
§ 18-5. ROADS OR IMPROVEMENTS. [Ord. 11/9/89]
On all subdivisions and/or plat plans requiring a new road, paving or
improvement of said road will not be waived if said road services over one
lot. Also, any further subdivision on a substandard road shall not be allowed
until said substandard road is improved according to the specifications in
effect in Chapter 13.
§ 18-6. TAXES. [Ord. 11/9/89]
All Little Compton taxes must be current before any plat plan can be
recorded. A statement from the Town Treasurer is required.
Chapter 19
DISABILITY RETIREMENT — POLICE, FIRE, EMT
§ 19-1. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. 6/19/97, § 1]
When used in this chapter:
a. 1. OFFICER – Shall mean full time police officers employed on a full
time basis by the Little Compton Police Department.
2. FF/EMT – As used herein shall mean full time fire fighters and
emergency medical technicians employed on a full time basis by
the Little Compton Fire Department.
b. DISABILITY RETIREMENT – Shall mean the retirement of an officer-
FF/EMT pursuant to injuries and/or illnesses incurred in the line of duty
pursuant to R.I.G.L. 45-19-19.
c. INJURED ON DUTY STATUS – Shall mean to have suffered an injury or
contracted an illness in the line of duty or while performing police-FF/
EMT duties.
d. INJURY OR ILLNESS INCURRED IN THE LINE OF DUTY OR WHILE
PERFORMING POLICE-FF/EMT DUTIES – Shall mean any injury or
illness, caused by an incident or trauma, or series thereof, which is
demonstrated to a reasonable degree of medical certainty based on the
factual and medical evidence to have occurred during the performance
of police-FF/EMT duties.
e. PERFORMANCE OF POLICE-FF/EMT DUTIES – Shall mean the
performance of the full range of duties regularly expected of an officer-
§ 18-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-1
AO:303
§ 19-2. DISABILITY IN THE PERFORMANCE OF DUTY. [Ord. 6/19/
97, § 2]
Any officer-FF/EMT who suffers an injury or illness in the line of duty and is
incapable of performing police-FF/EMT duties may be placed on disability
retirement under the following procedure:
FF/EMT as set forth in the respective Collective Bargaining Agreements
between the Union representing the officers and/or the FF/EMTs and
the Town and the Rules and Regulations of the Little Compton Town
Code, as amended. It is further understood that any physician
performing a medical examination or participating in a medical
arbitration pursuant to this chapter will be provided with a copy of the
specific sections of the Rules and Regulations which relate to the full
range of duties expected of an officer-FF/EMT when determining the
disability of any officer-FF/EMT.
f. PHYSICIAN – Shall include medical doctors and psychologists and/or
psychiatrists.
g. REGULAR RETIREMENT – Shall mean the retirement of any officer-FF/
EMT who has completed 25 years of service for the Town of Little
Compton pursuant to the respective Collective Bargaining Agreements
between the Union representing the officers and/or FF/EMTs and the
Town.
h. RETIREMENT FOR HEALTH RELATED CONDITIONS – Shall mean the
retirement of any officer-FF/EMT who is injured and/or incurs illness
not in the line of duty; has completed at least 10 years of service for the
Town of Little Compton; and is incapable of performing the full range of
duties expected of an officer-FF/EMT. Said officer-FF/EMT will be
retired pursuant to Town of Little Compton Pension Plan and this
chapter.
i. TOTAL DISABILITY – Shall mean the inability to perform police-FF/EMT
duties because of an injury or illness suffered by the officer-FF/EMT.
a. 1. Any officer-FF/EMT who remains absent from work for six
consecutive months in an injured on duty status (IOD) or who, at
any time, petitions for a disability retirement under this section
shall, at the request of the Town, submit to a medical examination
by a physician of the Town's choosing. The medical examination
may include a psychiatric or psychological examination if the
officer-FF/EMT claims that his or her illness or injury is related to
any mental condition or mental illness, or, if the examining
physician deems such an examination reasonably necessary to
determine whether the officer-FF/EMT is disabled.
2. The cost of the examination shall be borne by the Town.
3. If the officer's-FF/EMT's treating physician and the Town's
physician agree that the officer-FF/EMT has, or has not, become
§ 19-1 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 19-2
AO:304
§ 19-3. PHYSICIAN MEDICAL EXAMINATIONS AND MEDICAL
ARBITRATION. [Ord. 6/19/97, § 3]
incapable of performing police-FF/EMT duties as defined in Section
19-1e, the determination shall be binding upon the parties and the
officer-FF/EMT will either return to duty or be placed on disability
retirement according to this determination.
4. If the officer's-FF/EMT's treating physician disagrees with the
findings made by the Town's physician, the officer-FF/EMT shall
have the right to be examined by a neutral physician selected
according to the procedure provided for in Section 19-3.
b. At the Town's request, any officer-FF/EMT who has been absent from
work for five consecutive work days or more shall provide to the Town
(i) all medical records relating to the absence by treating or diagnosing
physicians or hospitals, including records of diagnostic tests, or (ii) a
medical records release allowing the Town to obtain the medical
records directly. The Town shall cause copies of records it obtains, by
virtue of such a release, to be sent to the officer-FF/EMT. The Town
shall keep all records under seal and absolutely confidential and these
records may only be reviewed by the Town's legal counsel, and if
consultation is necessary, counsel may review said records with the
Town Council, Police or Fire Chief and/or the Town's selected physician.
Any further review of medical records must be done with the officer's-
FF/EMT's express written consent.
a. In any case in which a neutral examining physician is to be selected, the
parties will utilize the following procedure:
1. The Town's physician and the officer's physician shall select the
physician to conduct the examination of the officer-FF/EMT (i.e.,
the neutral physician). Whenever possible, the neutral physician
shall be employed by or have privileges at a teaching hospital in the
State of Rhode Island or the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. The
officer's-FF/EMT's physician, after consultation with his patient,
and the Town's physician, after consultation with Town authorities,
shall select the neutral hospital and the neutral physician who has
privileges or is employed by that hospital. The parties shall utilize
the neutral hospital to the extent that the services of said hospital
are needed in connection with the examination. If the Town's
physician and the officer's-FF/EMT's physician cannot agree on a
neutral physician, then the parties shall have the Director of the
Rhode Island Medical Society select a physician whose primary
specialty is in a related area of that disabling injury/illness. The
physician selected must be in a practice and not an independent
medical examiner for hire.
b. The Town shall identify, in writing, to the officer-FF/EMT and his/her
representative the records which it intends to submit to the neutral
physician. Within 14 days of the receipt of such notice, the officer-FF/
§ 19-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-3
AO:305
EMT may demand in writing that the Town submit to the neutral
physician specific additional documents which the officer-FF/EMT
believes should be considered by the neutral physician. The officer-
FF/EMT shall provide the additional documents to the Town, unless
the Town and the officer-FF/EMT agree that the Town already has the
documents in its possession. Upon the expiration of the 14 days, the
Town shall submit the documents, including any designated by the
officer-FF/EMT, to the neutral physician.
c. No information in addition to that submitted to the neutral physician
pursuant to paragraph b of this section shall be submitted to the neutral
physician unless there was a significant oversight in the documents
submitted by either party or there are significant medical developments
between the time of the original submission of information and the time
of the examination. In the event of such circumstances and/or
developments, relevant medical records must be submitted by the party
seeking to have the neutral physician consider the records to the other
side and the neutral physician at least 48 hours before the examination.
Neither the Town nor the officer-FF/EMT shall communicate with the
neutral physician prior to the examination except as necessary to
schedule the examination and to forward medical records and
documents for the neutral physician's consideration.
d. The neutral physician and the officer-FF/EMT shall schedule the
examination. The examination shall take place as soon as possible. The
officer-FF/EMT shall be required to attend the examination as
scheduled unless a bona fide emergency prevents the officer-FF/EMT
from attending. In the event of such an emergency, the officer-FF/EMT
shall give notice to the Town and the neutral physician at the earliest
possible opportunity and a new examination date shall be agreed upon.
e. The results of the examination shall be mailed to the Town, the officer-
FF/EMT, and their physicians.
f. If the officer-FF/EMT does not attend, or refuses to attend, or to
cooperate, in the scheduling or conduct of the examination, the officer-
FF/EMT shall be deemed fit for duty. In such circumstances, the Town
shall notify the officer-FF/EMT of his or her fitness for duty and
obligation to report for duty.
g. 1. The neutral physician shall determine whether the factual and
medical evidence demonstrates to a reasonable degree of medical
certainty that (i) the officer-FF/EMT is incapable of performing the
full range of police-FF/EMT duties expected of an officer-FF/EMT
as defined in Section 19-1e; and (ii) the officer-FF/EMT became
disabled in the course of performing Police/Fire Department duties.
The neutral physician's determination shall be binding on the Town
and the officer-FF/EMT.
2. If the neutral physician finds that the officer-FF/EMT has become
totally disabled in the course of performing his or her official
§ 19-3 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 19-3
AO:306
§ 19-4. DISABILITY RETIREMENT BENEFIT. [Ord. 6/19/97, § 4]
duties, the Town shall process the officer-FF/EMT for disability
retirement as set forth in Section 19-4.
3. If the neutral physician finds the officer-FF/EMT fit for duty, the
office-FF/EMT shall report for duty within 48 hours after receiving
the physician's finding. If the officer-FF/EMT fails to so report, he
or she shall be deemed to have voluntarily resigned his or her
position.
4. If the neutral physician determines that the office-FF/EMT is
incapable of performing the full range of duties normally expected
of an officer-FF/EMT as defined in Section 19-1e but the medical
and factual evidence does not show within a reasonable degree of
medical certainty that the officer's-FF/EMT's injury or illness was
caused in the performance of police-FF/EMT duties, the officer-FF/
EMT shall not be required to return to duty but the following
options will be considered:
(a) The officer-FF/EMT may be processed for retirement and, if
eligible, receive a retirement due to health related conditions;
if the officer-FF/EMT is not eligible (less than 10 years service),
then the officer-FF/EMT would be entitled to any retirement
benefits to which he or she would be entitled under State law,
Town Ordinance, or the respective Collective Bargaining
Agreements.
(b) If the officer-FF/EMT has any accrued sick leave, the Town
shall elect to allow the officer-FF/EMT to utilize all said sick
time and, at the expiration of said sick time, to be reexamined
by the neutral physician to determine if the officer-FF/EMT is
capable of performing the full range of police-FF/EMT duties
as outlined in Section 19-1e. If the officer-FF/EMT is incapable
of performing the full range of police-FF/EMT duties as
outlined in Section 19-1e, then the officer-FF/EMT may be
processed for a retirement due to health related conditions, if
eligible, and if ineligible, will be afforded any retirement
benefits to which he or she may be entitled under State law,
Town Ordinance, or the respective Collective Bargaining
Agreements.
a. Any officer-FF/EMT disabled while performing police-FF/EMT duties
shall receive a disability retirement in lieu of workers compensation of
68% of the officer's-FF/EMT's annual salary at the time of his or her
disability retirement in accordance with R.I.G.L. § 45-19-19.
b. Any officer-FF/EMT receiving disability benefits under paragraph a of
this section shall also receive (i) the same health coverage benefits as
an officer-FF/EMT receiving a normal retirement pension in accordance
with the respective Collective Bargaining Agreements between the
§ 19-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-4
AO:307
§ 19-5. DISABILITY RETIREMENT EVALUATIONS. [Ord. 6/19/97,
§ 5]
Union representing the officers-FF/EMTs and the Town in effect at the
time of the disability retirement; and (ii) to the extent required by State
law, payment for medical expenses arising out of the injury or illness
which caused the officer-FF/EMT to retire.
c. Any officer-FF/EMT receiving disability benefits under subsection (a) of
this section shall not (i) accumulate sick time; (ii) receive clothing or
cleaning allowance; (iii) receive holiday pay; or (iv) continue to
accumulate or be paid for vacation days or longevity after the date that
the officer-FF/EMT began receiving disability benefits under paragraph
a of this section.
a. At the Town's discretion, any officer-FF/EMT on disability retirement
shall be subject to an annual medical examination to verify the officer's-
FF/EMT's medical condition and to determine whether the officer-FF/
EMT is still incapable of performing the full range of police-FF/EMT
duties normally expected of an officer-FF/EMT as defined in Section
19-1e. The Town shall have the right to waive the annual examination
requirement for an officer-FF/EMT when the nature of the officer's-FF/
EMT's disability clearly demonstrates that the officer-FF/EMT remains
incapable of performing the full range of duties expected of an officer-
FF/EMT.
b. A physician selected by the Town shall perform the examination. If the
Town's physician notifies the Town that the factual and medical
evidence demonstrates to a reasonable degree of medical certainty that
the officer-FF/EMT is capable of returning to police-FF/EMT duties as
defined in Section 19-1e, the Town shall so notify the officer-FF/EMT in
writing within 15 days of receiving such notice. Within 30 days of
receiving notice from the Town, the officer-FF/EMT may submit to the
Town a medical opinion from the officer's-FF/EMT's treating physician
regarding the officer's-FF/EMT's ability to perform the full range of
police-FF/EMT duties as defined in Section 19-1e. Both medical
opinions shall set forth the factual and medical evidence, including any
test results, upon which the physician relies in basing his/her opinions.
If the two physicians agree that the officer-FF/EMT is capable of
performing police-FF/EMT duties as defined in Section 19-1e, then the
officer-FF/EMT will be returned to duty unless processed for a regular
retirement in accordance with Section 19-1g. Rank adjustments will be
made and placement will be made according to seniority with no broken
time and the least senior officer-FF/EMT will be laid off. If the two
physicians do not agree, the parties will follow the procedure for the
selection of, and examination of, the officer-FF/EMT by a neutral
physician, in accordance with Section 19-3 of this chapter.
c. If the neutral physician finds that the factual and medical evidence
demonstrates to a reasonable degree of medical certainty that the
officer-FF/EMT is capable of performing the full range of police-FF/
§ 19-4 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 19-5
AO:308
EMT duties as outlined in Section 19-1e, then the Town may require
the officer-FF/EMT to report to duty within 48 hours. This duty may
be modified to include EMT recertification, if necessary, and any other
required certification, prior to a return to full duty. If the officer's-FF/
EMT's time of service, including the time of disability, is more than
25 years, the Town shall process the officer-FF/EMT for a regular
retirement in lieu of reporting for duty. If the officer's-FF/EMT's time
of service, including any periods of disability, is less than 25 years of
service and he or she fails to report for duty, he/she shall be deemed to
have voluntarily resigned and will receive whatever benefits and credits
the officer-FF/EMT is entitled to under Town Ordinance, Town Pension
Plan, State law and the respective Collective Bargaining Agreements.
d. If the neutral physician finds that the factual and medical evidence
demonstrates to a reasonable degree of medical certainty that the
officer-FF/EMT is incapable of performing the full range of police-FF/
EMT duties as outlined in Section 19-1e, then the officer-FF/EMT will
remain on disability retirement unless a future examination determines
that the officer-FF/EMT is capable of performing the full range of
police-FF/EMT duties as defined in Section 19-1e.
e. 1. The Town shall pay for the cost of the examination by its physician.
The Town will also pay the reasonable travel expenses incurred by
the officer-FF/EMT to attend said examination if the officer-FF/
EMT legally resides outside of New England and must travel to
New England for the exams or more than 120 miles from his or her
legal residence to the place of exam if in New England. Any officer-
FF/EMT who legally resides outside of New England shall notify the
Town if he or she intends to be in New England at or about the time
the officer-FF/EMT is due for his or her annual examination so that
the Town can attempt to schedule the examination to coincide with
the officer's-FF/EMT's presence in New England in order to avoid
having to pay the reasonable travel expenses of another trip to New
England. The Town will then either (i) notify the officer-FF/EMT
that they will set an examination at a mutually convenient time
while the retired officer-FF/EMT is in New England; (ii) notify the
officer-FF/EMT that the Town reserves its right to set an
examination for the current year at a time other than when the
retired officer-FF/EMT is in New England, subject to the remaining
provisions in this paragraph e1; or (iii) waive the requirement for
an examination in the current year. In lieu of paying travel
expenses, the Town may select a physician within a 50 mile radius
of where the officer-FF/EMT is then residing to conduct the
examination.
2. The Town shall pay for the examination by the neutral physician,
but the officer-FF/EMT shall be responsible for any costs that he/
she must incur to make him/herself available for the examination
by the neutral physician.
§ 19-5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-6
AO:309
§ 19-6. SICKNESS, INJURIES, AND ILLNESSES NOT IN THE
PERFORMANCE OF AN OFFICER'S-FF/EMT'S DUTIES:
RETIREMENT DUE TO HEALTH RELATED CONDITIONS. [Ord. 6/19/
97, § 6]
Chapter 20
a. If a determination is made pursuant to Section 19-3 that the factual and
medical evidence demonstrates to a reasonable degree of medical
certainty that an officer-FF/EMT suffered an injury or illness not in the
line of duty, (or if the parties agree that the illness or injury was not in
the line of duty) and the officer-FF/EMT is incapable of performing
police-FF/EMT duties, the officer-FF/EMT will be afforded those
procedures outlined in Section 19-1h and will be entitled to all rights
and benefits allowed by this particular chapter, the respective
Collective Bargaining Agreements, Town Ordinance, Town Pension Plan
and State law.
b. To ascertain the condition of any officer-FF/EMT who has remained
absent from work for five consecutive work days, the Town may require
the officer-FF/EMT to provide it with medical records in the manner set
forth in Section 19-2b.
c. If an officer-FF/EMT has exhausted his or her sick leave but not
returned to work, the Town may require the officer-FF/EMT to submit
to an examination by a physician chosen by the Town. The medical
examination may include a psychiatric examination if the officer-FF/
EMT claims that his or her absence from work is related to any mental
condition or mental illness or if the examining physician deems such an
examination reasonably necessary to determine whether the officer-FF/
EMT is disabled. The cost of the examination shall be borne by the
Town.
d. Any officer-FF/EMT who has suffered an injury or illness not incurred in
the performance of police-FF/EMT duties and who is incapable of
returning to the full range of police-FF/EMT duties outlined in Section
19-1e, may be processed for retirement for health related conditions as
defined in Section 19-1h. It is understood that an officer-FF/EMT, to be
eligible to retire for health related conditions, must have completed 10
years of service prior to his or her sustaining a non-work related injury
or illness. Any officer-FF/EMT completing said 10 years of service shall
be retired pursuant to the Town of Little Compton Pension Plan.
e. If an officer-FF/EMT has been retired due to health related conditions
and has not yet attained the 25th anniversary of his/her entry into the
Department, the officer-FF/EMT or the Town may elect to have the
officer-FF/EMT examined on an annual basis to determine whether the
officer-FF/EMT remains incapable of performing the full range of
police-FF/EMT duties as outlined in Section 19-1e. Within that period,
the parties will follow the disability retirement evaluation procedure as
outlined in Section 19-6.
§ 19-6 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § 19-6
AO:310
NOTIFICATION TO FARMERS
§ 20-1. PURPOSE. [Ord. 9/4/08]
The purpose of this chapter is to foster communication between the Town
of Little Compton and local farmers on actions that have a direct and
significant impact on agricultural operations as mandated by RI Gen. Laws
§ 2-23.1-1 et seq.
§ 20-2. MATTERS REQUIRING NOTIFICATION BY TOWN. [Ord. 9/4/
08]
Notification shall be given to farmers on the list established by the Division
of Agriculture at the Rhode Island Department of Environmental
Management as provided for in RI Gen. Laws § 2-23.1-3. Matters subject to
notification shall include the following actions:
§ 20-3. RESPONSIBILITY FOR PROVIDING NOTIFICATION. [Ord. 9/
4/08]
The Town Clerk is herein designated the official responsible for providing
notification to farmers on all matters.
§ 20-4. METHOD OF NOTIFICATION. [Ord. 9/4/08]
a. Change in the zoning and/or permitted uses of land used for farming;
b. Designation of or amendment to the designation of land used for
farming in comprehensive plans or land use ordinances;
c. Change in the manner of taxation of real and personal property used for
farming;
d. Establishment or amendment of programs for the transfer of
development rights affecting farming and hours of operation of
machinery and equipment used in farming;
e. Regulation of water use for farming purposes; and
f. Control of noise and hours of operation of machinery and equipment
used in farming.
Notice under this chapter shall be in addition to any other notice required
under Rhode Island law or local ordinance.
a. Notification shall be provided not later than seven business days after a
matter subject to notification is formally proposed for study or
consideration by a public body in which the matter originates. Written
notification of the matter shall be mailed to all farmers on the list
established by the Division of Agriculture and to any property owner
whose land is being farmed by a farmer listed on the aforementioned
list created by the Division of Agriculture.
§ 19-6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-4
AO:311
§ 20-5. WORK SESSIONS. [Ord. 9/4/08]
§ 20-6. EMERGENCY ACTIONS UNIMPAIRED. [Ord. 9/4/08]
The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to impair, limit, or
restrict the power of a public body of the Town to take emergency actions
of a temporary duration that are necessary to protect public health, safety,
or welfare.
§ 20-7. VALIDITY OF ACTIONS. [Ord. 9/4/08]
Except in instances of knowing and willful noncompliance with the
provisions of this chapter, a failure to comply strictly with any of the
requirements of this chapter shall not be deemed to affect or impair the
validity of any action otherwise duly taken by a public body.
Appendix
Appendix A
SPECIAL ACTS RELATING TO THE TOWN
b. The written notification shall, as a minimum, state the matter subject to
notification, the public body of the Town which will be studying or
considering the matter, and provide the name of the Town official,
whom one or more of said farmers may contact to request additional
information about the matter or to request a work session as provided
by law.
a. Any farmer who receives a notification as provided herein may request
in writing, within 10 business days after such notification, a work
session to review the impact of the matter subject to notification on
farming. The request shall be made to the official designated on the
notification to receive such requests. Not more than one work session
shall be required by the provisions of this chapter.
b. Within 20 business days after the receipt of such a request, said official
shall notify in writing all farmers on the notification list of the request,
providing the location, time and date of a work session on the matter,
which shall be not sooner than seven business days after the date of the
notice of the said work session.
c. The purpose of the work session shall be to review and consider the
effects of the matter subject to notification on farming. The work
session shall be open to the public and shall be prior to any final action
on the matter subject to notification by the public body, and the findings
and conclusions of the work session shall be reported to the public
body.
§ 20-4 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § A-1
AO:312
§ A-1. JANUARY SESSION, 1939, CHAPTER 763.
AN ACT Providing for the Management and Control of Public
Beaches and Commons in the Town of Little Compton. (H 839
Approved April 20, 1939.)
It is enacted by the General Assembly as follows:
Section 1. The town of Little Compton is hereby authorized and
empowered to manage, regulate and control all public beaches and
commons situated in said town, the word "beaches" being used in this act
to include the shores of said public beaches between high and low water
markers.
Sec. 2. The care, management and control of said public beaches and
commons shall be vested in a commission of not less than five nor more
than seven members, as the duly qualified electors of the said town shall
from time to time by their vote determine; provided, however, that the
members of any such commission shall be duly qualified electors of said
town; and provided, further, that the members of said commission shall
first be selected at the annual financial town meeting in the year 1940.
Until the members of said public commission have been elected and have
duly qualified for office, the care, management and control of said beaches
and commons and all other powers and authority herein granted to said
commission shall be vested in the committee heretofore selected by the
electors of the said town to take charge of all matters pertaining to the
beach in said town known as the South shore, which committee is known in
said town as the committee on the South shore.
Sec. 3. The said commission, or until its selection, the said committee on
the South shore, is hereby authorized and empowered to make suitable
provisions for the care, management, maintenance, protection and
improvement of said beaches and commons, and for the proper policing
of the same; to cause to be erected such bathhouses, fences and other
buildings and structures as it may deem necessary or desirable for the
convenience of the public and for the use and enjoyment of said beaches
and commons by the public in a proper manner and under proper sanitary
conditions.
Sec. 4. The town council of the said town is hereby authorized and
empowered to enact such ordinances as it may deem necessary for the
regulation of said public beaches and commons and in aid of the
management, maintenance and improvement of the same, and for the
regulation of any and all travel by the public to, from, on or over the
highways, or other public ways, passing over or across said public beaches
and commons; and to prescribe penalties for the violation of such
ordinances as may be enacted.
Sec. 5. The said commission, or the said committee on the South shore,
as the case may be, is authorized and empowered, for the purpose of
defraying the costs of maintenance and operation of the said public beaches
§ A-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § A-1
AO:313
or commons, to charge reasonable fees for admission to any of said beaches
or commons, or any part or parts thereof, for the use of bathing-houses or
other buildings and structures that may be located upon said beaches or
commons, or upon any land owned by the town in the vicinity of the same,
and for the privilege of parking motor vehicles upon said public beaches or
commons, or upon any land owned by the town in the vicinity of the same, or
upon any highway adjacent or leading to, over or across the same; provided,
however, that said commission, or the said committee on the South shore,
may exempt inhabitants of said town from the payment of any or all of said
fees.
Sec. 6. Said commission, or said committee on the South shore, as the case
may be, shall direct the expenditure of all moneys appropriated by said
town for carrying out the aforesaid provisions; shall cause to be kept proper
accounts of all income received and all expenditures made in accordance
with this act; shall transfer and pay over to the town treasurer of the town
of Little Compton all such income received; and shall certify all accounts
payable, incurred hereunder, to said town treasurer for payment when
approved.
Sec. 7. No rights of the inhabitants of said town, as such inhabitants, in
or pertaining to any of said public beaches or commons shall be destroyed
or substantially impaired by this act or by any action of said town council
hereunder, though the exercise of any such rights may be regulated or
reasonably restricted under this act so as to secure the most equitable
enjoyment of such rights by said inhabitants and to protect such public
beaches and commons from damage.
Sec. 8. This act shall take effect upon its passage.
§ A-2. JANUARY SESSION, 1959, CHAPTER 167.
AN ACT Authorizing the Town of Little Compton to Establish a
Permanent Police Force. (H 1727 Effective May 26, 1959.)
It is enacted by the General Assembly as follows:
Section 1. The town council of the town of Little Compton may appoint
at any regular meeting as a permanent police force, such police officers,
including a chief of police, for service in said town, as by ordinance the
said town council may from time to time determine, which said officers
shall hold their respective offices until vacated by death, resignation, or
retirement, except as hereinafter provided; but said town council may
increase or diminish the number of such police officers whenever and as
often as the electors of the town of Little Compton qualified to vote on
any proposition to impose a tax or for the expenditure of money shall,
at an annual or special financial town meeting, vote that the number of
said police officers shall be increased or diminished and shall appropriate
the necessary funds therefor; and the town council, or the president of
the town council, may at any time suspend any such officer until the next
regular meeting of said council, at which meeting said president shall report
§ A-1 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § A-2
AO:314
any and all suspensions, with the reasons therefor, and the said council
may continue such suspension until the next regular meeting following;
provided, however, that any police officer so appointed, including the chief
of police, shall be subject to reduction or to removal from office by said
council, at any regular meeting thereof, for misconduct, incapacity, neglect
of duty or insubordination of such character as the said council may deem
a disqualification for said office; and all such reductions or removals shall
be by said council upon charges in writing, if requested by such officer, and
of which the officer complained of shall have notice and opportunity at a
time appointed by said council to be heard thereon; and provided further,
that nothing in this act shall be construed to apply to any police officer or
constable other than the members of the permanent police force of said
town. Said town council may also appoint other police officers for occasional
service and for limited terms of less than one year.
Sec. 2. Upon the appointment and qualification of the members of a
permanent police force in accordance with the provisions of this act, the
term of office of the police force theretofore holding office in said town shall
terminate.
Sec. 3. The chief of police, other police officers of the permanent police
force, and police officers appointed for occasional service and for limited
terms shall have the power and authority conferred by law upon police
constables, but shall not be required to give bond, nor shall they be
authorized to serve process in civil actions; and every such officer, in the
due execution of his office, may command all necessary aid and assistance
in the execution of said office and every person who, when so requested,
shall refuse or neglect to give such aid and assistance shall be fined not
exceeding twenty dollars ($20).
Sec. 4. There shall be submitted to the qualified electors of the town of
Little Compton, at any regular or special town election to be held hereafter
in said town, the following question for their approval or rejection:
"Shall the act passed by the general assembly at its January A. D. session,
1959, entitled 'An act authorizing the town of Little Compton to establish a
permanent police force,' be adopted?"
Sec. 5. The secretary of state and the board of elections shall prepare
special ballot-labels upon the voting machines for the purpose of submitting
such question to the electors and the votes cast upon such question shall
be counted in the same manner as other votes are counted and the count
of such vote shall be certified as provided by sections 17-5-1 to 17-5-4
inclusive, in the general laws as amended by Chapter 18 of the public laws,
1958.
Sec. 6. Sections 4 and 5 of this act shall take effect upon their passage
and the remainder of the act shall take effect if and when a majority of the
electors voting upon said question shall vote to adopt the act authorizing
the town of Little Compton to establish a permanent police force.
§ A-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § A-3
AO:315
§ A-3. JANUARY SESSION, 1960, CHAPTER 79.
AN ACT Authorizing the Town of Little Compton to Establish a
Permanent Police Force and Amending Chapter 167 of the Public
Laws, 1959. (S 599 Effective May 5, 1960.)
It is enacted by the General Assembly as follows:
Section 1. Section 4 of chapter 167 of the public laws, 1959, entitled "An
act authorizing the town of Little Compton to establish a permanent police
force," is hereby amended to read as follows:
"Sec. 4. There shall be submitted to the qualified electors of the town of
Little Compton, at any regular or special town election to be held hereafter
in said town, the following question for their approval or rejection:
'Shall the act passed by the general assembly at its January A. D. session,
1959, entitled "An act authorizing a permanent police force," be adopted?"
The town council of the town of Little Compton is hereby authorized to call
a special town election to carry out the provisions of this act, notice of the
said special election to be the same required for special town meetings."
Sec. 2. This act shall take effect upon its passage and all acts and parts of
acts inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed.
§ A-4. JANUARY SESSION, 1960, CHAPTER 10.
AN ACT Authorizing the Town Council of the Town of Little Compton
to License and Regulate the Location and use of Trailer Parks in said
Town, and also to Regulate the use and Location of House Trailers
and Mobile Homes. (S 133 Approved Feb. 5, 1960.)
It is enacted by the General Assembly as follows:
Section 1. The town council of the town of Little Compton, is hereby
empowered to license and regulate the location and use of trailer parks in
said town, and said town council is also hereby empowered to regulate the
use and location of house trailers and mobile homes, when stationary, within
said town, which are being used for dwellings, permanent or temporary.
Sec. 2. This act shall take effect upon its passage and all acts and parts of
acts inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed.
§ A-5. JANUARY SESSION, 1965, CHAPTER 48.
AN ACT Providing for a Budget Committee in the Town of Little
Compton. (S 622 Approved April 27, 1965.)
It is enacted by the General Assembly as follows:
Section 1. The electors of the town of Little Compton qualified to vote
upon a proposition to impose a tax and for the expenditure of money shall
§ A-3 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § A-5
AO:316
annually in annual financial town meeting, legally assembled, in said town
of Little Compton, elect a budget committee consisting of five of such
qualified electors; members of the town council and members of the school
committee of said town shall be ineligible to be elected or serve as members
of said committee; and in case of failure to so elect such budget committee,
the town council of said town shall act as the budget committee.
Sec. 2. Said budget committee shall hold public meetings from time to time
to receive recommendations for town appropriations, and shall hold at least
one public hearing not more than twenty days and not less than ten days
prior to the annual financial town meeting of said town. (Amended January
Session, 1979 — Chapter 9, effective March 12, 1979.)
Sec. 3. The budget committee when elected shall be sworn to the faithful
performance of their duties in the same manner as other town officers, shall
choose one of their number as a chairman and one of their number as a
clerk, and shall keep records of their meetings and proceedings.
Sec. 4. The town officers of said town and the heads of the several
departments thereof shall submit to the town clerk on or before the fifteenth
day of February in each year their estimates of such sums as may be
required in connection with the several departments of said town, and
all persons proposing to introduce any resolution for the appropriation of
money at the financial town meeting shall file in the office of the town
clerk on or before the first day of March in each year for the use of
said committee, the form of resolution for the appropriation of money
intended to be presented to the said financial town meeting, in order that
the electors of said town qualified to vote at such financial town meeting
may be appraised thereof.
Sec. 5. At least ten days prior to the date of any such annual financial town
meeting of said town said budget committee shall file with said town clerk
a schedule or list of appropriations recommended by said committee for
passage at such annual financial town meeting, and shall also together with
such list of recommended appropriations file with said town clerk a list or
schedule of requests for appropriations submitted for the consideration of
the said budget committee and which were disapproved or not considered
by said budget committee.
Sec. 6. All vacancies occurring in said committee shall be filled by the town
council.
Sec. 7. Said budget committee shall have power to demand any and all
books, records, and correspondence relative to the expenditure of town
monies in the custody of any department of the town which in its opinion are
necessary to properly prepare a budget for the expenditure of town funds.
Sec. 8. This act shall take effect upon its passage.
§ A-5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § A-6
AO:317
§ A-6. JANUARY SESSION, 1971, CHAPTER 84.
AN ACT Authorizing the Town of Little Compton to Establish and
maintain a Pension Plan for Town Employees and Elected Officials.
(H 2521 Approved June 11, 1971.)
It is enacted by the General Assembly as follows:
Section 1. The town council of the town of Little Compton subject to the
approval of the financial town meeting at any regular or special meeting, is
authorized to enact an ordinance or ordinances to establish and maintain
a pension plan for town employees and elected officials and/or to contract
therefor with any insurance company authorized to do business in the state
of Rhode Island. Such ordinance or ordinances may define the employees
and elected officials eligible to participate in such plan; the contributions to
such plan, if any, to be made by such employees and elected officials and to
be appropriated by the town; the amount and nature of the benefits payable
to such employees and officials and/or their beneficiaries; the carrying and
other charges for establishing and maintaining such pension plan; and in all
other respects to do any act or thing necessary to properly establish and
maintain a pension plan.
Sec. 2. At the annual financial town meeting of the town of Little Compton
to be held next after the passage of this act or at any special town meeting
there shall be submitted to the electors of said town qualified to vote on any
proposition for the imposition of a tax or for the expenditure of money for
their approval or rejection the following proposition:
"Shall the action of the general assembly by an act passed at the January
session, A. D. 1971, entitled An act authorizing the town of Little Compton
to establish and maintain a pension plan for town employees and elected
officials', be approved?" The town clerk shall forthwith certify to the
secretary of state the results of the vote on the question so submitted.
Sec. 3. This section and section 2 of this act shall take effect upon the
passage of this act and section 1 shall take effect when and if the majority
of the qualified electors of the town of Little Compton voting upon the
proposition contained in section 2 hereof shall have voted their approval
thereof, and thereupon all acts and parts of acts inconsistent herewith shall
stand repealed.
§ A-7. JANUARY SESSION, 1973, CHAPTER 55.
AN ACT Enabling the Town of Little Compton to Control Dual Office
Holding by Members of the Town Council. (73-S 655 Approved May 8,
1973.)
It is enacted by the General Assembly as follows:
Section 1. For the purpose of avoiding conflicts of interest and making
more efficient the performance of duties by town employees, the town
council of the town of Little Compton shall have power by ordinance in
§ A-6 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § A-7
AO:318
accordance with the provisions of this act to eliminate dual office holding by
members of the town council.
Sec. 2. Such ordinances may provide that a member of the council shall
hold no other paid public office or employment in the service of the town
or of the state or federal government except that of notary public, justice
of the peace, volunteer fireman, or member of the national guard or naval,
air or military reserve and that no member of the council shall be eligible to
hold any other paid local town office during his tenure on the council or for
a period of one year thereafter.
Sec. 3. This act shall take effect upon its passage.
§ A-8. JANUARY SESSION, 1973, CHAPTER 178.
AN ACT Authorizing the Town of Little Compton to Enact Ordinances
Regulating, Controlling and Licensing Earth Removal. (73-S 936
Approved May 11, 1973.)
It is enacted by the General Assembly as follows:
Section 1. For the purposes of promoting health, safety or general welfare
and in order to effect uniform regulation within the town of Little Compton
for earth removal as hereinafter defined, the town of Little Compton shall
have the power in accordance with the provisions of this act to provide
by ordinance for the regulation, control and licensing of earth removal
as hereinafter defined, such power to be restricted and exercised in
accordance with sections 2 through 16 of this act.
Sec. 2. As used in this act:
"Earth removal" shall mean the extraction or removal of any sand, gravel,
loam, topsoil, stone, clay or shale, from deposits on any tract of land,
excluding, however, extracting, removing, digging, mining or quarrying
limestone, limerock, or granite and excluding operations of a sand and
gravel plant in operation upon the passage of this act and the immediately
surrounding twenty (20) acres of industrial zoned land upon which said
sand and gravel plant is located and excluding also earth removal involved
in the process of grading land,
(a) For the construction of building for which a building permit has been
issued;
(b) For the construction of a roadway, or
(c) For a subdivision in accordance with a plat plan or plans approved by
or in accord with an ordinance of any city or town or any duly authorized
board of authority thereof.
"Zoning board of review" shall mean the zoning board of review established
by the town of Little Compton.
§ A-7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § A-8
AO:319
"Residential use" shall mean any zone in which no use save dwellings,
including multi-family dwellings, is permitted without first obtaining a
variance, exception or special exception from the zoning board of review.
"Building inspector" shall mean that person charged by the town of Little
Compton with the issuance of building permits.
Sec. 3. An ordinance enacted pursuant to the authority contained in this act
may:
(a) set hours for earth removal as limited by subsection 4 (a)1;
(b) establish setback requirements as limited by subsection 4(a)2;
(c) require fencing as limited by subsection 4(a)3;
(d) regulate dust conditions as limited by subsection 4(a)4 and 4(b);
(e) regulate water conditions as limited by subsection 4(a)5;
(f) require plans for the rehabilitation of the tract of land upon cessation of
earth removal; and
(g) require a license for the initiation or lateral expansion of earth removal
in accordance with section 6.
Sec. 4. (a) With respect to earth removal operations on any tract of land,
said tract now or hereafter being in a residential use area as herein defined
or within fifty feet of such district such ordinance;
(1) may limit the hours of earth removal operations, provided, however, (i)
that no such restrictions shall be imposed for the period between 7:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m., of any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday or
Saturday (except a legal holiday), and (ii) that earth removal on Sunday and
on any legal holiday or for hours prior to 7:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m., may
be authorized on special exception issued by the building inspector;
(2) may prohibit the initiation or lateral expansion of earth removal within a
distance of the greater of 25 feet of the boundary of the tract of land upon
which earth removal is to be carried on adjacent to residential use property
or within 50 feet of any dwelling;
(3) may require the fencing of those portions of the boundary of the tract
of land upon which earth removal is being conducted adjacent to developed
residential property, such fencing to be five (5) feet in height and effective to
control access to the area in which such earth removal is being conducted;
(4) may require that calcium chloride or oil be applied to non-hard surfaced
roads to be used for vehicular ingress or egress to the tract of land, and
to the regularly traveled roads within said tract of land, on which earth
removal is to be conducted; and
§ A-8 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § A-8
AO:320
(5) may require that drainage be provided to prevent the permanent
collection and stagnation of surface or underground waters, and to prevent
the flooding and erosion of surrounding property.
(b) Within any district or area other than a residential use district as herein
defined such ordinance may require
(1) that calcium chloride or oil be applied to non-hard surfaced roads to be
used for vehicular ingress or egress to the tract of land and to the regularly
traveled roads within the said tract of land,
(2) that when earth removal ceases all slopes on said tract shall remain at
the natural angle of repose,
(3) that said tract will not permanently collect stagnant water, and
(4) that said tract will not be subject to erosion by wind or water.
Sec. 5. Except as otherwise provided herein, as a condition precedent to the
issuance of a license pursuant to section 6 hereof, any such ordinance shall
require the submission to the building inspector and his approval thereof:
(a) of a plan prepared by a registered engineer in compliance with the
provisions of said ordinance and setting forth the existing contours of the
tract of land, and based upon classifications of preliminary samples of the
material to be removed, (i) the final contours of the tract of land upon
completion of earth removal operations and (ii) the type of ground cover
to be planted or applied upon completion of earth removal operations to
effectively control wind and water erosion; provided, however, if suitable
fertile ground cover existing at the beginning of earth removal, enough
of said ground cover to be held in reserve and reapplied for a minimum
thickness of three (3) inches.
(b) of an opinion by a registered engineer that upon completion of earth
removal operations all slopes on said tract as set forth in the plan referred
to in subparagraph (a) of this section, shall remain at the natural angle of
repose; and
(c) of a bond not to exceed one hundred ($100.00) dollars for each acre of
said tract of land to insure compliance with the requirements of this section.
If the plan set forth in subparagraph 5(a) is not complied with, the town
of Little Compton is authorized and empowered to undertake and complete
such plan and the owner of said tract of land shall reimburse the town
of Little Compton for its necessary expenses in connection therewith and
the town of Little Compton shall have a lien on said tract of land for such
expenses.
Sec. 6. As a condition precedent to any earth removal as herein defined
such ordinance shall require a license to be issued by the building inspector
upon the submission of the documents required by section 5 and his
approval thereof and the payment of a license fee of twenty-five ($25.00)
dollars.
§ A-8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § A-8
AO:321
Sec. 7. Upon special application and after a showing that the literal
enforcement of the ordinance will work a hardship, the zoning board of
review may grant an exception to any terms of said earth removal ordinance
upon a finding that such exception will not result in a substantial
depreciation of surrounding property.
Sec. 8. Appeals from the decisions of the building inspector to the zoning
board of review shall be taken in the same manner as other appeals to said
zoning board and the procedure as to notice and hearings shall be the same
insofar as the same are consistent herewith.
Sec. 9 Any such ordinance may also provide for the revocation by the
zoning board of review, after notice and hearing, of any license issued under
the authority of any such earth removal ordinance for violations of any of
the provisions of said ordinance.
Sec. 10. Any such ordinance may:
(a) provide for a penalty for the violation of any of its provisions of a fine
not exceeding one hundred ($100.00) dollars for each offense, such fine to
inure to the town of Little Compton, and also may
(b) provide that suit may be brought in the superior court in the name of the
town of Little Compton to restrain any violation of, or compel compliance
with, the provisions of such earth removal ordinance or ordinances.
Sec. 11. Any such ordinance shall not apply to earth removal being
conducted on the date of its enactment on any tract of land within the town
of Little Compton until sixty (60) days after the enactment of such ordinance
and, further, any such ordinance shall provide that upon submission to the
building inspector of the plan and all other material as required under
sections 5 and 6 hereof, except that no such plan need set forth existing
contours for that portion of any tract of land on which earth removal
has been completed on the effective date of such ordinance, the building
inspector shall forthwith issue a license for the continuance of earth
removal on any such tract of land.
Sec. 12. Any such ordinance shall provide that real property acquired or
leased prior to the effective date of this act for the purpose of earth removal
and held for such purpose on the date of enactment of such ordinance shall
be considered in use for earth removal whether or not extracting has then
actually commenced, and a license for earth removal on such property shall
be issued pursuant to section 6 hereof upon compliance with the provisions
of sections 5 and 6 hereof and subject to any ordinance enacted as provided
in section 15 hereof. In order for real property to qualify hereunder, the
following conditions shall be considered as conclusive evidence that such
real property was acquired or leased and held for the purpose of later
mineral extraction:
(a) such real property was acquired or leased prior to effective date of this
act;
§ A-8 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § A-8
AO:322
(b) such real property was acquired or leased by an individual, corporate
or otherwise, engaged at the time of acquisition in the business of mineral
extraction;
(c) such real property, or the substantial portion of such property has not
been permanently developed, for any residential, commercial (other than
farm or agricultural) or industrial purpose;
(d) such real property contains mineral deposits of a demonstrable
economic value; and
(e) provided, however, that if the owner or lessee of any such tract of land
shall file in the office of the town clerk of the town of Little Compton as the
case may be, on or before December 31, 1973, a statement setting forth his
intention to engage in earth removal on said tract of land describing said
tract of land, then such tract of land shall be deemed to qualify under this
section, and as to any tract of land for which such intention is not so filed
then the provisions of this section shall have no force and effect.
Sec. 13. If any provision of this act, or the application thereof, is held
invalid, the validity of the remainder of this act shall not be affected thereby.
Sec. 14. If the town of Little Compton shall engage in earth removal for
municipal purposes it shall comply with the provisions of the earth removal
ordinance adopted pursuant to this act.
Sec. 15. This act shall not be deemed to limit by implication or otherwise
any ordinance enacted pursuant to the authority of chapter 24 of title 45 of
the general laws of 1956, as amended.
Sec. 16. This act shall take effect on July 1, 1973.
§ A-9. JANUARY SESSION, 1974, CHAPTER 293.
AN ACT Enabling the Town Council of the Town of Little Compton to
Exempt Certain Property From Taxation. (74-S 2244 Effective without
signature of governor. May 14, 1974.)
It is enacted by the General Assembly as follows:
Section 1. The town council of the town of Little Compton may by
ordinance exempt from taxation the real property situated in said town and
owned by the Sakonnet Preservation Association, Inc.
Sec. 2. This act shall take effect upon its passage.
§ A-10. JANUARY SESSION, 1977, CHAPTER 105.
AN ACT Relating to the Zoning Board of Review in Little Compton.
(77-S 1284 Effective without signature of governor. May 11, 1977.)
It is enacted by the General Assembly as follows:
§ A-8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § A-10
AO:323
Section 1. Section 45-24-14 of the general laws in chapter 45-24 entitled
"Zoning ordinances" is hereby amended to read as follows:
"45-24-14. COMPOSITION OF BOARD OF REVIEW — OPEN
HEARINGS. — The board of review shall consist of five (5) members, each
to hold office for the term of five (5) years; provided, however, that the
original selection shall be made for terms of one (1), two (2), three (3),
four (4), and five (5) years respectively. The chairman, or in his absence,
the acting chairman may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses. The mayor of any city or the town council of any town shall have
the right to name an auxiliary or sixth member of said board of review of
said city or town, as the case may be, who shall sit as an active member
when and if a member of said board is unable to serve at any hearing, upon
request of the chairman of said board. All hearings of such board shall be
open to the public.
"Provided further, however, that the town council of the town of Little
Compton shall have the right to name two (2) additional auxiliary members
or seventh and eighth members of said board of review of said town to sit
as an active member when and if a member of said board is unable to serve
at any hearing, upon request of the chairman of said board."
Sec. 2. This act shall take effect upon its passage.
§ A-11. JANUARY SESSION, 1982.
AN ACT Changing the Fiscal Year of the Town of Little Compton;
Authorizing the Qualified Electors of the Town to Levy Taxes
Sufficient to Finance the Change in the Fiscal Year; Changing the
Date of the Annual Financial Town Meeting; and Amending Section
2 of Chapter 48 of the Public Laws, 1965, Entitled "An Act Providing
for a Budget Committee in the Town of Little Compton." (82-H7248
Introduced January 2, 1982.)
It is enacted by the General Assembly as follows:
Section 1. Notwithstanding any public law to the contrary, the fiscal year of
the town of Little Compton shall begin on July 1 of each calendar year and
end on June 30 of the following calendar year, commencing July 1, 1983.
Sec. 2. The fiscal year of the town commencing April 1, 1982, is hereby
extended to run fifteen months to June 30, 1983.
Sec. 3. The electors of the town of Little Compton qualified to vote upon any
proposition to impose a tax, or for the expenditure of money in said town,
and assembling at the heretofore regular annual financial town meeting on
April 6, 1982, at seven o'clock in the evening, or any adjournment thereof,
are hereby authorized to approve and make appropriations and to order
the levy of taxes to raise funds sufficient to meet the fifteen month budget
for appropriations made and for all such other financial transactions as
may legally come before said meeting, for the period April 1, 1982 through
June 30, 1983, said period constituting one financial year for the purposes
§ A-10 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § A-11
AO:324
of section 45-12-4 of the general laws of Rhode Island (1956) and other
applicable sections of chapter 45-12, and the tax so levied shall be deemed
an annual tax for the purposes of said sections.
Sec. 4. Said qualified electors are hereby authorized also to order the
collection of this said tax levy in five quarterly payments.
Sec. 5. Section 1 of chapter 1834 of the public laws of 1931, entitled "An
Act Fixing the Time for the Holding of a Financial Town Meeting and for
the Election of Town Officers in the Town of Little Compton," amended by
chapter 2424 of the public laws of 1950, is hereby further amended to read
as follows:
"Section 1. The electors of the town of Little Compton, qualified to vote on
any proposition to impose a tax or for the expenditure of money in said
town, shall, on the third Tuesday in May, 1983, and annually on the third
Tuesday in May thereafter, assemble in town meeting at seven o'clock in the
evening for the purpose of hearing official reports, ordering a tax or taxes,
making appropriations and transacting other business appertaining to the
financial affairs of said town. The place or location for holding such financial
town meeting shall be designated by the town council of the town of Little
Compton and shall be stated in the call and warrant for said meeting. Said
financial town meeting shall be warned and called and the list of electors
qualified to vote therein shall be made out and canvassed in the same
manner as provided by law with respect to elective town meetings."
Sec. 6. Section 4 of chapter 48 of the public laws of 1965, entitled "An Act
Providing for a Budget Committee in the Town of Little Compton," said act
amended by chapter 8 of the public laws of 1979, is amended to read as
follows:
"Sec. 4. The town officers of said town and the heads of the several
departments thereof shall submit to the town clerk on or before the fifteenth
day of March in each year their estimates of such sums as may be required
in connection with the several departments of said town, and all persons
proposing to introduce any resolution for the appropriation of money at the
financial town meeting shall file in the office of the town clerk on or before
the first day of April in each year for the use of said committee, the form of
resolution for the appropriation of money intended to be presented to the
said financial town meeting, in order that the electors of said town qualified
to vote at such financial town meeting may be apprised thereof."
Sec. 7. This act shall take effect if approved by the electors of the town of
Little Compton, qualified to vote on any proposition to impose a tax or for
the expenditure of money in said town at the meeting of said electors to be
held at seven o'clock in the evening of April 6, 1982, or any adjournment
thereof. Notice that said act shall be submitted to said electors for approval
shall be posted in the warrant for said April 6, 1982 meeting. The town
clerk shall, forthwith after said town meeting on said April 6, 1982 or
adjournment thereof, notify the secretary of state of the result of the vote
upon the aforesaid question.
§ A-11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § A-11
AO:325
Sec. 8. All acts and parts of acts inconsistent with the sections of this
foregoing act are hereby repealed. All other acts and parts of acts to which
these said sections apply are affirmed.
§ A-12. JANUARY SESSION, 1983.
AN ACT Exempting from Taxation the Real and Personal Property
of Little Compton Nursing Association to an Amount Not Exceeding
$150,000. (83-H6165 Introduced March 18, 1983.)
It is enacted by the General Assembly as follows:
Section 1. The property, real and personal, held for or by Little Compton
Nursing Association, incorporated as a non-business corporation, to an
amount not exceeding one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000) shall
at all times be exempt from all taxes so long as said property shall be
used for the purposes for which said corporation was incorporated. Said
exemption shall be effective for the tax year ending December 31, 1983 and
all subsequent years.
§ A-13. JANUARY SESSION, 1983.
AN ACT Authorizing the Town of Little Compton to Enact an
Ordinance Licensing and Regulating Jukeboxes, Amusement Devices
and Electronic or Video Games. (83-H5328 Introduced February 1,
1983.)
It is enacted by the General Assembly as follows:
Section 1. License requirement. No person shall keep a jukebox,
mechanical amusement device or electronic or video game as hereinafter
defined, or any similar device of a similar character in any saloon, shop or
place of business of any nature within the Town of Little Compton or keep
any such device for public use or profit within said town, without a license
from the town council of said town first having been obtained; the town
council may, in its discretion, grant or refuse to grant, licenses therefor, and
the licenses so granted shall continue for a term not exceeding one (1) year.
Section 2. Definition of terms. As used in this chapter, unless the context
otherwise indicates the following definition shall apply:
(a) The term "jukebox" shall mean any music vending machine, contrivance
or device which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc, or
key into any slot, crevice, or other opening, or by the payment of any price,
operates or may be operated, for the emission of songs, music or similar
amusement.
(b) The term "mechanical amusement device" shall mean any machine
which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, or disc, or key into
any slot, crevice, or other opening, or by the payment of any price, may
be operated by the public generally for use as a game, entertainment or
amusement, whether or not registering a score. It shall include such devices
§ A-11 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § A-13
AO:326
as marble machines, pinball machines, skill ball, mechanical grab machines,
mechanical pool tables and all games, operations, or transactions, similar
thereto under whatever name they may be described.
(c) The term "electronic and video games" shall mean any machine, which,
upon the insertion of a coin, token, plate, slug or disc, or key into any
slot, crevice, or other opening or by the payment of any price, may be
operated by the public generally for use as a game, entertainment or
amusement, whether or not registering a score. It shall include such devices
as marble machines, pinball machines, skill ball, mechanical grab machines,
mechanical pool tables and all games, operations, or transactions, similar
thereto under whatever name they may be described.
(d) The term "person" as used herein shall mean any individual, firm,
corporation, or association.
Section 3. Contents of license application. The application for the
license shall contain the following information:
(a) Name and address of applicant, (shall be owner of the business in which
device is located), age, date and place of birth when applicable.
(b) Prior arrests, and convictions of applicant, if an individual, or any
stockholders, or officers, if the applicant be a corporation or an association,
including the names and addresses of all officers.
(c) Place where machine or device is to be displayed or operated and the
business conducted at that place.
(d) Description of machine to be covered by the license, mechanical
features, and serial number.
No license shall be issued to any individual unless he shall be over eighteen
(18) years of age and a citizen of the United States.
Section 4. Inspection. Application for a license shall be made out in
triplicate, one copy being referred to the chief of police, another copy to the
building official's office, the third to remain on file in Town Clerk's office.
(a) The chief of police shall investigate the machine or device sought to
be licensed, the location wherein it is proposed to be operated, and the
applicant, and report to the council his findings.
The council shall not approve the issuance of a license for any machine or
device which would constitute a "gambling device," as defined by section
11-19-18 of the general laws of Rhode Island, 1956, or any other section or
sections of said general laws.
(b) The electrical inspector shall inspect all wiring and connections to the
machine, determine if the same complies with the electrical code of the
town of Little Compton and the State of Rhode Island and shall report to the
council his findings.
§ A-13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § A-13
AO:327
(c) The licenses granted hereunder shall be displayed on each machine and
each and every machine shall be required to be so licensed.
Section 5. License fees. Every applicant, before being granted a license,
shall pay the following annual license fee for the privilege of operating or
maintaining for operation each jukebox, mechanical amusement device, or
electronic and video games as defined in section 2 hereof.
Jukeboxes $25.00 per machine
Mechanical amusement devices $25.00 per machine
Electronic and video games $300.00 per machine
On the thirtieth (30th) day of November, next following of issue, each
license shall expire.
Section 6. Prohibitions and restrictions.
(a) No person shall permit the playing of jukeboxes between the hours of
1:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m., and at all other times shall modulate the volume of
music so not to cause nuisance.
(b) No person licensed by virtue of this chapter shall permit any jukebox,
mechanical amusement device or electronic and video game, the use of
which has been permitted under license granted to him, to be used by
any minor under the age of sixteen (16) years, and in case of such use
being permitted, the person holding such license shall, thereupon, forfeit
the same.
(c) No person licensed by virtue of this chapter shall have or assemble more
than two (2) electronic video games and two (2) mechanical amusement
devices in any one place of business or premises.
(d) No license fee shall be required of any charitable institution.
Section 7. Revocation of License. Every license issued by the town of
Little Compton is subject to revocation should the licensee, directly or
indirectly, permit the operation of any jukebox, mechanical amusement
device, or electronic or video game contrary to the provisions of this act
or any ordinance or amendment thereto or the laws of the State of Rhode
Island. Said license maybe revoked by the council of the town of Little
Compton after written notice to the licensee, which shall specify the
violations with which the licensee is charged. The licensee may ask for a
hearing on said charge to be held not later than ten (10) days after notice
has been received by the licensee. At such hearing the licensee and/or his
attorney may present and submit evidence and witnesses in his defense.
Section 8. Penalty. Every person who shall own, keep or use any jukebox,
mechanical amusement device, electronic or video games, or any device
similar in character, without such license first having been obtained, shall
be fined not more than one hundred ($100.00) dollars nor less than fifty
($50.00) dollars or be imprisoned not exceeding three (3) months for each
such offense.
§ A-13 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § A-13
AO:328
Section 9. Separability of provisions. Each separate provision of this
chapter shall be deemed independent of all the other provisions herein, and
it is further declared that if any provision of the chapter be declared invalid,
all other provisions thereof shall remain valid and enforceable.
Section 10. This act shall take effect upon passage.
§ A-14. JANUARY SESSION, 1985.
AN ACT Establishing the Little Compton Agricultural Conservancy
Trust. (85-S954 Introduced April 14, 1985.)
It is enacted by the General Assembly as follows:
Section 1. There is hereby established a Little Compton Agricultural
Conservancy Trust (hereinafter called Trust) for the primary purpose of
acquiring development rights to agricultural property within the town. The
Trust shall have as a secondary purpose the acquisition of agricultural
property, and/or other property, or interest therein, to preserve open
spaces, fresh and saltwater marshes, estuaries and adjoining uplands,
groundwater recharging areas, land providing access to the ocean, land for
bicycle paths and land for future public recreational facilities and use.
Section 2. The Trust shall be administered by seven (7) trustees, five
(5) of whom shall be appointed by the town council with at least one
(1) being an active farmer. The trustees who are first appointed shall be
designated to serve for terms of one (1), two (2), three (3), four (4), and five
(5) years respectively. Thereafter trustees shall be appointed as aforesaid
for a term of office of five (5) years, except that all vacancies occurring
during a term shall be filled for the unexpired term. In addition to the
five (5) trustees appointed by the town council, the current chairperson,
or member designee, of the Little Compton Conservation Commission and
Little Compton Planning Board shall also be trustees.
Trustees shall be resident electors of the town of Little Compton, shall serve
without compensation and shall hold office until their successors have been
appointed. No trustee may be an elected officer or salaried employee of the
town.
Section 3. The members of the Trust shall elect a chairperson, vicechairperson,
and treasurer from amongst its members. The trustees shall
elect or appoint a secretary who need not be a voting member of the
Trust. The term of office of the office of the chairperson, vice-chairperson,
treasurer and secretary, unless otherwise prescribed by the Little Compton
town council, shall be for the calendar year, or for that portion therefor
remaining after each such officer is designated or elected.
Section 4. The trustees may adopt reasonable rules and regulations
governing the conduct of Trust affairs, including the acquisition and
management of its holdings not inconsistent with the provisions of this act.
All rules and regulations of the Trust are subject to the approval of the town
council. Decisions of the trustees shall be by majority vote of those present
§ A-13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § A-14
AO:329
and voting, and no business shall be transacted without four (4) members
present. The trustees shall keep accurate records of their meetings and
actions and shall file an annual report which shall be printed in the annual
town report. All meetings of the Trust shall be open to the public.
Section 5. The Trust shall have the authority to acquire any real property
from consenting land owner(s), situated in Little Compton, or any interest
therein, which it shall deem important to preserve or maintain in an open
or agricultural condition. With the exception of property acquired for public
recreation purposes, such property shall be held by the Trust subject to
the condition that it shall be used for open space or agricultural use. The
trustees shall afford priority to the acquisition of development rights of
agricultural lands.
Section 6. The Trust shall also have power to:
a. Purchase, receive by gift, or otherwise acquire real property and
development rights, as defined in section 42-82-2 of the general laws or any
interest in real property consistent with purposes of this Act;
b. Accept gifts, grants or loans of funds or services from any source, public
or private, and comply, subject to the provisions of this Act, with any terms
and conditions thereof;
c. Accept from State and/or Federal agencies, loans or grants for use in
carrying out its purposes and enter into agreements with such agencies
respecting any such loans or grants;
d. Employ counsel, auditors, engineers, appraisers, private consultants,
advisors, secretaries or other personnel needed to provide necessary
services;
e. Administer and manage land and interests in land held by it in a manner
which allows public use and/or enjoyment consistent with the natural and
scenic resources thereof;
f. Otherwise do all things necessary for the performance of its duties, the
fulfillment of its obligation and the conduct of its business.
Section 7. The electors of the Town of Little Compton are hereby
authorized to levy an additional tax upon real property transfers within said
town in accordance with section 8 of this act. Said tax shall be levied at the
annual financial town meeting and shall become effective on the first day
of the next town fiscal year. The tax, once adopted, shall remain in effect
unless the electors, when legally assembled, repeal said tax. The electors,
when legally assembled, may also amend the rate or rates of said tax and/or
the amount exempted from such tax. (2002-H8198, Approved May 20, 2003)
Section 8. The term "real property interest" as used herein shall mean:
any present or future legal equitable interest in or to real property, and
any beneficial interest therein, including the interest of any beneficiary in
a trust which holds any legal or equitable interest in real property and the
§ A-14 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § A-14
AO:330
interest including stocks and bonds of any corporation or limited liability
corporation in real property but shall not include any interest which is
limited to any or all of the following: the dominant estate in any easement
or right-of-way; the right to enforce any restriction; any estate at will or at
sufferance, and estate for years having a term of less than fifteen (15) years;
any reversionary right, condition, or right of entry for condition broken; the
interest of a mortgage or other secured party in any mortgage or security
agreement.
Whenever a tax is assessed by section 44-25-1 of the general laws on the
transfer of a real property interest situated in Little Compton, there is
hereby imposed, in addition to said tax, an additional tax not to exceed the
amount of five (5%) percent of that amount of the total purchase price which
exceeds three hundred thousand ($300,000.00) dollars unless such rate or
rates and/or exemption amount are amended as provided for in section 7
of this act. Said exemption shall not be less than three hundred thousand
($300,000.00) dollars. (Ord. 12/21/17)
As used herein, the total purchase price shall mean the aggregate
consideration received by a seller or sellers collectively for the transfer of
each recorded lot of real property, whether in a single conveyance or in
separate contemporaneous conveyances, which transfer or transfers result
in the conveyance of either: (i) the entire fee interest, or (ii) a lesser
fee interest in the real property including, without limitation, conservation
easements and development rights; and only one, three hundred thousand
($300,000.00) dollar, (or other greater amount if adopted by the electors)
exemption shall be applied to such transaction or transactions conveying
the entire fee interest regardless of the number of deeds or other
instruments used to effectuate the transfer or the number of buyers or
sellers participating therein. If something less than the entire fee interest
is conveyed, then the exemption shall be reduced proportionately. (Ord. 12/
21/17)
The additional tax authorized by this section shall also be imposed on
the aggregate consideration provided in exchange for a transfer of real
property interests held in the name of or otherwise owned by: (1) A
corporation, where there is a transfer by the controlling stockholders of
their interest in the stock of the corporation; (2) A limited liability
corporation; (3) A trust; (4) A person or persons or entities with a property
interest of a term of years or lease of property greater than fifteen (15)
years; and (5) A partnership when there is a change in composition of such
partnership, either in one transaction, or in a series of related transactions,
which change in composition results in a transfer of capital interest in
excess of fifty percent (50%) of the total capital interest within such
partnership or results in a transfer of the ownership rights to interests
in excess of fifty percent (50%) of the total profit interests within such
partnership.
In the case of real property interest in real property which is situated
in both Little Compton and Tiverton, Rhode Island or Westport,
Massachusetts, the additional tax shall be imposed on that portion of the
§ A-14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § A-14
AO:331
purchase price, in relation to what the current assessed values, as
determined by the Little Compton tax assessors and their counterpart in the
abutting town, bear to the total sales price.
The payment of the additional tax hereby imposed shall be evidenced by
the affixing of documentary stamps, provided by the Little Compton town
clerk's office, to every original instrument presented for recording in the
same manner as set forth in section 44-25-3 of said general laws. Said
tax shall be the obligation of the buyer of real property unless otherwise
agreed to by the parties of the transfer.20 (87-H 7044, Approved July 1,
1987; 99-S 0967, Approved May 18, 1999; 2002-H 8198, Approved May 20,
2003; 2009-S 0756, Approved July 16, 2009; 2009-H 6022, Approved July
16, 2009, Amended 12/21/17 as Approved May 17, 2016 - eff. July 1, 2016)
Section 9. All funds collected by virtue of said assessment shall be
deposited in a fund to be set up as a revolving account by the treasurer
of the Town of Little Compton. Additional monies or other liquid assets
received as voluntary contributions, grants or loans shall be deposited into
said account.
Section 10. If any of the provisions of this act or if any rule, regulation
or order thereunder or the application of such provision to any person
or circumstances shall be held invalid, the remainder of this act and the
application of this act or such rule, regulation or order to any person or
circumstances, other than those as to which it is held invalid, shall not be
affected thereby.
Section 11. This section shall take effect upon passage of the act. The
remainder of this act shall take effect upon its approval by a majority of
those voting to approve the act at an annual financial town meeting of the
Town of Little Compton.
The following is a certified vote of the Annual Financial Town Meeting of
May 20, 1986:
Voted: To approve the establishment of the Little Compton
Agricultural Conservancy Trust to provide for the orderly
preservation of agricultural and other undeveloped land
within the Town's boundaries.
Voted: To approve a land transfer tax of two (2%) percent on the
purchase of all property within the Town which exceeds a
purchase price of seventy-five thousand ($75,000.00) dollars
to carry out the purpose of the aforesaid Trust.
From the decision of the electors at the Annual Financial Town Meeting on
May 17, 2016:
20.Editor's Note: The amendment to this section was adopted at the Financial Town Meeting
of the Town of Little Compton on May 19, 2009.
§ A-14 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § A-14
AO:332
Approved: Pursuant to Sections 7 and 8 of Chapter 16 of the Rhode
Island Public Laws of 1985, as amended ("An Act Establishing
the Little Compton Agricultural Conservancy Trust"), to
increase the current transfer-tax exemption on real property
transfers from $150,000 to $300,000 of the total purchase
price (thereby eliminating the current two-percent (2%) tax
rate on that amount of the total purchase price between
$150,000 and $225,000). The $300,000 exemption will take
effect on July 1st, 2016. (Ord. 12/21/17)
LITTLE COMPTON AGRICULTURAL CONSERVANCY TRUST
STANDING RULES AND REGULATIONS
SECTION I. NAME.
The name of the Trust shall be the Little Compton Agricultural
Conservancy Trust (hereinafter called Trust).
SECTION II. MEETINGS. [Ord. 12/21/17]
1. The trustees shall regularly meet on at least a monthly basis.
Special meetings may be called by the chairperson at any time
upon notice to all other trustees and forty-eight (48) hours public
notice.
2. Meetings shall be conducted in accordance with "Robert's Rules of
Order."
3. Agenda and Notice.
a. The Secretary shall type and distribute the agenda to members
of the Trust and Town Council liaison.
b. The general form and order of the agenda shall be determined
by the Trust from time to time.
c. Any person wishing to bring matters before the Trust may
request, by written communication to the Trust, that matters
be entered on the agenda.
d. The deadline for inclusion of matters on the agenda for a
regular monthly meeting shall be 4:00 p.m. on the Monday of
the week preceding the meeting. However, bills to be paid shall
be presented no later than 4:00 p.m. on the day of meeting.
e. (Reserved)
f. A matter may be submitted at a Trust meeting upon a majority
vote of all Trustees present, for discussion only.
§ A-14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § A-14
AO:333
g. The Secretary shall prepare packets containing (i) the agenda
and (ii) pertinent documents arranged in the agenda's order by
4:00 p.m. on the Friday of the week before the Wednesday
meeting.
h. Copies of the packet shall be distributed to:
1. Trustees.
2. Town Council Liaison.
3. Town Clerk for public view excluding Executive Session
material.
i. Copies of the agenda shall be:
1. Posted at:
(a) Town Hall.
(b) Brownell Library.
SECTION III. OFFICERS.
1. Chairperson. The chairperson shall preside at all meetings. The
chairperson shall direct the Trust and shall in general supervise
and control all of its business and affairs. The chairperson may sign
deeds, contracts or other documents which the trustees have
authorized to be executed.
2. Vice-Chairperson. The vice-chairperson shall, in the event of the
absence or disability of the chairperson, possess all of the powers
and perform all the duties of that office. The vice-chairperson shall
also perform such other duties as may be assigned by the
chairperson.
3. Secretary. The secretary shall see that all notices are given in
accordance with these rules and regulations and shall record the
minutes of meetings, to include providing a copy of said minutes to
the Little Compton Town Clerk for dissemination to the Town
Council. The secretary shall also prepare the written Annual
Report.
4. Treasurer. All monies received or collected shall be placed in a fund
set up and kept as a revolving account by the treasurer of the Town
of Little Compton. The treasurer of the Trust shall orally present to
the trustees a status report of said revolving account at each
regularly scheduled meeting.
5. Administrative Matters.
(a) The Trustees shall adopt and provide to the treasurer for the
Town of Little Compton a form entitled "Receipt For Land
Transfer Tax Paid", a copy of the first page being made as an
§ A-14 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § A-14
AO:334
appendix to the rules and regulations, which shall be
completed and submitted to the Town Treasurer at the time of
recording in all transfers of real property involving monetary
consideration.
See Attached Appendix.21
(b) The Trustees shall be reimbursed for all expenses incurred in
the performance of their official duties.
(c) The Trustees shall have the right to incur administrative and
maintenance expenses as set forth in Section 6 of Public Law
85-16. (Ord. 12/8/94; Ord. 5/4/95; Ord. 3/9/00; Ord. 7/25/13)
SECTION IV. APPLICATION FOR SELECTION.
1. Applications may be solicited from landowners on an annual basis,
or more frequently should conditions warrant. Application
deadlines shall be advertised at least twice in a public newspaper
of general circulation no more than sixty (60) days and at least
thirty (30) days prior to deadline. Application forms shall be
available at the Town Clerk's Office.
2. The Trustees may actively solicit applications from property
owners who are willing to sell, but who have not filed applications,
provided that:
(a) Acquisition of the property is consistent with the purposes of
the Trust as set forth in Section 1 of the Enabling Act.
(b) The property is subject to the same standards of application,
evaluation and negotiation as prescribed in Section V and VI.
(c) The property is ranked in relation to the other applicants, as
set forth in paragraphs 2 and 3 of Section V.
3. Gifts may be accepted at any time. (Ord. 3/9/00)
SECTION V. CRITERIA FOR EVALUATION.
1. Initial review. Within sixty (60) days of the application deadline, the
trustees will review all completed applications. Site visits will be
arranged with the landowner on a day suitable to a majority of the
trustees.
2. Rating. Each application shall receive, by vote, a numerical value
based upon a rating criteria developed by the trustees. These
rating criteria shall include, but not be limited to:
(a) Agricultural significance;
(b) Biological, ecological, and environmental significance;
21.Editor's Note: The appendix referred to herein may be found at the end of this Act.
§ A-14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § A-14
AO:335
(c) Protection of drinking water and ground water recharging
areas;
(d) Protection and preservation of open spaces, fresh and salt
water marshes, estuaries and adjoining uplands;
(e) Land providing access to the ocean;
(f) Land for bicycle paths and for future public recreational
facilities and use.
3. Selection of applications for negotiation. In selecting applications
for negotiation, the trustees shall, by vote, consider the aforesaid
combined score as well as the type and intensity of farm activity,
perceived developmental pressure, urgency, price, title and access,
liability and management, geographic diversity and estimated cost
of development rights or other interests. All applications not so
initially selected may, with the landowner's permission, be carried
over to the following year(s) for re-evaluation. Written notification
of the trustees' decision shall be provided to all applicants. (Ord. 3/
9/00)
SECTION VI. PURCHASE OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS, REAL PROPERTY
AND/OR OTHER INTERESTS.
1. Negotiating committee. The chairperson shall appoint a
negotiating committee of not less than two (2) trustees to negotiate
with each applicant selected.
2. Negotiations. The committee shall meet with the landowner(s) or
their authorized representative and attempt to negotiate an
agreement for the transfer of the development rights or other
interests in the land to the Trust. No agreement shall be entered
into until an appraiser commissioned by the Trustees has done an
appraisal, including development rights where applicable, of said
property or interest therein. Said appraiser shall be licensed by the
State of Rhode Island. Any purchase price agreed upon shall not
exceed the appraised value. In entering into an agreement, the
Trust shall not obligate itself to spend more than the amount of
monies in its revolving account, plus any sums to be received in
gifts or grants. Any loan or other borrowing of money by the
Trustees from any source shall be subject to Financial Town
Meeting approval, and any State laws pertaining to the borrowing
by cities and towns within the State.
3. Final approval of trustees. If the negotiating committee and
landowner(s) reach agreement, proposed transfer documents shall
be submitted to the balance of the trustees for approval by majority
vote. If said approval is received, the transfer shall be completed in
accordance with the terms of the agreement and appropriate
transfer documents shall be recorded in the Little Compton Land
Evidence Reports.
§ A-14 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § A-14
AO:336
4. Expense Relating to the Acquisition of Development Rights, Real
Property and/or Other Interests. The Trustees shall have the right
to incur additional expenses, other than the purchase price,
necessary to acquire development rights, real property and/or
other interests. Such expenses shall not exceed the greater of
twenty thousand ($20,000.00) dollars or ten (10%) percent of the
total purchase price, or, if a gift, appraised value. (Ord. 12/8/94;
Ord. 3/9/00)
SECTION VII.STEWARDSHIP & MANAGEMENT.
1. The Trust shall retain any real property interest relating to land
and water areas acquired in its natural, scenic or open condition, in
a manner consistent with the purposes of the Enabling Act and with
the purposes of any grant or devise by which land was acquired.
The Trustees shall administer and manage its land and interest.
2. The Trustees may dedicate a reasonable amount of money from the
Land Trust Funds to implement management plans for each
property.
3. The Trustees shall monitor the Trust's property and interest
therein from time to time and at least yearly; to assure that it is
being managed in a manner consistent with the objectives of the
Act, with the purposes of any grant or devise by which the land was
acquired.
4. Signs and markers shall be of a design that is in keeping with the
property so marked and shall be used sparingly and in a reasonable
manner. Their placement shall be sensitive to the landscape,
natural features, scenic vistas and stonewalls.
5. The Trustees shall maintain a catalogue of acquisitions for the
purposes of transferring knowledge of the Trust to succeeding
Trustees and future generations. The catalogue shall contain
copies of each deed and shall document and reference the history
of the transactions. Copies of available maps shall accompany the
catalogue and be located in the Town Hall.
6. The Trust will make reasonable efforts to record and identify
boundaries of its real property interests through surveys, maps and
permanent markers as appropriate. A suitable copy of any such
map may be filed with the Land Evidence Records of the Town of
Little Compton. (Ord. 3/9/00)
SECTION VIII. INSURANCE.
The Trustees will seek adequate insurance to protect the Trust, its
real property and interest therein from legal claims including but not
limited to Title Insurance, or general liability coverage. The Trust will
also seek adequate directors and officers liability insurance to protect
its Trustees from legal claims arising from the performance of their
§ A-14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § A-14
AO:337
§ A-15. JANUARY SESSION, A-D. 1991.
AN ACT Changing the Date of the Annual Financial Town Meeting,
and Amending Section 2 of Chapter 48 of the Public Laws, 1965,
Entitled "An Act Providing for a Budget Committee in the Town of
Little Compton". (91-H 5562 Approved February 15, 1991)
It is enacted by the General Assembly as follows:
Section 1. Section 1 of chapter 1834 of the public laws of 1931, entitled
"An Act Fixing the Time for the Holding of a Financial Town Meeting and
for the Election of Town Officers in the Town of Little Compton", amended
by chapter 2424 of the public laws of 1950, and by chapter 5 of the public
laws of 1982, is hereby further amended to read as follows:
"Section 1. The electors of the town of Little Compton, qualified to vote on
any proposition to impose a tax or for the expenditure of money in said
town, shall, on the third Saturday in May, 1991, and annually on the third
Saturday in May thereafter, assemble in town meeting at one o'clock in the
afternoon for the purpose of hearing official reports, ordering a tax or taxes,
making appropriations and transacting other business appertaining to the
financial affairs of said town. The place or location for holding such financial
town meeting shall be designated by the town council of the town of Little
Compton and shall be stated in the call and warrant for said meeting. Said
financial town meeting shall be warned and called and the list of electors
qualified to vote therein shall be made out and canvassed in the same
manner as provided by law with respect to elective town meetings."
Section 2. Section 4 of chapter 48 of the public laws of 1965, entitled, "An
Act Providing for a Budget Committee in the Town of Little Compton," said
act amended by chapter 8 of the public laws of 1979, and by chapter 5 of
the public laws of 1982 is amended to read as follows:
"Section 4. The town officers of said town and the heads of the several
departments thereof shall submit to the town clerk on or before the fifteenth
day of March in each year their estimates of such sums as may be required
responsibilities as Trustees of the Little Compton Agricultural
Conservancy Trust. (Ord. 3/9/00)
SECTION IX. SPECIAL COMMITTEES.
Special committees of the Trust may be elected by the trustees or
appointed by the chairperson to carry out activities in furtherance of
the Trust purposes. (Ord. 3/9/00)
SECTION X.AMENDMENTS.
These rules and regulations may be amended at any meeting of the
Trust by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the trustees present and voting. Any
such amendments are subject to the approval of the Little Compton
Town Council. (Ord. 3/9/00)
§ A-14 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § A-15
AO:338
in connection with the several departments of said towns, and all persons
proposing to introduce any resolution for the appropriation of money at the
financial town meeting shall file in the office of the town clerk on or before
the fifteenth day of March in each year for the use of said committee, the
form of resolution for the appropriation of money intended to be presented
to the said financial town meeting, in order that the electors of said town
qualified to vote at such financial town meeting may be apprised thereof."
Section 3. This act shall take effect upon passage.
Section 4. All acts and parts of acts inconsistent with the sections of this
foregoing act are hereby repealed. All other acts and parts of acts to which
these said sections apply are affirmed.
§ A-16. JANUARY SESSION, A.D. 1994.
AN ACT Changing the Date of the Annual Financial Town Meeting for
the Town of Little Compton. (94-S-3136 Approved April 11, 1994)
It is enacted by the General Assembly as follows:
Section 1. Section 1 of Chapter 1834 of the Public Laws of 1931 entitled
"An Act Fixing the Time for the Holding of a Financial Town Meeting and
for the Election of Town Officers in the Town of Little Compton," amended
by Chapter 2424 of the Public Laws of 1950, and by Chapter 5 of the Public
Laws of 1982, and further amended by Chapter 10 of the Public Laws of
1991, is hereby further amended as follows:
"Section 1. The electors of the town of Little Compton, qualified to vote on
any proposition to impose a tax or for the expenditure of money in said
town, shall, on any day within the third week of May, 1994, and annually
during the third week in each May thereafter, assemble in town meeting
for the purpose of hearing official reports, ordering a tax or taxes, making
appropriations and transacting other business appertaining to the financial
affairs of said town. The date, time, place or location for holding such
financial town meeting shall be designated by the town council of the town
of Little Compton not later than April 1 of each year, and shall be stated
in the call and warrant for said meeting. Said financial town meeting shall
be warned and called and the list of electors qualified to vote therein shall
be made out and canvassed in the same manner as provided by law with
respect to elective town meetings."
Section 2. This act shall take effect upon passage.
§ A-17. JANUARY SESSION, A.D. 1999.
AN ACT Relating to Towns and Cities - Zoning Ordinances (99-S-0908
Effective without signature of governor June 24, 1999)
It is enacted by the General Assembly as follows:
§ A-15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § A-17
AO:339
Section 1. Section 45-24-56 of the General Laws in Chapter 45-24 entitled
"Zoning Ordinances" is hereby amended to read as follows:
45-24-56. Administration - Zoning board of review. - Establishment
and procedures. - (A) A zoning ordinance adopted pursuant to this chapter
shall provide for the creation of a zoning board of review and for the
appointment of members, including alternate members, and for the
organization of the board, as specified in the zoning ordinance, or, in cities
and towns with home rule or legislative charters, as provided in the charter.
A zoning ordinance may provide for remuneration to the zoning board
of review members and for reimbursement for expenses incurred in the
performance of official duties. A zoning board of review may engage legal,
technical, or clerical assistance to aid in the discharge of its duties. The
board shall establish written rules of procedure, a mailing address to which
appeals and correspondence to the zoning board of review shall be sent,
and an office where records and decisions shall be filed.
(B) The zoning board of review shall consist of five (5) members, each
to hold office for the term of five (5) years; provided, however, that the
original appointments shall be made for terms of one, two (2), three (3), four
(4), and five (5) years, respectively. The zoning board of review shall also
include two (2) alternates to be designated as the first and second alternate
members, their terms to be set by the ordinance, but not to exceed five
(5) years. These alternate members shall sit and may actively participate in
hearings. The first alternate shall vote if a member of the board is unable
to serve at a hearing and the second shall vote if two (2) members of the
board are unable to serve at a hearing. In the absence of the first alternate
member, the second alternate member shall serve in the position of the
first alternate. No member or alternate may vote on any matter before the
board unless they have attended all hearings concerning that matter. Where
not provided for in the city or town charter, the zoning ordinance shall
specify procedures for filling vacancies in unexpired terms of zoning board
members, and for removal of members for due cause.
(C) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (B) of this section, the
zoning board of review of the town of Jamestown shall consist of five
(5) members, each to hold office for the term of five (5) years; provided,
however, that the original appointments shall be made for terms of one (1),
two (2), three (3), four (4) and five (5) years respectively. The zoning board
of review of the town of Jamestown shall also include three (3) alternates
to be designated as the first, second, and third alternate members, their
terms to be set by the ordinance, but not to exceed five (5) years. These
alternate members shall sit and may actively participate in hearings. The
first alternate shall vote if a member of the board is unable to serve at a
hearing; the second shall vote if two (2) members of the board are unable
to serve at a hearing; and the third shall vote if three (3) members of the
board are unable to serve at a hearing. In the absence of the first alternate
member, the second alternate member shall serve in the position of the
first alternate. No member or alternate may vote on any matter before
the board unless they have attended all hearings concerning that matter.
§ A-17 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § A-17
AO:340
Where not provided for in the town charter, the zoning ordinance shall
specify procedures for filling vacancies in unexpired terms of zoning board
members, and for removal of members for due cause.
(D) Members of zoning boards of review serving on the effective date of
adoption of a zoning ordinance under this chapter shall be exempt from the
provisions of this chapter respecting terms of originally appointed members
until the expiration of their current terms.
(E) The chairperson, or in his or her absence, the acting chairperson, may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by the issuance of
subpoenas.
(F) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (B) of this section, the
Zoning Board of Review for the Town of Little Compton shall consist of five
(5) members, each to hold office for the term of five (5) years. The Zoning
Board of Review for the Town of Little Compton shall also include three
(3) alternates to be designated as the first [1st], second [2nd] and third
[3rd] alternate members, their terms to be set by the ordinance, but not to
exceed five (5) years. These alternate members shall sit and may actively
participate in the hearings. The first alternate shall vote if a member of
the board is unable to serve at a hearing; the second shall vote if two (2)
members of the board are unable to serve at a hearing; and the third shall
vote if three (3) members of the board are unable to serve at a hearing.
In the absence of the first alternate member, the second alternate member
shall serve in the position of the first alternate. No member or alternate may
vote on any matter before the board unless they have attended all hearings
concerning that matter. Where not provided for in the Town Charter, the
zoning ordinance shall specify procedures for filling vacancies in unexpired
terms of zoning board members, and for removal of members for due cause.
Section 2. This act shall take effect upon passage.
Appendix B
PENSION PLAN
WHEREAS, the Town of Little Compton (hereinafter referred to as the
"Employer") adopted the Town of Little Compton Pension Plan (hereinafter
referred to as the "Plan") for the benefit of its Employees, effective as of
January 1, 1972; and
WHEREAS, Article Ten of said Plan provides that the Employer may amend
the Plan; and
WHEREAS, the Employer wishes to amend the Plan; and
WHEREAS, it is intended that the Plan is to be a qualified plan under
Section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code and is to be operated for the
exclusive benefit of the Participants and their Beneficiaries;
§ A-17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § A-17
AO:341
NOW, THEREFORE, the Plan is hereby amended by restating the Plan in its
entirety as follows:
§ A-17 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § A-17
AO:342
ARTICLE ONE
DEFINITIONS
1.1. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. 5/18/00; Ord. 6/13/02; Ord. 12/19/02]
For purposes of this Plan, unless the context or an alternative definition
specified within another Article provides otherwise, the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings indicated:
1.1 "ACCRUED BENEFIT" shall mean the amount to which a Participant
would be entitled under the benefit formula in Section 4.1 commencing
at his Normal Retirement Date, based upon the Participant's Average
Compensation, Years of Service and the Plan provisions in effect as of the
determination. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the case of a Participant
who is a member of (a) the Police Officers Union and is employed by the
Town of Little Compton Police Department or (b) the Firefighters Union and
is employed by the Town of Little Compton Fire Department, the Accrued
Benefit shall be determined without regard to the fact that, effective July
1,1992, the Participant shall receive a monthly retirement benefit, after
twenty-five (25) Years of Service, equal to fifty percent (50%) of his
Compensation immediately prior to his termination of Service. In the case
of any Participant who is credited with at least one Hour of Service in a
Plan Year beginning on or after January 1, 1988, the accrual of benefits may
not be discontinued nor may the rate of such accruals be reduced solely on
account of the Participant's attainment of any specified age. The treatment
of benefit accruals beyond Normal Retirement Date shall be determined
in accordance with Section 4.2. Effective for the period from July 1, 1993
through June 30, 1997, Years of Service during which a member of the
Firefighters Union declined to make Employee Mandatory Contributions
shall be disregarded for purposes of determining such Participant's Accrued
Benefit.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Section 1.1, effective July
1, 1997, Employee Mandatory Contributions are no longer required to be
made to the Plan by members of the Firefighters Union. Effective for the
period from July 1, 1994 through June 30, 2000, Years of Service during
which a member of the Police Officers Union declined to make Employee
Mandatory Contributions shall be disregarded for purposes of determining
such Participant's Accrued Benefit.
1.2 "ACTUARIAL EQUIVALENT" shall mean a benefit that has a value
equal to any benefit otherwise payable under the Plan as determined by the
Actuary.
(a) Equivalence, for all purposes except for determining an Actuarial
Equivalent single sum, shall be determined using the following factors:
1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 1.1
AO:343
Pre-Retirement Post-Retirement
Interest: 7% 7%
Mortality: None 1984 Unisex Pension Mortality
Table
(b) Effective January 1, 2000, the distribution to a Participant of a benefit
under the Plan in the form of an Actuarial Equivalent single sum shall be
determined in accordance with (1) and (2) below, whichever produces the
greater single sum amount:
(1) Pre-Retirement Post-Retirement
Interest: 7% 7%
Mortality: None 1984 Unisex Pension Mortality
Table
(2) Pre-Retirement Post-Retirement
Interest: The "applicable interest
rate" defined below
The "applicable interest
rate" defined below
Mortality: The "applicable mortality
table" defined below
The "applicable mortality
table" defined below
For purposes of this Section 1.2, the term "applicable interest rate" means
the annual rate of interest on 30-year Treasury securities for the calendar
month that is two (2) months preceding the first day of the Plan Year in
which the distribution occurs. The "applicable interest rate" shall remain
constant for one calendar month year.
For purposes of this Section 1.2, the term "applicable mortality table"
means the table prescribed by the Secretary of the Treasury. Such table
shall be based on the prevailing commissioner's standard table, as
described in Section 807(d)(5)(A) of the Code, used to determine reserves
for group annuity contracts issued on the dates as of which the present
value is being determined (without regard to any other subparagraphs of
Section 807(d)(5) of the Code). The applicable mortality table is based upon
a fixed blend of fifty percent (50%) of the male mortality rates and fifty
percent (50%) of the female mortality rates from the 1983 Group Annuity
Mortality
Table, which mortality table is set forth in Internal Revenue Service
Revenue Ruling 95-6. Notwithstanding the foregoing, effective December
31, 2002, for purposes of this Section 1.2, the term "applicable mortality
table" means the mortality table based upon a fixed blend of fifty (50%)
percent of the unloaded male mortality rates and fifty (50%) percent of
the unloaded female mortality rates underlying the 1994 Group Annuity
Reserving Table, projected to 2002, which mortality table is set forth in
Internal Revenue Service Revenue Ruling 2001-62.
1.1 LITTLE COMPTON CODE 1.1
AO:344
(c) In the event the factors used to determine Actuarial Equivalent are
modified, the value of a Participant's benefit, on or after the effective date
of such change, shall be the greater of (1) the Actuarial Equivalent of
the Accrued Benefit determined as of the day before the effective date of
the change in such factors, or (2) the Actuarial Equivalent of the Accrued
Benefit as of the date of determination computed using the new factors.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Section 1.2(c), this Section
does not apply to the modification of the factors used to determine Actuarial
Equivalent pursuant to Section 1.2(b)(2) which is effective for distributions
on or after January 1, 2000, as permitted by Income Tax Regulation Section
1.417(e)-1(d)(10).
1.3 "ACTUARY" shall mean an actuary appointed by the Administrator
under whose supervision valuation reports and benefit calculations are
performed for the Plan. The actuary must be enrolled under Federal
practice.
1.4 "ADMINISTRATOR" shall mean the Pension Committee appointed in
accordance with the provisions of Section 8.1.
1.5 "BENEFICIARY" shall mean any person, trust, organization or estate
entitled to receive a death benefit under the Plan on the death of a
Participant.
1.6 "BREAK IN SERVICE" shall mean a twelve (12)-month computation
period (as used for measuring Years of Service for vesting purposes) in
which an Employee or Participant is not credited with more than five
hundred (500) Hours of Service.
1.7 "CODE" shall mean the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended
from time to time.
1.8 "COMPENSATION" shall mean:
(a) The monthly equivalent of a Participant's base annual compensation paid
by the Employer as in effect on July 1 of each Plan Year, but exclusive
of bonuses and overtime, and exclusive of any program of deferred
compensation, employee benefits, or additional remuneration payable other
than in cash. In the case of a Participant whose normal work schedule
consists of less than forty (40) hours per week, "Compensation" shall mean
the monthly equivalent of a Participant's Compensation paid by the
Employer in a Plan Year, but exclusive of any program of deferred
compensation, employee benefits, or additional numeration payable other
than in cash. Compensation shall include any amounts deferred under a
salary reduction agreement in either a Code Section 401(k) plan or under a
Code Section 125 plan maintained by the Employer.
(b) Compensation Limitations. Only the first $150,000 (or such larger
amount when prescribed by the Secretary of the Treasury or his delegate) of
each Participant's Compensation will be considered for all purposes under
the Plan. The increase in the $150,000 limit in effect on January 1 of any
calendar year is effective for the Plan Year commencing in such calendar
1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 1.1
AO:345
year. If a Participant's benefit for the current Plan Year is determined with
reference to annual Compensation paid to him in a prior Plan Year, the
Compensation for such prior Plan Year shall be limited to $150,000 or the
increase in the $150,000 limit in effect for such prior Plan Year.
(1) Decrease in Limit. The annual compensation of each Participant taken
into account in determining benefit accruals in any Plan Year beginning
after December 31, 2001, shall not exceed $200,000. Annual compensation
means compensation during the Plan Year or such other consecutive
12-month period over which compensation is otherwise determined under
the Plan (the determination period). For purposes of determining benefit
accruals in a Plan Year beginning after December 31, 2001, compensation
for any prior determination period shall be limited as provided by the
Employer in Section 1.8(b)(3) of this Amendment.
(2) Cost-of-Living Adjustment. The $200,000 limit on annual compensation
in Section 1.8(b)(1) shall be adjusted for cost-of-living increases in
accordance with Section 401(a)(17)(B) of the Code. The cost-of-living
adjustment in effect for a calendar year applies to annual compensation for
the determination period that begins with or within such calendar year.
(3) Compensation Limit for Prior Determination Periods. In determining
benefit accruals in Plan Years beginning after December 31, 2001, the
annual compensation limit in Section 1.8(b)(1), Increase in Limit, for
determination periods beginning before January 1, 2002, shall be $150,000
for any determination period beginning in 1996 or earlier; $160,000 for any
determination period beginning in 1997, 1998 or 1999; and $170,000 for
any determination period beginning in 2000 or 2001.
(c) "AVERAGE COMPENSATION" shall mean the Compensation of a
Participant averaged over the five (5) consecutive calendar years in his
last ten (10) calendar years as an Employee producing the highest average
prior to the earlier of (1) his termination of Service or (2) termination of
the Plan. Effective July 1, 2000, "Average Compensation" shall mean the
Compensation of a Participant averaged over the three (3) consecutive
calendar years in his last ten (10) calendar years as an Employee producing
the highest average prior to the earlier of (1) his termination of Service or
(2) termination of the Plan. In the event a Participant has completed less
than sixty (60) (thirty-six (36), effective July 1, 2000) consecutive complete
calendar months as an Employee receiving Compensation from the
Employer, his Average Compensation shall be determined based upon all
complete calendar months as an Employee. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
effective July 1, 1992, in the case of a Participant who is a member of
the Police Officers Union and is employed by the Town of Little Compton
Police Department, "Average Compensation" shall mean the Compensation
of the Participant averaged over the twelve (12)-consecutive-month period
from July 1 through June 30 in which the Participant had the highest
Compensation prior to his termination of Service. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, in the case of a Participant who is a member of the Firefighters
Union and is employed by the Town of Little Compton Fire Department,
"Average Compensation" shall mean the Compensation of the Participant
1.1 LITTLE COMPTON CODE 1.1
AO:346
averaged over the twelve (12)-consecutive-month period from July 1
through June 30 in which the Participant had the highest Compensation
prior to his termination of Service.
1.9 "EFFECTIVE DATE" The Plan's initial Effective Date is January 1, 1972.
The Effective Date of this restated Plan, on and after which it supersedes
the terms of the existing Plan document, is January 1, 2002, except where
the provisions of the Plan shall otherwise specifically provide. The rights
of any Employee or Participant who separated from the Employer's service
prior to that date shall be established under the terms of the Plan and Trust
as in effect at the time of his separation, unless he subsequently returns
to service with the Employer. Rights of spouses or beneficiaries of such
Participants shall also be governed by those documents.
1.10 "EMPLOYEE" shall mean a common law employee of the Employer.
Employee shall not include any individual who the Employer has classified
as an independent contractor solely on account of his reclassification by the
Internal Revenue Service as an employee.
1.11 "EMPLOYEE MANDATORY CONTRIBUTIONS" shall mean
contributions made by the Employees as set forth in Section 7.2.
1-12 "EMPLOYER" shall mean the Town of Little Compton.
1-13 "EMPLOYMENT DATE" shall mean the first date as of which an
Employee is credited with an Hour of Service, provided that in the case of a
Break in Service, his Employment Date shall be the first date thereafter as
of which he is credited with an Hour of Service.
1-14 "FIREFIGHTERS UNION" shall mean Local 3957, International
Association of Fire Fighters, AFC-CIO.
1.15 "HOUR OF SERVICE" shall mean:
(a) Each hour for which an Employee is paid or entitled to payment for the
performance of duties for the Employer. These hours shall be credited to
the Employee for the computation period in which the duties are performed;
and
(b) Each hour for which an Employee is paid, or entitled to payment,
by the Employer on account of a period of time during which no duties
are performed (irrespective of whether the employment relationship has
terminated) due to vacation, holiday, illness, incapacity (including
disability), layoff, jury duty, military duty or leave of absence. No more than
five hundred and one (501) Hours of Service shall be credited under this
subsection for any single continuous period (whether or not such period
occurs in a single computation period). An hour for which an Employee is
directly or indirectly paid, or entitled to payment, on account of a period
during which no duties are performed shall not be credited to the Employee
if such payment is made or due under a plan maintained solely for the
purpose of complying with applicable worker's compensation, or
unemployment compensation or disability insurance laws. Hours of Service
1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 1.1
AO:347
shall not be credited for a payment which solely reimburses an Employee
for medical or medically related expenses incurred by the Employee. Hours
of Service under this subsection shall be calculated and credited pursuant
to section 2530.200b-2 of the Department of Labor regulations which is
incorporated herein by this reference; and
(c) Each hour for which back pay, irrespective of mitigation of damages, is
either awarded or agreed to by the Employer. The same Hours of Service
shall not be credited both under subsection (a) or subsection (b), as the
case may be, and under this subsection (c). These Hours of Service shall be
credited to the Employee for the computation period or periods to which the
award or agreement pertains rather than the computation period in which
the award, agreement or payment is made.
1.16 "NORMAL RETIREMENT AGE" shall mean a Participant's 62nd
birthday or, if later, the fifth anniversary of his initial Employment Date.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, effective July 1, 1992, in the case of a
Participant who is a member of (a) the Police Officers Union and is employed
by the Town of Little Compton Police Department or (b) the Firefighters
Union and is employed by the Town of Little Compton Fire Department,
"Normal Retirement Age" shall mean the earlier of (1) his 62nd birthday or,
if later, the fifth anniversary of his initial Employment Date, or (2) the date
he completes twenty-five (25) Years of Service.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Section 1.16, in the case
of a Participant who is a member of the Police Officers Union and is initially
employed by the Town of Little Compton Police Department on or after July
1, 1994, "Normal Retirement Age" shall mean the later of the Participant's
55th birthday or the date he completes twenty-five (25) Years of Service.
"NORMAL RETIREMENT DATE" shall mean a Participant's attainment of
Normal Retirement Age.
1.17 "PARTICIPANT" shall mean any Employee who has satisfied the
eligibility requirements of Article Three and who is participating under
the Plan, and shall include Participants who terminated Service with the
Employer but have not received a total distribution of their vested Accrued
Benefits.
1.18 "PLAN" shall mean this Plan as set forth herein and as it may be
amended from time to time.
1.19 "PLAN YEAR" shall mean the twelve (12)-consecutive-month period
beginning July 1 and ending June 30.
1.20 "POLICE OFFICERS UNION" shall mean Local 644, International
Brotherhood of Police Officers.
1.21 "TRUST" shall mean the Trust Agreement entered into between the
Employer and the Trustee forming part of this Plan, together with any
amendments thereto. "Trust Fund" shall mean any and all property held
1.1 LITTLE COMPTON CODE 1.1
AO:348
by the Trustee pursuant to the Trust Agreement, together with income
therefrom.
1.22 "TRUSTEE" shall mean the Trustee or Trustees appointed by the
Employer in accordance with Section 8.2, and any successors thereto.
1.23 "VALUATION DATE" shall mean the annual date selected by the
Actuary as of which Plan assets are valued and liabilities determined for
purposes of an actuarial valuation.
1.24 "YEAR OF SERVICE" or "SERVICE" shall mean a twelve (12)-
consecutive-month computation period in which an Employee is credited
with one thousand (1,000) or more Hours of Service. For all purposes other
than eligibility to participate in the Plan under Section 3.1, the twelve
(12)-consecutive-month period from January 1 to December 31 in which an
Employee is credited with one thousand (1,000) or more Hours of Service
shall be the computation period. (Special rules with respect to Service in job
classifications which are ineligible for Plan participation appear in Article
Two.)
If a Year of Service is ever required purposes of eligibility to participate
in the Plan under Section 3.1, a Year of Service shall be determined as
follows: the first computation period shall be the twelve (12)-consecutivemonth
period commencing on the Employee's Employment Date. If the
Employee is credited with one thousand (1,000) or more Hours of Service
in that period he will be credited with a Year of Service for eligibility as
of the last day of the twelve (12)-month period. If the Employee does not
complete one thousand (1,000) or more Hours of Service in that period he
shall be credited with a Year of Service for eligibility when he completes
one thousand (1,000) or more Hours of Service in any vesting computation
period which starts on or after his Employment Date. For vesting and
accrual purposes, credit for a Year of Service shall be given upon the
completion of the one thousandth (1,000th) Hour of Service in each
computation period. Effective for the period from July 1, 1993 through June
30, 1997, Years of Service during which a member of the Firefighters Union
declined to make Employee Mandatory Contributions shall be disregarded
for vesting and accrual purposes.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Section 1.24, effective July
1, 1997, Employee Mandatory Contributions are no longer required to be
made to the Plan by members of the Firefighters Union. Effective for the
period from July 1, 1994 through June 30, 2000, Years of Service during
which a member of the Police Officers Union who was hired on or after July
1, 1994 and declined to make Employee Mandatory Contributions shall be
disregarded for vesting and accrual purposes.
1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 1.1
AO:349

ARTICLE TWO
SPECIAL RULES RELATED TO SERVICE
2.1. CESSATION OF EMPLOYMENT AND RETURN TO SERVICE.
[Ord. 6/13/02]
An Employee who returns to employment after a Break in Service shall
retain credit for his pre-Break Years of Service, subject to the following
rules:
2.2. LEAVE OF ABSENCE. [Ord. 6/13/02]
A Participant on an unpaid leave of absence pursuant to the Employer's
normal personnel policies shall be credited Hours of Service at his regularly
scheduled weekly rate while on such leave, provided the Employer
acknowledges in writing that the leave is with its approval. These Hours
of Service will be credited only for purposes of determining if a Break in
Service has occurred, and not for eligibility to participate under Section 3.1,
benefit accrual under Section 4.1, vesting under Section 4.5, or any other
purpose under the Plan. Rules dealing with crediting of Service during a
paid leave of absence are set forth in Section 1.15.
For any individual who is absent from work for any period by reason of the
individual's pregnancy, birth of the individual's child, placement of a child
with the individual in connection with the individual's adoption of the child,
or by reason of the individual's caring for the child for a period beginning
immediately following such birth or placement, the Plan shall treat as Hours
of Service, solely for determining if a Break in Service has occurred, the
following Hours of Service:
(a) If, when the Employee incurred his Break in Service, he had not
completed sufficient Years of Service to be credited with a vested
benefit, his pre-Break Years of Service will be disregarded for vesting
purposes if his consecutive Breaks in Service equal or exceed the
greater of five (5) or the aggregate number of pre-Break Years of
Service.
(b) If the Participant received full or partial payment of his vested interest
in the Plan, pre-Break Years of Service will be restored for accrual
purposes only if amounts are repaid, with five percent (5%) interest
compounded annually, as of the earlier of the date which is five (5) years
after the Participant's subsequent Employment Date, or the date which
is the last day of the period in which the Participant incurs five (5)
consecutive Breaks in Service commencing as of the date of
distribution. It is the intention of the Employer that no Employee
receive a duplication of benefits and this Section shall be so
interpreted.
(a) The Hours of Service which otherwise normally would have been
credited to such individual but for such absence; or
2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 2.2
AO:351
2.3. SERVICE IN EXCLUDED JOB CLASSIFICATION, WITH
RELATED COMPANIES, OR AS A LEASED EMPLOYEE. [Ord. 6/13/
02]
(b) In any case when the Administrator is unable to determine the Hours of
Service, an assumed eight Hours of Service per day of absence.
In no event will more than five hundred and one (501) of such Hours of
Service be credited by reason of any such pregnancy or placement. The
Hours of Service shall be credited in the computation period (used for
measuring Years of Service for vesting purposes) which starts after the
period of absence begins. However, the Hours of Service shall instead
be credited to the computation period in which the absence begins if it
is necessary to credit the Hours of Service in that period to avoid the
occurrence of a Break in Service.
(a) Preamble. As provided in more detail below, an Employee is not eligible
to accrue benefits under the Plan if Section 3.1 specifically excludes his
job classification. However, Employees in an ineligible job classification
are entitled, together with employees of certain related businesses, to
credit for their Service in the event such Employees become employed
in an eligible classification with the Employer.
(b) Definitions.
(1) Eligible Classification. An Employee will be considered in an
eligible class of Employees for such period when his Employer has
adopted the Plan and such Employee is not in an ineligible class of
Employees.
(2) Ineligible Classification. An Employee will be considered in an
ineligible class of Employees for any period when:
(A) The Employee is in a job classification which is excluded under
Section 3.1; or
(B) The Employee is an employee of an employer who is a member
of a controlled group of businesses or an affiliated service
group (as defined in Section 414 of the Code), which employer
has not adopted this Plan.
(c) Service Rules for Ineligible Classifications. Hours of Service in an
ineligible classification will be credited for purposes of determining
Years of Service for eligibility to participate in the Plan under Section
3.1 and for purposes of determining the Employee's vesting percentage
in the event the Employee participates in the Plan. Hours of Service in
an ineligible classification will not be credited for purposes of
determining the Service required for a benefit under Article Four.
(d) Construction. This Section is included in the Plan to comply with the
Code provisions regarding the crediting of Service, and not to extend
2.2 LITTLE COMPTON CODE 2.3
AO:352
2.4. SPECIAL RULES RELATING TO VETERANS REEMPLOYMENT
RIGHTS. [Ord. 6/13/02]
Notwithstanding any provision of this Plan to the contrary, contributions,
benefits and service credit with respect to qualified military service will be
provided in accordance with Section 414(u) of the Code. The provisions of
this Section 2.4 are effective December 12, 1994.
any additional rights to Employees in ineligible classifications other
than those required by the Code and regulations thereunder.
2.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 2.4
AO:353

ARTICLE THREE
PLAN PARTICIPATION
3.1. PARTICIPATION. [Ord. 5/18/00; Ord. 6/13/02]
All Employees participating in this Plan prior to the Plan's restatement shall
continue to participate, subject to the terms hereof. Each other Employee
shall become a Participant under the Plan effective as of the first day
of the Plan Year coincident with or next following his Employment Date.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, effective for the period from July 1, 1993
through June 30, 1997, an Employee who is a member of the Firefighters
Union and is employed by the Town of Little Compton Fire Department is
not eligible to participate in the Plan unless he agrees to make Employee
Mandatory Contributions as set forth in Section 7.2.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Section 3.1, effective July
1, 1997, Employee Mandatory Contributions are no longer required to be
made to the Plan by members of the Firefighters Union. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, effective for the period from July 1, 1994 through June 30,
2000, an Employee who is a member of the Police Officers Union who was
hired on or after July 1, 1994 and is employed by the Town of Little Compton
Police Department is not eligible to participate in the Plan unless he agrees
to make Employee Mandatory Contributions as set forth in Section 7.2.
3.2. REEMPLOYMENT OF FORMER PARTICIPANT. [Ord. 6/13/02]
A Participant whose participation ceased because of termination of
employment with the Employer will immediately participate upon his
reemployment.
3.3. TERMINATION OF ELIGIBILITY. [Ord. 6/13/02]
If a Participant shall become ineligible to participate in the Plan because
the Participant's job classification is specifically excluded under Section
3.1 or Section 2.3(b)(2), such Participant shall continue to vest in his
Accrued Benefit under the Plan for each Year of Service completed while
an ineligible Employee until such time as his benefit is distributed to him
pursuant to the terms of the Plan. If a Participant becomes ineligible during
a Plan Year, such Participant shall accrue a benefit based upon the
Participant's Average Compensation as determined as of his termination of
eligibility, provided such Participant is credited with a Year of Service in
such Plan Year.
3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 3.3
AO:355

ARTICLE FOUR
RETIREMENT AND DISABILITY BENEFITS, VESTING
4.1. NORMAL RETIREMENT BENEFIT. [Ord. 5/18/00; Ord. 6/13/02;
Ord. 7/23/03; Ord. 6/15/05]
Each Participant who retires at his Normal Retirement Date shall be entitled
to receive a monthly retirement benefit determined as of such date.
Effective prior to July 1, 2000, the amount of his monthly benefit shall be
equal to the product of one and one-half percent (1.5%) of his Average
Compensation and the number of his Years of Service. Effective July 1,
2000, the amount of his monthly benefit shall be equal to the product of
one and sixty-five hundredths percent (1.65%) of his Average Compensation
and the number of his Years of Service. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
effective July 1, 1992, each Participant who is a member of (a) the Police
Officers Union and is employed by the Town of Little Compton Police
Department or (b) the Firefighters Union and is employed by the Town of
Little Compton Fire Department, and retires after twenty-five (25) Years
of Service, shall be entitled to receive a monthly retirement benefit equal
to fifty percent (50%) of his highest annual Compensation, which monthly
retirement benefit shall, effective July 1, 1997, be increased by two percent
(2%) for each Year of Service in excess of twenty-five (25) to a maximum
of sixty percent (60%) of his Compensation immediately prior to his
termination of Service. In no event shall a Participant who retires at his
Normal Retirement Date receive a monthly retirement benefit of less than
one twelfth (1/12) of the product of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and his
Years of Service.
A Participant's right to his benefit shall be nonforfeitable upon reaching
Normal Retirement Age. It shall be payable under the rules specified in
Article Five. In no event will the Normal Retirement Benefit be greater than
the maximum permissible amount defined in Section 9.1(b)(8).
Effective for the period from July 1, 1993 through June 30, 1997, a member
of the Firefighters Union shall not accrue a benefit for periods during which
such Participant declined to make Employee Mandatory Contributions.
Effective July 1, 1997, Employee Mandatory Contributions are no longer
required to be made to the Plan by members of the Firefighters Union.
Effective for the period from July 1, 1994 through June 30, 2000, a member
of the Police Officers Union who was hired on or after July 1, 1994 shall not
accrue a benefit for periods during which such Participant declined to make
Employee Mandatory Contributions.
Effective July 1, 2005, the monthly retirement benefit of a Participant
who has retired and is receiving his monthly benefit shall be increased
annually by two percent (2%) as of July 1 of each year to reflect a cost of
living increase. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, the cost of living
increase for a retired Participant who received a cost of living increase as of
the anniversary of his retirement date shall be actuarially adjusted to take
into consideration that the cost of living increase is determined as of July 1
of each year.
4.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 4.1
AO:357
Collective Bargaining Agreement Provisions Effective July 1, 2012.22
The following provisions were negotiated with the Town unions (Fire,
Municipal and Police) for the contracts effective 1 July 2012, and remain in
effect:
1. For employees hired on or after 1 July 2012, the cost of living adjustment
provided by the Pension Plan shall be applied only to the first $25,000 of a
retiree's pension.
The Committee voted unanimously to incorporate these provisions into the
Town Pension Plan.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Section 4.1, effective
August 1, 2003, a Participant who is employed by the Town of Little
Compton Fire Department, who has attained age fifty (50) and has
completed at least twenty-five (25) Years of Service for accrual purposes as
of August 1, 2003, and separates from Service on or after August 1, 2003
and prior to September 1, 2003 (or the last date on which he is scheduled
to work for the Employer, if earlier) shall be entitled to an increase in his
monthly normal retirement benefit which results from using an additional
four (4) Years of Service in computing his normal retirement benefit as
of his date of termination of employment. In no event, however, shall any
Participant be eligible for the increased normal retirement benefit pursuant
to this paragraph unless he has executed the required Agreement and
Release Form no later than August 31, 2003. The effective date of the
Participant's retirement pursuant to this paragraph shall be September 1,
2003.
4.2. LATE RETIREMENT BENEFIT. [Ord. 6/13/02]
A Participant who remains in the employ of the Employer after his Normal
Retirement Date shall not be eligible to receive his benefit until his actual
retirement date, except if a minimum distribution is required by the rules
specified in Section 5.6. Any such Participant shall be entitled to a monthly
benefit the Actuarial Equivalent of the monthly benefit which would have
been payable under Section 4.1 had he retired at Normal Retirement Date.
The monthly benefit calculated under this Section 4.2 shall be offset by the
Actuarial Equivalent of benefit payments made to the Participant during the
Plan Year under the minimum distribution rules.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Section 4.2, a Participant's
Accrued Benefit is actuarially increased to take into account the period after
age 70 1/2 in which the Employee does not receive any benefits under the
Plan. The actuarial increase begins on the April 1 following the calendar
year in which the Employee attains age 70 1/2 (January 1, 1997 in the case
of an Employee who attained age 70 1/2 prior to 1996), and ends on the
22.Editor's Note: The above provisions of current collective bargaining agreements were
acknowledged by the Pension Committee as its 15 August 2016 meeting.
4.1 LITTLE COMPTON CODE 4.2
AO:358
date on which benefits commence after retirement in an amount sufficient
to satisfy Section 401(a)(9) of the Code.
The amount of actuarial increase payable as of the end of the period for
actuarial increases must be no less than the actuarial equivalent of the
Employee's retirement benefits that would have been payable as of the
date the actuarial increase must commence plus the actuarial equivalent
of additional benefits accrued after that date, reduced by the actuarial
equivalent of any distributions made after that date. The actuarial increase
is generally the same as, and not in addition to, the actuarial increase
required for that same period under Section 411 of the Code to reflect
the delay in payments after normal retirement, except that the actuarial
increase required under Section 401(a)(9)(C) of the Code must be provided
even during the period during which an Employee is in Code Section
411(a)(3)(B) service.
For purposes of Section 411(b)(1)(H) of the Code, the actuarial increase
will be treated as an adjustment attributable to the delay in distribution
of benefits after the attainment of Normal Retirement Age. Accordingly, to
the extent permitted under Section 411(b)(1)(H) of the Code, the actuarial
increase required under Section 401(a)(9)(C)(iii) of the Code may reduce
the benefit accrual otherwise required under Section 411(b)(1)(H)(i) of the
Code, except that the rules on the suspension of benefits are not applicable.
4.3. EARLY RETIREMENT. [Ord. 6/13/02; Ord. 7/23/03]
A Participant who separates from Service on or after the later of his
attainment of age fifty (50) and the completion of at least twenty (20)
Years of Service shall be entitled to elect to receive his monthly retirement
benefit either (a) commencing on his Normal Retirement Date in an amount
equal to the product of one and one-half percent (1.5%) of his Average
Compensation and the number of his Years of Service, or (b) commencing
on the first day of the month following his satisfaction of the age and service
requirements for Early Retirement in an amount equal to the product of one
and twenty-five hundredths percent (1.25%) of his Average Compensation
and the number of his Years of Service.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Section 4.3, effective
August 1, 2003, a Participant who is employed by the Town of Little
Compton Fire Department, who has attained age fifty (50) and has
completed at least twenty-five (25) Years of Service for accrual purposes as
of August 1, 2003, and separates from Service on or after August 1, 2003
and prior to September 1, 2003 (or the last date on which he is scheduled
to work for the Employer, if earlier) shall be entitled to an increase in his
monthly normal retirement benefit which results from using an additional
four (4) Years of Service in computing his normal retirement benefit as
of his date of termination of employment. In no event, however, shall any
Participant be eligible for the increased normal retirement benefit pursuant
to this paragraph unless he has executed the required Agreement and
Release Form no later than August 31, 2003. The effective date of the
4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 4.3
AO:359
Participant's retirement pursuant to this paragraph shall be September 1,
2003.
4.4. DISABILITY RETIREMENT. [Ord. 6/13/02; Ord. 6/3/04;
amendment approved by the electorate 5/22/07]
(a) Payment in the Event of Disability. If a Participant who has been
credited with ten (10) or more Years of Service shall separate from
Service with the Employer by reason of total and permanent disability,
the Participant shall be entitled to receive disability payments
determined as of the date of his disability retirement in an amount
equal to the normal retirement benefit accrued in accordance with
Section 4.1.
(b) Disability Retirement Benefit. As set forth in the Town Ordinance of the
Town of Little Compton, if a Participant who is employed by the Town of
Little Compton Police Department or the Town of Little Compton Fire
Department shall separate from Service with the Employer by reason of
occupational disability, the Participant shall be entitled to receive a
monthly occupational disability benefit in an amount equal to sixtyeight
percent (68%) of the Participant's Compensation at the time of the
occupational disability. The benefit shall be payable monthly for the
period of disability. A Participant who is receiving an occupational
disability benefit shall not be eligible to receive the cost of living
increases set forth in Section 4.1 to the occupational disability benefit.
(c) Time of Payment. The Participant may elect to have payment of benefits
commence on the first day of the month following the date on which a
determination of total and permanent disability is made by the Pension
Committee pursuant to the rules specified in Section 4.4(b).
(d) Form of Payment. Payment shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of Article Five. Payments shall be deemed disability income
until the earlier of the first of the month in which the Participant dies,
recovers from disability or attains his Normal Retirement Date. If such
disability continues to his Normal Retirement Date, the Participant
shall be considered as retiring on his Normal Retirement Date, and he
shall continue to receive the same monthly benefit payments.
(e) Effect of Recovery From Disability. If, upon recovery from disability, a
Participant reenters employment covered by this Plan, his Years of
Service up to the date of his retirement for disability shall be restored
and he shall commence to accrue benefits under the Plan based upon
his Years of Service both before his retirement for disability and after
his reemployment. However, the Plan benefits to which he may become
entitled thereafter shall be reduced by the Actuarial Equivalent of the
disability payments received.
(f) Continuing Evidence of Disability. A disabled Participant may be
required to submit evidence of his continued eligibility for disability
income benefits at any time during disability retirement prior to Normal
4.3 LITTLE COMPTON CODE 4.4
AO:360
4.5. VESTING. [Ord. 6/13/02]
A Participant shall at all times have a nonforfeitable (vested) right to his
Employee Mandatory Contributions. Except as otherwise provided with
respect to Early or Normal Retirement, disability, or death, a Participant
shall have a nonforfeitable right to a percentage of his Accrued Benefit
derived from Employer contributions as determined under the following
schedule. The benefit shall be payable under the rules specified in Article
Five.
Years of Service Vested Percentage
Less than 10 years 0%
10 years and thereafter 100%
If a Participant terminates employment for reasons other than retirement,
death or permanent and total disability prior to his completion of ten (10)
Years of Service, he shall be entitled to a refund of his Employee Mandatory
Contributions, together with five percent (5%) interest. Distribution of this
amount shall commence no later than sixty (60) days following the close
of the Plan Year in which the Participant terminated employment. If a
Participant terminates employment following his completion of ten (10)
Years of Service, he shall not be entitled to a refund of his Employee
Mandatory Contributions.
Retirement Date, but not more than semi-annually, to determine
whether he is eligible for continuance of the disability pension. If
he engages in gainful employment (or if the Pension Committee
determines that he is no longer permanently disabled), his disability
income will cease. However, as of May 22, 2007, certain gainful
employment will be allowed without penalty. Commencing May 22,
2007, members on disability pension may earn the difference between
their disability pension and 125% of the current salary for the position
from which they retired upon applying for disability. Their disability
pensions will be reduced by the amount earnings from gainful
employment exceed the aforementioned 125%. Each disabled
Participant will submit a signed statement on or before April 15 each
year attesting to the amount of earned income from gainful employment
for the prior year together with such other substantiating evidence
as the Pension Committee may require. In the event the disabled
Participant fails to submit evidence of his continued eligibility for such
disability benefits when requested, his disability pension will be
discontinued until he submits such evidence.
(g) Definition of Gainful Employment. Gainful employment is defined as
earned income, as described in Title II of the Social Security Act (see 42
USC 1382a). This description generally defines earned income,
received either in cash or in kind, as wages, net earnings from selfemployment,
and certain royalties and honoraria.
4.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 4.5
AO:361
Any percentage of a Participant's Accrued Benefit to which he is not entitled
shall be forfeited upon the occurrence of a Break in Service. A zero percent
vested Participant shall be considered to have received a complete
distribution of his vested Accrued Benefit as of the date of his first Break in
Service, and if he returns to the employment of the Employer prior to
incurring five (5) consecutive Breaks in Service, he shall be considered to
have repaid such distribution as of his completion of one Year of Service
after his resumption of employment.
4.5 LITTLE COMPTON CODE 4.5
AO:362
ARTICLE FIVE
MODE AND TIME OF DISTRIBUTION OF PENSION BENEFITS
5.1. NORMAL FORM OF BENEFIT. [Ord. 6/13/02]
The pension formula under Section 4.1 is calculated to produce a benefit
in the form of equal monthly installments, payable to the Participant during
his lifetime, with payments ceasing in the month of his death, subject to the
succeeding provisions of Article Five. In the case of a Participant with an
Eligible Spouse the provisions of Section 5.2 shall apply.
5.2. JOINT AND SURVIVOR ANNUITY. [Ord. 6/13/02]
This Section shall apply to a Participant who does not die prior to the
"annuity starting date".
5.3. TIME OF COMMENCEMENT OF BENEFIT PAYMENTS. [Ord. 6/
13/02]
(a) If distribution of a Participant's benefit commences during his lifetime,
it shall be paid in the form of an annuity for the life of the Participant or,
if the Participant is married as of his benefit commencement date, in the
form of a "qualified joint and survivor annuity" for the life of the
Participant and his "eligible spouse".
For this purpose, a "qualified joint and survivor annuity" is an
immediate annuity for the life of the Participant with a survivor annuity
for the life of the spouse which is 67.5% of the amount of the annuity
which is payable during the joint lives of the Participant and his spouse.
The "qualified joint and survivor annuity" will be the Actuarial
Equivalent of the Participant's vested Accrued Benefit.
(b) "Eligible Spouse" is the spouse who (i) is married to the Participant for
the one-year period ending prior to the earlier of benefit
commencement or the date of the Participant's death, or (ii) becomes
married within the one-year period prior to benefit commencement and
remains married for at least one year. A divorce occurring after benefit
payments have commenced to the Participant will not cause an "eligible
spouse" to lose such status, unless the spouse agrees to give up rights
hereunder pursuant to the terms of a qualified domestic relations order
described in Code Section 414(p). The divorce or death of an "eligible
spouse" shall not entitle a subsequent spouse to status as an "eligible
spouse."
(c) Once payments have commenced, the form of benefit may not be
changed.
(a) Normal or Late Retirement. Participants whose employment has
terminated shall have distribution of their benefits commence within
sixty (60) days following their Normal Retirement Date, unless the
Participant elects to defer receipt of his benefits.
5.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 5.3
AO:363
5.4. MINIMUM DISTRIBUTION RULES. [Ord. 6/13/02]
(b) Early or Disability Retirement. A Participant whose employment has
terminated either due to total and permanent disability or who has met
both the age and service requirements for Early Retirement may,
subject to the provisions of Section 4.3, request in writing the
distribution of his benefits to commence within sixty (60) days of receipt
by the Plan Administrator of his valid election.
(c) Pre-retirement Termination of Employment. If a Participant terminates
employment for any reason other than Normal or Early Retirement,
disability or death, distribution of the Actuarial Equivalent of his vested
Accrued Benefit shall commence upon the latest of:
(1) The 60th day after the Participant's Normal Retirement Date
occurs; or
(2) The 60th day following the close of the Plan Year in which he
terminated employment; or
(3) The 60th day after a Participant's written election to commence
payment is delivered to the Administrator.
(d) Latest Commencement Date. Distribution of benefits must commence
by the later of the April 1st following the end of the calendar year in
which the Participant retires or the April 1st following the end of the
calendar year in which the Participant attains age 70 1/2.
(a) A Participant who must commence distribution of benefits pursuant to
Code Section 401(a)(9) may elect a form of payment that is the
Actuarial Equivalent of his vested Accrued Benefit in accordance with
one of the following options:
(1) In the case of annuity income payments the following rules shall
apply:
(A) Payments to Participant or to Participant and Surviving
Spouse. Payments shall start no later than as provided under
Section 5.3 and shall be calculated to be paid over the
Participant's life expectancy or the joint life expectancies of the
Participant and his spouse.
(B) Payments to Participant and Non-Spouse Beneficiary. Payments
shall start no later than as provided under Section 5.3 and shall
be calculated to be paid over the joint life expectancies of the
Participant and the Beneficiary. However, the periodic annuity
payable to the Beneficiary may not exceed the "applicable
percentage" of the Participant's annuity payment, as
determined from the Table of Proposed Income Tax Regulation
Section 1.401(a)(9)-2, Q & A 6.
5.3 LITTLE COMPTON CODE 5.4
AO:364
5.5. ANNUITY INCOME. [Ord. 6/13/02]
Subject to the provisions of Section 5.2, the Administrator may direct
the Trustee to purchase from an insurance company selected by the
Administrator an annuity contract that will provide the monthly income in
an amount equal to that which the Participant or Beneficiary is entitled
under the Plan. In the event an annuity contract is so purchased, the
contract may either be assigned to the Participant or his Beneficiary on
a nontransferable basis or held by the Trustee for the benefit of the
Participant or his Beneficiary.
5.6. DIRECT ROLLOVER OF ELIGIBLE ROLLOVER
DISTRIBUTIONS. [Ord. 6/13/02]
(b) Consent to Receive Minimum Distribution. The Administrator shall
make reasonable efforts to obtain the consent of the Participant (or
spouse, where applicable) to receive distributions. If consent cannot be
obtained after reasonable efforts, the Administrator shall distribute
benefits in the form of either a Qualified Joint and Survivor Annuity or
Qualified Pre-Retirement Survivor Annuity pursuant to Sections 5.2 and
6.1, respectively.
(c) Beneficiaries for purposes of this Section shall be determined in
accordance with regulations issued pursuant to Code Section 401(a)(9).
(d) Prior Election. Notwithstanding the requirements of this Section and
Section 5.3 to the contrary, any distributions made in accordance with a
written election by the Participant or the Participant's Beneficiary
before January 1, 1984 may be made or may continue to be made under
the provisions of such election, provided such method of distribution
would not have disqualified the Plan under Section 401(a)(9) of the
Code as in effect prior to January 1, 1984.
(a) Notwithstanding any provision of the Plan to the contrary that would
otherwise limit a Distributee's election, a Distributee may elect, at the
time and in the manner prescribed by the Administrator, to have any
portion of an Eligible Rollover Distribution paid directly to an Eligible
Retirement Plan specified by the Distributee in a Direct Rollover.
(b) Definitions.
(1) Eligible Rollover Distribution. An eligible rollover distribution is
any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of
the Distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does
not include: any distribution that is one of a series of substantially
equal periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made
for the life (or life expectancy) of the Distributee or the joint lives
(or joint life expectancies) of the Distributee and the Distributee's
designated Beneficiary, or for a specified period of ten years or
more; any distribution to the extent such distribution is required
under Section 401(a)(9) of the Code; any hardship distribution
5.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 5.6
AO:365
described in Section 401(k)(2)(B)(i)(IV) of the Code; and the
portion of any distribution that is not includible in gross income
(determined without regard to the exclusion for net unrealized
appreciation with respect to employer securities).
(A) Modification of Definition of Eligible Rollover Distribution to
Include After-Tax Employee Contributions. For purposes of the
direct rollover provisions of the Plan, a portion of a distribution
shall not fail to be an eligible rollover distribution merely
because the portion consists of after-tax employee
contributions which are not includible in a gross income.
However, such portion may be paid only to an individual
retirement account or annuity described in Section 408(a) or
(b) of the Code, or to a qualified defined contribution plan
described in Section 401(a) or 403(a) of the Code that agrees
to separately account for amounts so transferred, including
separately accounting for the portion of such distribution
which is includible in gross income and the portion of such
distribution which is not so includible.23 [Ord. 12/19/02]
(2) Eligible Retirement Plan. An eligible retirement plan is an
Individual Retirement Account described in Section 408(a) of the
Code, an Individual Retirement Annuity described in Section
408(b) of the Code, an Annuity Plan described in Section 403(a) of
the Code, or a qualified trust described in Section 401(a) of the
Code, that accepts the Distributee's Eligible Rollover Distribution.
However, in the case of an Eligible Rollover Distribution to the
surviving spouse, an eligible retirement plan is an Individual
Retirement Account or Individual Retirement Annuity.
(A) Modification of Definition of Eligible Retirement Plan. For
purposes of the direct rollover provisions of the Plan, an
eligible retirement plan shall also mean an annuity contract
described in Section 403(b) of the Code and an eligible plan
under Section 457(b) of the Code which is maintained by a
state, political subdivision of a state, or any agency or
instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state and
which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred
into such plan from this Plan. The definition of eligible
retirement plan shall also apply in the case of a distribution to
a surviving spouse, or to a spouse or former spouse who is the
alternate payee under a qualified domestic relation order, as
defined in Section 414(p) of the Code.24 [Ord. 12/19/02]
(3) Distributee. A Distributee includes an Employee or former
Employee. In addition, the Employee's or former Employee's
surviving spouse and the Employee's or former Employee's spouse
or former spouse who is the alternate payee under a qualified
23.Editor's Note: These provisions shall apply to distributions made after December 31, 2001.
24.Editor's Note: These provisions shall apply to distributions made after December 31, 2001.
5.6 LITTLE COMPTON CODE 5.6
AO:366
domestic relations order, as defined in Section 414(p) of the Code,
are Distributees with regard to the interest of the spouse or former
spouse.
(4) Direct Rollover. A direct rollover is a payment by the Plan to the
Eligible Retirement Plan specified by the Distributee.
5.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 5.6
AO:367

ARTICLE SIX
DEATH BENEFITS
6.1. DEATH PRIOR TO BENEFIT COMMENCEMENT. [Ord. 6/13/02]
(a) Pre-Retirement. If a Participant should die while in the employ of the
Employer prior to the commencement of benefit payments and is
survived by an Eligible Spouse, such spouse shall be entitled to a death
benefit in the form of a Qualified Pre-Retirement Survivor Annuity, as
set forth in Section 6.1(c). If a Participant should die while in the
employ of the Employer prior to the commencement of benefit
payments and is not survived by an Eligible Spouse, the Participant's
Beneficiary shall be entitled to a refund of the Participant's Employee
Mandatory Contributions, if any were made by the Participant, together
with five percent (5%) interest.
(b) Deferred Vested. If a Participant, who has a nonforfeitable interest in
his Accrued Benefit, dies after termination of employment but prior to
the commencement of benefit payments and is survived by an Eligible
Spouse as defined in Section 5.2(b), such spouse shall be entitled to a
death benefit in the form of a Qualified Pre-Retirement Survivor
Annuity, as set forth in Section 6.1(c). If a Participant, who has a
nonforfeitable interest in his Accrued Benefit, dies after termination of
employment but prior to the commencement of benefit payments and is
not survived by an Eligible Spouse, the Participant's Beneficiary shall
be entitled to a refund of the Participant's Employee Mandatory
Contributions, if any were made by the Participant, together with five
percent (5%) interest.
(c) Qualified Pre-Retirement Survivor Annuity. In the case of a Participant
with an Eligible Spouse (as defined in Section 5.2(b)), the following
minimum death benefit shall constitute the "Qualified Pre-Retirement
Survivor Annuity" and shall be provided under the Plan to the Eligible
Spouse of a Participant who dies after his attainment of his earliest
retirement age (defined below): a monthly pension equal to the amount
which the spouse would have received if the Participant had retired on
the day before his death and elected a joint and 67 1/2% surviving
spouse annuity which was the Actuarial Equivalent of his vested
Accrued Benefit. In the case of a Participant who dies on or before his
earliest retirement age, the "Qualified Pre-Retirement Survivor
Annuity" is a monthly pension equal to the amount the spouse would
have received if such Participant had separated from service on the
date of his death, survived to his earliest retirement age, elected a
qualified joint and 67 1/2% survivor annuity to commence on such date,
and died on the next day. Solely for purposes of this Subsection (c),
earliest retirement age is the earliest date on which the Participant
could elect to receive retirement benefits.
(d) Death After Commencement of Benefit. If a Participant dies after
payment of benefits has commenced, no death benefit shall be payable
6.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 6.1
AO:369
6.2. DESIGNATION OF BENEFICIARY. [Ord. 6/13/02]
Each Participant shall be entitled to file with the Administrator a
designation of Beneficiary to receive a refund of Employee Mandatory
Contributions, if any, pursuant to Section 6.1(a) or 6.1(b), or other sums
payable hereunder if such Beneficiary survives the Participant. Beneficiary
designations may include primary and contingent Beneficiaries, and may be
revoked or amended at any time in a similar manner of form, and the most
recent designations shall govern. In the absence of an effective designation
of Beneficiary or if the Beneficiary dies before complete distribution of the
Participant's benefits, all amounts shall be paid to the surviving spouse of
the Participant, if living, or otherwise equally to his then surviving children
whether by marriage or adopted and the surviving issue of any deceased
children, per stirpes, or, if none, to his estate.
6.3. TIME OF DISTRIBUTING DEATH BENEFITS. [Ord. 6/13/02]
except as provided in the form of pension elected by the Participant
under Article Five.
(a) Death Prior to Benefit Commencement. Payments under the Qualified
Pre-Retirement Survivor Annuity shall commence no later than within a
reasonable time after the earliest date on which the Participant could
have elected to receive retirement benefits. Distribution of the
Participant's Employee Mandatory Contributions shall commence no
later than sixty (60) days following the close of the Plan Year of the
Participant's death.
(b) Death After Commencement of Benefit Payments. If a Participant dies
after payments have commenced, any survivor's benefit must be paid at
least as rapidly as under the method of distribution in effect as of the
date of the Participant's death.
6.1 LITTLE COMPTON CODE 6.3
AO:370
ARTICLE SEVEN
EMPLOYER CONTRIBUTIONS, ROLLOVERS, AND TRANSFERS
FROM OTHER PLANS
7.1. EMPLOYER CONTRIBUTIONS. [Ord. 6/13/02]
The Employer shall retain an Actuary to assist it in determining the amount
of contributions to make under the Plan. The contribution of the Employer
may be paid to the Trustee on any date or dates which the Employer may
select and shall be made in the form of cash or checks made payable to
the Trustee, or in the form of property acceptable to the Trustee under the
terms of the Trust.
7.2. EMPLOYEE MANDATORY CONTRIBUTIONS. [Ord. 5/18/00;
Ord. 6/13/02]
Effective for the period from July 1, 1993 through June 30, 1997, each
Participant who is a member of the Firefighters Union and is employed
by the Town of Little Compton Fire Department shall contribute two and
one-half percent (2.5%) of his Compensation to the Plan. Effective July 1,
1994, each Participant who is a member of the Firefighters Union and is
employed by the Town of Little Compton Fire Department shall contribute
three percent (3%) of his Compensation to the Plan. Effective July 1, 1995,
each Participant who is a member of the Firefighters Union and is employed
by the Town of Little Compton Fire Department shall contribute four and
one-half percent (4.5%) of his Compensation to the Plan.
Effective July 1, 1997, Employee Mandatory Contributions are no longer
required to be made to the Plan by members of the Firefighters Union.
Effective for the period from July 1, 1994 through June 30, 2000, each
Participant who is a member of the Police Officers Union and is employed
by the Town of Little Compton Police Department shall contribute two and
one-half percent (2.5%) of his Compensation to the Plan.
Collective Bargaining Agreement Provisions Effective July 1, 2012.25
The following provisions were negotiated with the Town unions (Fire,
Municipal and Police) for the contracts effective 1 July 2012, and remain in
effect:
1. All employees hired on or after 1 July 2012 shall contribute seven percent
of salary annually toward their pensions via pre-tax bi-weekly payroll
deduction.
The Committee voted unanimously to incorporate these provisions into the
Town Pension Plan.
25.Editor's Note: The above provisions of current collective bargaining agreements were
acknowledged by the Pension Committee at its 15 August 2016 meeting.
7.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 7.3
AO:371
7.3. FORFEITURES. [Ord. 6/13/02]
No forfeiture under the Plan shall be applied to increase the benefits
that any Participant or Beneficiary would otherwise receive. Any amounts
forfeited shall be held in the Trust Fund and used to reduce the
contributions of the Employer.
7.4. ROLLOVERS FROM OTHER PLANS. [Ord. 12/19/02]
The Employer, operationally and on a nondiscriminatory basis, may limit
the source of rollover contributions that may be accepted by this Plan. The
Employer will not accept the rollover of after-tax employee contributions
from another plan.
7.3 LITTLE COMPTON CODE 7.4
AO:372
ARTICLE EIGHT
ADMINISTRATION OF THE PLAN
8.1. PENSION COMMITTEE. [5/17/94; 1/2/95; 6/13/02]
The Plan shall be administered by a Pension Committee which shall consist
of five (5) members duly elected as provided herein to serve for one year or
until their successors are elected:
8.2. AUTHORITY OF THE PENSION COMMITTEE. [Ord. 6/13/02]
The Pension Committee shall be the named fiduciary under the Plan and
shall have the authority to interpret the Plan and to determine the eligibility
for benefits of Participants and beneficiaries pursuant to the provisions
of the Plan and to decide any and all matters arising in connection with
the administration of the Plan. The Pension Committee shall also act as
Plan Administrator. The Pension Committee shall also have the authority to
amend the Plan provided the amendment is of a minor or technical nature.
In the exercise of such authority, the Pension Committee shall endeavor to
act by general rules so as not to discriminate in favor of any person.
8.3. DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY. [Ord. 6/13/02]
The Pension Committee may establish procedures for allocating fiduciary
responsibilities among the members of the Pension Committee and may
designate any one or more persons to exercise any of its powers or to
execute or deliver any instruments or make any payments on its behalf;
provided, however, that no person other than a member of the Pension
(a) Three (3) members who shall be qualified to vote in Little Compton shall
be annually appointed in May by the Town Council.
(b) One (1) member shall be elected by the Town Council of the Employer
from among its members.
(c) One (1) member shall be elected in April of each year by those
Employees of the Employer who are members of the Plan but not
members of the International Brotherhood of Police Officers or the
I.A.F.F. Such Employee representative must be a Plan Participant.
(d) One (1) member shall be elected in April of each year by those
Employees of the Employer who are members of the Plan and the
International Brotherhood of Police Officers. Such Employee
representative must be a Plan Participant.
(e) One (1) member shall be a member of the I.A.F.F. union who is an
Employee of the Town and a Plan Participant.
The Pension Committee shall act by a majority of its members then in office,
and any such action may be taken either by vote at a meeting or by written
consent without a meeting. The members of the Pension Committee shall serve
without compensation for their services.
8.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 8.3
AO:373
Committee, or the Trustee, shall have any authority or control, whether or
not discretionary, respecting the management or disposition of the Plan's
assets. Any such delegation of fiduciary responsibilities shall be authorized
by a majority vote of the Pension Committee. The Pension Committee may
employ such agents and such clerical services as it may require in carrying
out the provisions of the Plan and applicable law. Any expense for services
rendered shall be paid from the Trust unless the amount of such expense
shall be separately paid by the Employer.
8.4. RELIANCE ON REPORTS AND CERTIFICATES. [Ord. 6/13/02]
The Pension Committee shall be entitled to rely conclusively upon all tables,
valuations, certificates, opinions and reports furnished by any Trustee,
Investment manager or advisor, accountant, actuary, controller, counsel or
other person who is employed or engaged for such purposes.
8.5. ANNUAL REPORT. [Ord. 6/13/02]
The Pension Committee shall keep a record of all its proceedings. The
Pension Committee shall prepare and submit to each Financial Town
Meeting an annual report showing the fiscal transactions of the Plan for the
preceding year, a balance sheet showing the financial condition of the Plan
and such other information as it deems necessary or desirable. The Pension
Committee shall obtain from the Trustee not less often than annually a
report with respect to the cost and market value of the assets held in the
Trust Fund, in such form as is required by the Pension Committee.
8.6. CLAIMS PROCEDURE. [Ord. 6/13/02]
The Pension Committee shall act as claims fiduciary. All claims for benefits
under the Plan must be made in writing and shall be directed to the
attention of the claims fiduciary. Upon receipt of the claim, the claims
fiduciary shall promptly notify the claimant of the time periods within which
any notice of denial of claim, request for review of claim, or decision on
review of denial of claim must be given in accordance with subsections (a)
through (c) below.
(a) If the claims fiduciary determines that any individual who has claimed a
right to receive benefits under the Plan is not entitled to receive all or
any part of the benefits claimed, it shall inform the claimant by certified
mail of its determination and of the reasons therefor in layman's terms,
with specific reference to pertinent Plan provisions and any additional
material necessary for the claimant to perfect his claim. The notice of
denial shall also include a description of the review procedures set forth
below. Such notice shall be made within a reasonable period of time but
not later than ninety (90) days after receipt of the claim, unless special
circumstances require an extension of time for processing. If such an
extension of time is required, the claims fiduciary shall furnish written
notice of the extension to the claimant prior to the termination of the
initial ninety (90) day period. The extension notice shall indicate the
8.3 LITTLE COMPTON CODE 8.6
AO:374
8.7. TRUST AGREEMENT AND DESIGNATION OF TRUSTEE. [Ord.
6/13/02]
The Pension Committee shall approve and enter into a Trust Agreement on
behalf of the Employer with the Trustee as designated therein. The Pension
Committee may designate any number of persons, parties, corporate
fiduciaries, or any combination thereof, to act as Trustees as the Pension
Committee deems appropriate.
8.8. ACTUARY. [Ord. 6/13/02]
The Pension Committee shall appoint an individual, firm, or corporation as
actuary, who can act in the capacity of "enrolled actuary" under Section
3042 of ERISA, to perform the duties of the actuary herein specified and
such other duties in connection with the administration of the Plan as may
be conferred upon him or it by the Employer and the Trustee and are not
contrary to the provisions of the Plan.
special circumstances requiring an extension of time and the date by
which the claims fiduciary expects to render a final decision.
(b) Within sixty (60) days of receipt by the claimant of the written notice of
denial of the claim, the claimant may file a written request with the
claims fiduciary to conduct a full and fair review of the denial of the
claimant's claim for benefit. In connection with the claimant's appeal,
the claimant may review pertinent documents and may submit issues
and comments in writing.
(c) The claims fiduciary shall promptly advise the claimant of its decision
on the claimant's request for review. Such decision shall be written in a
manner calculated to be understood by the claimant, shall include
specific reasons for the decision, and shall contain specific references
to pertinent Plan provisions upon which the decision is based. The
decision on review shall be made no later than sixty (60) days following
the receipt of a request for review.
8.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 8.8
AO:375

ARTICLE NINE
BENEFIT LIMITATIONS
9.1. LIMITATION ON BENEFITS. [Ord. 6/13/02; Ord. 12/19/02, § 2]
(a) Rules. The following rules limit benefits payable under this Plan:
(1) The annual benefit otherwise payable to a Participant at any time
will not exceed the maximum permissible amount.
(2) If the Participant makes nondeductible Employee contributions
under the terms of this Plan for any limitation year beginning after
December 31, 1986, such contributions which are credited for the
limitation year, shall be treated as an annual addition to a qualified
defined contribution plan, for purposes of these rules.
(3) The limitation in Subsection (1) is deemed satisfied if the annual
benefit payable to a Participant is not more than $1,000 multiplied
by the Participant's number of Years of Service or portions thereof
(not to exceed ten (10)) with the Employer, provided the Participant
has never participated in a qualified defined contribution plan
maintained by the Employer.
(4) If a Participant is, or has ever been, covered under more than one
defined benefit plan maintained by the Employer, the sum of the
Participant's annual benefits from all such plans may not exceed
the maximum permissible amount. Benefits will be reduced under
any other defined benefit plan before under this Plan unless such
plans are terminated, in which event benefits will be limited in this
Plan.
(5) If the Employer maintains, or at any time maintained, one or more
qualified defined contribution plans covering any Participant in this
Plan, the sum of the Participant's defined contribution fraction and
defined benefit fraction will not exceed 1.0 in any limitation year.
Benefits under a defined benefit plan shall have priority over
benefits under a defined contribution plan. The provisions of this
Section 9.1(a)(5) shall not apply to limitation years commencing on
or after January 1, 2000.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Article Nine to the
contrary, a Participant's defined benefit fraction (including
preservation of his accrued benefit) and/or defined contribution
fraction may be adjusted in accordance with transitional rules
contained in Section 235 of the Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility
Act of 1982 and Section 1106 of the Tax Reform Act of 1986.
(7) In any Plan Year in which the Plan becomes a Super Top-Heavy
Plan, the denominators of the defined benefit fraction and defined
contribution fraction shall be computed using one hundred percent
(100%) of the dollar limitation instead of one hundred and twentyfive
percent (125%). In any year which the Plan is a Top-Heavy Plan
9.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 9.1
AO:377
(but not a Super Top-Heavy Plan), the limitations shall be similarly
reduced, subject to the special provisions in Section 11.3 which
provide for maintenance of the one hundred and twenty-five
percent (125%) limitations subject to added minimum accruals.
(b) Definitions. The following definitions are applicable to this Section 9.1:
(1) Annual benefit. A retirement benefit under the Plan which is
payable annually in the form of a straight life annuity. Except as
provided below, a benefit payable in a form other than a straight
life annuity must be adjusted to an actuarial equivalent straight life
annuity before applying the limitations of this Section 9.1. For
limitation years beginning before January 1, 1995, such actuarially
equivalent straight life annuity is equal to the greater of the
annuity benefit computed using the interest rate specified in the
Plan for adjusting benefits in the same form or five percent (5%).
For limitation years beginning after December 31, 1994, the
actuarially equivalent straight life annuity is equal to the greater of
the annuity benefit computed using the interest rate and mortality
table (or other tabular factor) specified in the Plan for adjusting
benefits in the same form, and the annuity benefit computed using
a five percent (5%) interest rate assumption and the "applicable
mortality table", as defined below. In determining the actuarially
equivalent straight life annuity for a benefit form other than a
nondecreasing annuity payable for a period of not less than the life
of the Participant (or, in the case of a qualified pre-retirement
survivor annuity, the life of the surviving spouse), or decreases
during the life of the Participant merely because of (A) the death of
the survivor annuitant (but only if the reduction is not below fifty
percent (50%) of the annual benefit payable before the death of the
survivor annuitant), or (B) the cessation or reduction of Social
Security supplements of qualified disability payments (as defined in
Section 401(a)(11) of the Code), "the applicable interest rate", as
defined below, will be substituted for "a five percent (5%) interest
rate assumption" in the preceding sentence.
For purposes of this Section 9.1(b)(1), the term "applicable interest
rate" means the annual rate of interest on 30-year Treasury
securities for the calendar month that is three (3) months
preceding the first day of the Plan Year in which the distribution
occurs. The "applicable interest rate" shall remain constant for
year.
For purposes of this Section 9.1(b)(1), the term "applicable
mortality table" means the table prescribed by the Secretary of
the Treasury. Such table shall be based on the prevailing
commissioner's standard table, as described in Section
807(d)(5)(A) of the Code, used to determine reserves for group
annuity contracts issued on the dates as of which the present value
is being determined (without regard to any other subparagraphs
of Section 807(d)(5) of the Code). The applicable mortality table
9.1 LITTLE COMPTON CODE 9.1
AO:378
is based upon a fixed blend of fifty percent (50%) of the male
mortality rates and fifty percent (50%) of the female mortality
rates from the 1983 Group Annuity Mortality Table, which mortality
table is set forth in Internal Revenue Service Revenue Ruling 95-6.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, effective December 31, 2002, for
purposes of this Section 9.1(b)(1), the term "applicable mortality
table" means the mortality table based upon a fixed blend of fifty
(50%) percent of the unloaded male mortality rates and fifty (50%)
percent of the unloaded female mortality rates underlying the 1994
Group Annuity Reserving Table, projected to 2002, which mortality
table is set forth in Internal Revenue Ruling 2001-62.
The annual benefit does not include any benefits attributable to
Employee contributions or rollover contributions, or the assets
transferred from a qualified plan that was not maintained by the
Employer. No actuarial adjustment to the benefit is required for (A)
the value of a qualified joint and survivor annuity, (B) benefits that
are not directly related to retirement benefits (such as qualified
disability benefits, pre-retirement death benefits, and postretirement
medical benefits), and (C) the value of post-retirement
cost-of-living increases made in accordance with Section 415(d)
of the Code and Section 1.415-3(c)(2)(iii) of the Income Tax
Regulations.
(2) Compensation. For purposes of determining maximum permitted
benefits under this Section, all of a Participant's earned income,
wages, salaries, and fees for professional services, and other
amounts received for personal services actually rendered in the
course of employment with the Employer maintaining the Plan
(including, but not limited to, commissions paid to salesmen,
compensation for services on the basis of a percentage of profits,
commissions on insurance premiums, tips and bonuses), and
excluding the following:
(A) Employer contributions to a plan of deferred compensation
which are not included in the Employee's gross income for the
taxable year in which contributed or Employer contributions
under a simplified employee pension plan (funded with
individual retirement accounts or annuities) to the extent such
contributions are deductible by the Employee, or any
distributions from a plan of deferred compensation;
(B) Amounts realized from the exercise of an unqualified stock
option, or when restricted stock (or property) held by the
Employee either becomes freely transferable or is no longer
subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture;
(C) Amounts realized from the sale, exchange or other disposition
of stock acquired under a qualified stock option; and
9.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 9.1
AO:379
(D) Other amounts which received special tax benefits, or
contributions made by the Employer (whether or not under a
salary reduction agreement) towards the purchase of an
annuity described in Section 403(b) of the Code (whether or
not the amounts are actually excludable from the gross income
of the Employee).
Compensation shall be measured on the basis of compensation paid in
the limitation year.
For purposes of applying the limitations of this Section 9.1,
compensation paid or made available during such limitation year shall
include any elective deferral (as defined in Code Section 402(g)(3)),
and any amount which is contributed or deferred by the Employer at
the election of the Employee and which is not includible in the gross
income of the Employee by reason of Code Section 125 or 457. The
provisions of this paragraph are effective for Plan Years beginning
after December 31, 1997.
(3) Defined benefit fraction. A fraction, the numerator of which is the
sum of the Participant's projected annual benefits under all the
defined benefit plans (whether or not terminated) maintained by
the Employer, and the denominator of which is the lesser of one
hundred and twenty-five percent (125%) of the dollar limitation
determined for the limitation year under Sections 415(b)(1)(A) and
415(d)(1) of the Code or one hundred and forty percent (140%) of
the Participant's Highest Average Compensation (as defined in
Section 9.1(b)(6)), including any adjustments under Section 415(b)
of the Code. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 9.1(b)(8)
relating to reductions to the maximum dollar limitation for years of
participation less than ten (10), for purposes of computing the
denominator of the defined benefit fraction, such reductions shall
be determined based upon Years of Service. Provided, however, if a
Participant was a Participant as of the first day of the first limitation
year commencing after December 31, 1986, in one or more defined
benefit plans maintained by the Employer which were in existence
on May 6, 1986, the denominator of this fraction will not be less
than one hundred and twenty-five percent (125%) of the sum of the
annual benefits under such Plans which the Participant had
accrued as of the end of the last limitation year commencing before
January 1, 1987, disregarding any changes in the terms and
conditions of the plans after May 5, 1986. These provisions are
applicable only if the defined benefit plans, individually and in the
aggregate, satisfied the requirements of Code Section 415 for all
limitation years beginning before January 1, 1987.
(4) Defined contribution fraction. A fraction, the numerator of which is
the sum of the annual additions to the Participant's account under
all the defined contribution plans (whether or not terminated)
maintained by the Employer for the current and all prior limitation
years (including the annual additions attributable to the
9.1 LITTLE COMPTON CODE 9.1
AO:380
Participant's nondeductible Employee contributions to this and all
other defined benefit plans, whether or not terminated, maintained
by the Employer), and the denominator of which is the sum of
the maximum aggregate amounts for the current and all prior
limitation years with the Employer (regardless of whether a defined
contribution plan was maintained by the Employer).
The maximum aggregate amount in any limitation year is the lesser
of one hundred and twenty-five percent (125%) of the dollar
limitation then in effect under Code Section 415(c)(1)(A) or thirtyfive
percent (35%) of the Participant's compensation for such year.
(5) Employer. The Employer that adopts this Plan, and all members of a
controlled group of corporations (as defined in Section 414(b) of
the Code, as modified by Section 415(h)), commonly controlled
trades or businesses (as defined in Section 414(c) as modified by
Section 415(h)), or affiliated service groups (as defined in Section
414(m)) of which the adopting employer is a part, and any other
entity required to be aggregated with the Employer pursuant to
regulations under Section 414(o) of the Code.
(6) Highest Average Compensation. The average compensation for the
three (3) consecutive limitation years with the Employer that
produces the highest average.
(7) Limitation year. The twelve (12)-consecutive-month period used to
measure compensation in this Plan for benefit purposes shall be the
Plan Year.
(8) Maximum permissible amount. The defined benefit dollar
limitation.
(A) Defined benefit dollar limitation. The "defined benefit dollar
limitation" is $160,000 as adjusted, effective January 1 of each
year, under Section 415(d) of the Code in such manner as the
Secretary shall prescribe, and payable in the form of a straight
life annuity. A limitation as adjusted under Section 415(d) will
apply to limitation years ending with or within the calendar
year for which the adjustment applies. [Ord. 12/19/02]
(B) Maximum permissible benefit. The "maximum permissible
benefit" is the lesser of the defined benefit dollar limitation or
the defined benefit compensation limitation (both adjusted
where required, as provided in (1) and, if applicable, in (2) or
(3) below).
(1) If the Participant has fewer than 10 years of participation
in the Plan, the defined benefit dollar limitation shall be
multiplied by a fraction, (i) the numerator of which is the
number of years (or part thereof) of participation in the Plan
and (ii) the denominator of which is 10. In the case of a
Participant who has fewer than 10 years of service with the
9.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 9.1
AO:381
Employer, the defined benefit compensation limitation shall
be multiplied by a fraction, (i) the numerator of which is the
number of years (or part thereof) of service with the Employer
and (ii) the denominator of which is 10.
(2) If the benefit of a Participant begins prior to age 62, the
defined benefit dollar limitation applicable to the Participant
at such earlier age is an annual benefit payable in the form
of a straight life annuity beginning at the earlier age that is
the actuarial equivalent of the defined benefit dollar limitation
applicable to the Participant at age 62 (adjusted under (1)
above, if required). The defined benefit dollar limitation
applicable at an age prior to age 62 is determined as the
lesser of (i) the actuarial equivalent (at such age) of the defined
benefit dollar limitation computed using the interest rate and
mortality table (or other tabular factor) specified in Section
1.2 of the Plan and (ii) the actuarial equivalent (at such age)
of the defined benefit limitation computed using a 5 percent
interest rate and the applicable mortality table as defined in
Section 1.2 of the Plan. Any decrease in the defined benefit
dollar limitation determined in accordance with this paragraph
(2) shall not reflect a mortality decrement if benefits are not
forfeited upon the death of the Participant. If any benefits are
forfeited upon death, the full mortality decrement is taken into
account.
(3) If the benefit of a Participant begins after the Participant
attains age 65, the defined benefit dollar limitation applicable
to the Participant at the later age is the annual benefit payable
in the form of a straight life annuity beginning at the later
age that is actuarially equivalent to the defined benefit dollar
limitation applicable to the Participant at age 65 (adjusted
under (1) above, if required). The actuarial equivalent of the
defined benefit dollar limitation applicable at an age after age
65 is determined as (i) the lesser of the actuarial equivalent
(at such age) of the defined benefit dollar limitation computed
using the interest rate and mortality table (or other tabular
factor) specified in Section 1.2 of the Plan and (ii) the actuarial
equivalent (at such age) of the defined benefit dollar limitation
computed using a 5 percent interest rate assumption and the
applicable mortality table as defined in Section 1.2 of the Plan.
For these purposes, mortality between age 65 and the age of
which benefits commence shall be ignored. [Ord. 12/19/02]
(C) If the benefit of a Participant commences prior to age sixty-two
(62), the defined benefit dollar limitation shall be an annual
benefit that is the actuarial equivalent of the defined benefit
dollar limitation for age sixty-two (62), as determined above,
reduced for each month by which benefits commence before
the month in which the Participant attains age sixty-two (62).
9.1 LITTLE COMPTON CODE 9.1
AO:382
The annual benefit beginning prior to age sixty-two (62) shall
be determined as the lesser of the equivalent annual benefit
computed using the interest rate and mortality table (or other
tabular factor) equivalence for early retirement benefits, and
the equivalent annual benefit computed using a five percent
(5%) interest rate and applicable mortality table as defined in
Section 1.2 of the Plan. Any decrease in the adjusted defined
benefit dollar limitation determined in accordance with this
provision (C) shall not reflect any mortality decrement to the
extent the benefits will not be forfeited upon the death of the
Participant.
(D) If the annual benefit of a Participant commences after the
Participant's social security retirement age, the defined benefit
dollar limitation as reduced in (A) above, if necessary, shall be
adjusted so that it is the actuarial equivalent of an annual
benefit of such dollar limitation beginning at the Participant's
social security retirement age. The equivalent annual benefit
beginning after social security retirement age shall be
determined as the lesser of the equivalent annual benefit
computed using the interest rate and mortality table (or other
tabular factor) specified in the Plan for purposes of
determining actuarial equivalence for delayed retirement
benefits, and the equivalent annual benefit computed using a
five percent (5%) interest rate assumption and the applicable
mortality table as defined in Section 1.2 of the Plan.
(E) Notwithstanding anything else in this Section 9.1 to the
contrary, the benefit otherwise accrued or payable to a
Participant under this Plan shall be deemed not to exceed the
defined benefit dollar limitation if:
(1) the retirement benefits payable for a Plan Year under any
form of benefit with respect to such Participant under this
Plan and under all other defined benefit plans (regardless of
whether terminated) ever maintained by the Employer do not
exceed $1,000 multiplied by the Participant's number of Years
of Service or parts thereof (not to exceed ten (10)) with the
Employer; and
(2) the Employer has not at any time maintained a defined
contribution plan, a welfare benefit plan, or an individual
medical account in which the Participant participated.
(9) Projected annual benefit. The annual benefit as defined in
Subsection (b)(1) to which the Participant would be entitled under
the terms of the Plan assuming:
(A) The Participant will continue employment until normal
retirement age under the Plan (or current age, if later), and
9.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 9.1
AO:383
9.2. BENEFIT INCREASES RESULTING FROM THE INCREASE IN
THE LIMITATIONS OF SECTION 415(b) OF THE CODE. [Ord. 12/19/
02]
Benefit increases resulting from the increase in the limitations of Section
415(b) of the Code shall be provided to all employees participating in the
Plan who have one hour of service on or after the first day of the first
limitation year ending after December 31, 2001.
(B) The Participant's compensation for the current limitation year
and all other relevant factors used to determine benefits under
the Plan will remain constant for all future limitation years.
(10) Annual additions. The sum of the following amounts credited to a
Participant's account for the limitation year:
(A) Employer contributions; and
(B) Forfeitures; and
(C) Employee contributions made after December 31, 1986; and
(D) Amounts allocated, after March 31, 1984, to an individual
medical account, as defined in Section 415(1)(2) of the Code,
which is part of a pension or annuity plan maintained by the
Employer are treated as annual additions to a defined
contribution plan. Also, amounts derived from contributions
paid or accrued after December 31, 1985, intaxable years
ending after such date, which are attributable to postretirement
medical benefits allocated to the separate account
of a Key Employee, as defined in Section 419A(d)(3), under a
welfare benefit fund, as defined in Section 419(e), maintained
by the Employer, are treated as annual additions to a defined
contribution plan.
(11) Annual additions shall be limited to the lesser of (A) $30,000, as
adjusted under Code Section 415(d), or (B) twenty-five percent
(25%) of the Participant's compensation (as defined in Code Section
415(c)(3)) for the limitation year.
9.1 LITTLE COMPTON CODE 9.2
AO:384
ARTICLE TEN
AMENDMENT AND TERMINATION
10.1. AMENDMENT. [Ord. 6/13/02]
The Employer shall have the right to amend, alter or modify the Plan at any
time, or from time to time, in whole or in part. Any such amendment shall
become effective under its terms upon adoption by the Employer. However,
no amendment affecting the duties, powers or responsibilities of the Trustee
may be made without the written consent of the Trustee. No amendment
(including a change in the actuarial basis for determining optional or early
retirement benefits) shall be made to the Plan which shall:
10.2. TERMINATION OF THE PLAN. [Ord. 6/13/02]
The Employer reserves the right to terminate the Plan in whole or in part
with respect to a specific group of Employees. In the event of full or partial
termination, Employees affected thereby shall have a nonforfeitable right
to their Accrued Benefits, to the extent funded. The Administrator, upon
termination, shall cause the assets of the Plan to be allocated for the
purposes set forth, and in the order of priorities established by Section 4044
of ERISA. Any residual assets remaining thereafter shall be returned to the
Employer. The Employer shall not be liable to Participants for benefits other
than those which can be provided by the Plan's assets.
(a) Deprive any Participant without his consent of any portion of his
Accrued Benefit prior to the date of such action; or
(b) Make it possible, except as provided in Sections 10.2 for any part of the
corpus or income of the Trust Fund (other than such part as may be
required to pay taxes and administrative expenses) to be used for or
diverted to purposes other than the exclusive benefit of the Participants
or their Beneficiaries; or
(c) Alter the schedule for vesting in Accrued Benefits with respect to any
Participant who has completed three (3) or more Years of Service
without his consent or deprive any Participant of the nonforfeitable
portion of his Accrued Benefit.
Notwithstanding the other provisions of this Section or any other provisions
of the Plan to the contrary, any amendment or modification of the Plan may
be made retroactively, if necessary or appropriate to conform to or to satisfy
the conditions of any law, governmental regulation or ruling and to meet the
requirements of the Code qualification.
10.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 10.2
AO:385

ARTICLE ELEVEN
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
11.1. PLAN DOES NOT AFFECT EMPLOYMENT. [Ord. 6/13/02]
Neither the creation of this Plan nor any amendment of it nor the creation
of any fund or amount nor the payment of benefits hereunder shall be
construed as giving any legal or equitable right to any Employee or
Participant against the Employer, its officers or Employees, or against the
Trustee, and all liabilities under this Plan shall be satisfied, if at all, only
out of the Trust Fund held by the Trustee. Participation in the Plan shall not
give any Participant any right to be retained in the employ of the Employer,
and the Employer hereby expressly retains the right to hire and discharge
any Employee at any time with or without cause, as if the Plan had not been
adopted, and any such discharged Participant shall have only such rights or
interests in the Trust Fund as may be specified herein.
11.2. MERGER OF PLANS. [Ord. 6/13/02]
In the case of any merger or consolidation of this Plan with, or transfer
of the assets or liabilities of the Plan to, any other plan, the terms of
such merger, consolidation or transfer shall be such that each Participant
would receive (in the event of termination of this Plan or its successor
immediately thereafter) a benefit which is not less than he would have
received in the event of termination of this Plan immediately before such
merger, consolidation or transfer.
11.3. BENEFITS NOT ASSIGNABLE. [Ord. 5/18/00; Ord. 6/13/02]
Except as provided in Section 414(p) of the Code with respect to "qualified
domestic relations orders," the rights of any Participant or his Beneficiary
to any benefit or payment hereunder shall not be subject to voluntary
or involuntary alienation or assignment. Section 414(p) of the Code shall
be deemed to apply to the Plan notwithstanding that the Plan is a
governmental plan pursuant to Section 414(d) of the Code.
11.4. DISTRIBUTION TO LEGALLY INCAPACITATED. [Ord. 6/13/02]
In the event any benefit is payable to a minor or incompetent or to a person
otherwise under legal disability, or who is by sole reason of advanced age,
illness, or other physical or mental incapacity, incapable of handling the
disposition of his property, the Administrator, in its sole discretion, may
direct the Trustee to apply the whole or any part of such benefits, directly
to the care, comfort, maintenance, support, education or use of such person
or to pay or distribute the whole or any part of such benefit to the spouse
of such person, the parent of such person, the guardian, committee or
other legal representative, wherever appointed, of such person, the person
with whom such person shall reside, any other person having the care and
control of such person or such person personally. The receipt of any such
11.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 11.4
AO:387
payment or distribution so made shall be a complete discharge of liability
for Plan obligations.
11.5. GOVERNING DOCUMENTS. [Ord. 6/13/02]
A Participant's rights shall be determined under the terms of the Plan as in
effect at his date of separation from eligible Service.
11.6. GOVERNING LAW. [Ord. 6/13/02]
The provisions of this Plan shall be construed under the laws of the state of
Rhode Island, except to the extent such laws are preempted by Federal law.
11.7. CONSTRUCTION. [Ord. 6/13/02]
Wherever appropriate, the use of the masculine gender shall be extended to
include the feminine or neuter or vice versa; and the singular form of words
shall be extended to include the plural; and the plural shall be restricted to
mean the singular.
11.8. HEADINGS. [Ord. 6/13/02]
The Article headings and Section numbers are included solely for ease of
reference. If there is any conflict between such headings and numbers and
the text of the Plan, the text shall control.
11.9. COUNTERPARTS. [Ord. 6/13/02]
This Plan may be executed in any number of counterparts, each of which
shall be deemed an original; said counterparts shall constitute but one
and the same instrument, which may be sufficiently evidenced by any one
counterpart.
11.10. LOCATION OF PARTICIPANT OR BENEFICIARY UNKNOWN.
[Ord. 6/13/02]
In the event that all or any portion of the distribution payable to a
Participant or to a Participant's Beneficiary hereunder shall, at the
expiration of five (5) years after it shall become payable, remain unpaid
solely by reason of the inability of the Administrator to ascertain the
whereabouts of such Participant or Beneficiary, after sending a registered
letter, return receipt requested, to the last known address, and after further
diligent effort, the amount so distributable shall be forfeited and used to
offset the Employer contributions to the Plan. In the event a Participant or
Beneficiary is located subsequent to the forfeiture of his Accrued Benefit,
such benefit shall be restored.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Employer, by its duly authorized officer, has
caused this Plan to be executed on the 13th day of June, 2002.
TOWN OF LITTLE COMPTON
11.4 LITTLE COMPTON CODE 11.10
AO:388
/s/ By
Jane P. Cabot, Town Council President
Chairperson, Pension Committee
11.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 11.10
AO:389
Appendix C
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
11.10 LITTLE COMPTON CODE 11.10
AO:390
ARTICLE 1
PURPOSES AND GENERAL STATEMENTS
1.1. AUTHORITY.
These Land Development and Subdivision Regulations, hereinafter referred
to as "Regulations" are adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Title
45, Chapter 23, §§ 25 through 74 of the Rhode Island General Laws, known
as the Rhode Island Land Development and Subdivision Review Enabling
Act of 1992, and the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Little Compton
(Chapter 14 of the Little Compton Code of Ordinances).
1.1.1. Purposes.
The purpose of these Regulations is to establish procedural and substantive
provisions for the development and subdivision of land that will, consistent
with the Constitutions of the United States of America and the State of
Rhode Island, the Home Rule Charter, the Comprehensive Community Plan
and the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Little Compton, accomplish the
following:
1.1.2. Construction and Intent.
a. Protect the public health, safety and welfare of the Town;
b. Provide for the orderly, thorough and expeditious review and approval
of land development projects and subdivisions;
c. Protect existing natural and built environments and mitigate the
significant negative impacts of proposed development on those
environments;
d. Promote high quality, and appropriate design and construction of land
development projects and subdivisions;
e. Promote subdivision and land development designs that are wellintegrated
into surrounding neighborhoods, and concentrate
development in areas that can best support intensive use because of
natural characteristics and existing infrastructure;
f. Provide for design and improvement standards to reflect the
Comprehensive Plan with regard to the physical character of the Town
and its neighborhoods;
g. Promote thorough technical review of all proposed land developments
and subdivisions by the Planning Board;
h. Provide consistent procedures for record-keeping on all matters of land
development and subdivision review, approval and construction.
a. These Regulations are not intended to supersede, abrogate, or interfere
with any provision of any ordinance of the Town of Little Compton.
1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 1.1.2
AO:391
b. These Regulations are intended to be interpreted so as to be consistent
with the Constitutions of the United States of America and the State of
Rhode Island, and the Home Rule Charter of the Town of Little
Compton, and further the implementation of the Comprehensive Plan
and the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Little Compton and the Rhode
Island Development and Subdivision Review Enabling Act of 1992.
Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan means in accordance with
the goals, policies, procedures, maps and other policy statements in the
plan.
1.1.2 LITTLE COMPTON CODE 1.1.2
AO:392
ARTICLE 2
APPLICABILITY OF REGULATIONS AND CLASSIFICATION OF
SUBDIVISIONS
2.1. APPLICABILITY OF REGULATIONS.
In order to determine the applicability of these Regulations, potential
applicants are welcome to schedule a Pre-Application Meeting with either
the Administrative Officer or the Planning Board, and there is no fee
required for such meeting. These Regulations shall apply to any adjustment,
alteration or change of any existing lot line, and to the creation of any new
lot lines, including, but not limited to, the following:
2.1.1. Adjustment of Lot Line.
Any adjustment to existing lot lines of a recorded lot by any means shall be
considered a subdivision, and subject to these Regulations, even if no new
lot is created.
2.1.2. Division or Subdivision.
The division or subdivision, of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two (2) or
more lots, tracts, or parcels shall be considered a subdivision and subject to
these Regulations.
2.1.3. Resubdivision.
All re-subdivision activity shall be considered a subdivision and subject to
these Regulations.
2.1.4. Financing.
The division of land for purposes of financing or mortgaging shall be
considered a subdivision and subject to these Regulations.
2.2. CLASSIFICATION OF SUBDIVISIONS.
All subdivisions shall be classified according to criteria set forth below.
If any subdivision does not otherwise fit into a classification, it shall be
considered a Major Subdivision.
2.2.1. Administrative Subdivision.
An Administrative Subdivision shall include only divisions, mergers,
mergers and redivision and adjustment of existing lot lines, and if any
additional lot is created, it shall be a "lot not for development." A "lot not
for development" (as defined in Article 10) may include any lot which is to
be donated to the Town, or which is to be conveyed as open space pursuant
to Rhode Island law or as farmland to the Rhode Island Department of
Environmental Management, the Little Compton Agricultural Conservancy
Trust, or any recognized conservation organization, provided that such lot
2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 2.2.1
AO:393
shall be conveyed with appropriate restrictions forbidding any development
thereon. No public hearing is required for this classification.
2.2.2. Minor Subdivision.
A Minor Subdivision shall include only a residential subdivision of land
consisting of five (5) or fewer units or lots, provided that such subdivision
does not require waivers or modifications as specified in these Regulations.
All nonresidential subdivisions shall be considered as major subdivisions.
Minor Subdivisions shall be further classified as follows:
2.2.3. Major Subdivision.
A Major Subdivision shall include any subdivision not classified as either
an Administrative Subdivision or a Minor Subdivision, including, but not
limited to, a subdivision in which more than five (5) lots are resultant,
a subdivision requiring a waiver or modification of these regulations, a
nonresidential subdivision, or a subdivision with phasing. A public hearing
is required for all major subdivisions. Any such subdivision shall require a
a. Two-Lot One-Time-Only Compound ("Compound").26 A Two-Lot One-
Time-Only Compound Minor Subdivision shall mean the division of land
into not more than two (2) lots, without the provision of a street where
one would otherwise be required. The requirements for the driveway,
which may be by easement, are set forth in Appendix D at § D.2.2.f. A
Compound shall not occur more than once for any property. In the event
of any re-subdivision of either of the lots resulting from the Compound,
then this classification shall not be available to the applicant, and the
re-subdivision shall be considered a Major Subdivision and shall meet
all the requirements thereof, including a major subdivision street. No
public hearing is required for this classification.
b. Existing Street Minor Subdivision - Two to Five Lots. This shall include
the division of land into not more than five (5) lots, for residential
development only, and where street creation or extension is NOT
required. This classification of Minor Subdivision would include that
which was, prior to November 2, 1995 considered to be a division of
land with frontage along an existing street. No public hearing is
required for this classification.
c. Minor Subdivision - Two to Five Lots With A New Street. This shall
include the division of land into not more than five (5) lots, for
residential development only, where street creation or extension is
required. A public hearing is required for this classification. Any such
subdivision shall require a street, platted as a separate lot and built in
accordance with the standards for minor subdivision streets set forth in
Appendix D, § D.2.2, for access to each lot. Every individual lot within
the subdivision shall meet the minimum dimensional requirements of
the Zoning Ordinance as set forth in § 14-4.1 of the Zoning Ordinance.
26.Editor's Note: Prior to December 27, 1995, this was called "Minor subdivision"
2.2.1 LITTLE COMPTON CODE 2.2.3
AO:394
street, platted as a separate lot and built in accordance with the standards
for major subdivision streets set forth in Appendix D, § D.2.3, for access to
each lot. Every individual lot within the subdivision shall meet the minimum
dimensional requirements of the Zoning Ordinance as set forth in
Subsection 14-4.1 of the Zoning Ordinance.
2.2.4. Affordable Housing in Five Lot Subdivisions. [Ord. 6/6/06]
It is the intent of this subsection that for all subdivisions of five (5) or
more lots, twenty (20%) percent of the lots shall provide for affordable
housing, shall have affordability restrictions and be eligible for the Town's
low income and disabled property tax relief. The terms affordable housing
and affordability restrictions are defined in the Zoning Ordinance. The
Planning Board shall deem successive applications that result in five (5) or
more lots over time to be subject to this section. The applicant is required
to comply with this subsection by choosing one (1) of the following first
two (2) alternatives listed below. In the event the Planning Board finds that
Alternatives 1 and 2 do not satisfactorily meet the affordable housing goals
of the Town, then Alternative 3 as described below shall be required.
Alternative 1 — The applicant shall build at least one (1) affordable housing
unit on twenty (20%) percent of the lots, with the approval of the Planning
Board as to location and cost of the affordable housing units. All affordable
housing units shall be consistent in external design and construction with
the other units in a proposed development, and shall be integrated into the
development.
Alternative 2 — The applicant shall deed twenty (20%) percent of the lots
to either the Town or a nonprofit housing provider (at the Planning Board's
discretion), with the approval of the Planning Board as to the choice and
location of such lots. Such lot or lots may be developed themselves with
affordable housing, or they may be sold by the Town or nonprofit housing
provider with the proceeds used to develop affordable housing elsewhere in
the Town.
Alternative 3 — The applicant shall make a one time cash payment as a
fee in lieu of providing the units or lots in an amount that is equal to
twenty (20%) percent of the fair market value of the developed lots in the
subdivision at the time of Final Approval. Such value shall be substantiated
by an appraisal prepared by one (1) or more professional appraisers of
the Planning Board's choice, at the expense of the applicant. The fee shall
be paid to the Little Compton Housing Trust which shall use such funds
to provide affordable housing elsewhere in the Town. The fee shall be
paid prior to the recording of the Final Plan, or simultaneous thereto in
the event that proceeds from the sale of a lot or lots are being used for
such fee. This Alternative may only be used upon approval of the Planning
Board, following a finding of fact that such alternative shall result in closer
consistency with the goals of the Housing Element of the Little Compton
Comprehensive Plan, than would either of the first two (2) alternatives.
2.2.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 2.2.4
AO:395

ARTICLE 3
APPLICATION PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS,
ADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISIONS
3.1. SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS.
3.1.1. Required Items Checklist and Plans.
Any applicant requesting approval of a proposed Administrative
Subdivision, as defined in these Regulations, shall submit to the
Administrative Officer the items and plans set forth in Appendix A,
Instructions and Checklist for Administrative Subdivisions.
3.1.2. Required Design and Construction Standards.
Any proposed Administrative Subdivision shall meet the design and
construction requirements as set forth in Appendix D, Subdivision Design
Standards.
3.2. CERTIFICATION.
The application shall be certified as complete or incomplete by the
Administrative Officer within a fifteen (15) day period from the date of
its submission according to the provisions of § 7.2 of these Regulations.
In the event such certification of the application is not made within the
time specified, the application shall be deemed complete for purposes of
commencing the review period.
3.3. REVIEW PROCESS.
3.3.1. Administrative Officer.
Within fifteen (15) days of certification of completeness, the Administrative
Officer shall review the application and approve, deny or refer it to the
Planning Board with recommendations. The Administrative Officer shall
report his or her actions to the Planning Board at its next regular meeting,
to be made part of the record.
3.3.2. Review By Planning Board.
If referred to the Planning Board, either by the Administrative Officer or by
default, the Board shall consider the application and the recommendations
a. No Action. If no action is taken by the Administrative Officer within the
fifteen (15) days, the application shall be deemed to be referred to the
Planning Board and placed on the agenda of the next regular Planning
Board meeting.
b. Denial. Denial of an application by the Administrative Officer shall not
be appealable and shall require the plan to be submitted as a Minor
Subdivision application.
3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 3.3.2
AO:397
of the Administrative Officer, if any, and shall either approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the application within sixty-five (65) days of certification
of completeness. Denial of an Administrative
Subdivision by the Planning Board shall be an appealable action.
3.4. EXPIRATION OF APPROVAL.
Approval of an Administrative Subdivision shall expire ninety (90) days from
the date of approval unless within such period a plat in conformity with such
approval is submitted for signature and recording as specified in § 8.8 of
these Regulations.
3.5. FAILURE TO ACT.
Failure of either the Administrative Officer or the Planning Board to act
within the period prescribed shall constitute approval of the Administrative
Subdivision plan and a certificate of the Administrative Officer as to the
failure of the Planning Board or Administrative Officer to act within the
required time and the resulting approval shall be issued on request of the
applicant.
3.3.2 LITTLE COMPTON CODE 3.5
AO:398
ARTICLE 4
APPLICATION PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS, MINOR
SUBDIVISIONS
4.1. SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS.
4.1.1. Required Items Checklist and Plans.
Any applicant requesting approval of a proposed Minor Subdivision, as
defined in these Regulations, shall submit to the Administrative Officer the
items and plans set forth in Appendix B, Instructions and Checklist For
Minor Subdivisions.
4.1.2. Required Design and Construction Standards.
Any proposed Minor Subdivision shall meet the design and construction
requirements as set forth in Appendix D, Subdivision Design Standards.
4.2. CERTIFICATION.
The application shall be certified as complete or incomplete by the
Administrative Officer within a twenty-five (25) day period from the date
of its submission according to the provisions of § 7.2 of these Regulations.
In the event such certification of the application is not made within the
time specified, the application shall be deemed complete for purposes of
commencing the review period.
4.3. REVIEW PROCESS.
4.3.1. Stages.
Review shall consist of two (2) stages, preliminary and final, provided, that
if a street creation or extension is involved, a public hearing is required. The
Planning Board may combine the approval stages, providing requirements
for both stages have been met by the applicant to the satisfaction of the
Planning Board.
a. Preliminary Plan. If no street creation or extension is required,
including a Family Compound Minor Subdivision, the Planning Board
shall approve, deny, or approve with conditions, the preliminary plan
within sixty-five (65) days of certification of completeness, or within
such further time as is agreed to by the applicant and the Board.
b. Public Hearing. If a street extension or creation is required, the
Planning Board shall hold a public hearing prior to approval, according
to the requirements in § 8.5 of these Regulations, and shall approve,
deny, or approve with conditions, the preliminary plan within ninety-five
(95) days of certification of completeness, or within such further time as
is agreed to by the applicant and the Board.
4.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 4.3.1
AO:399
4.3.2. Reassignment to Major Subdivision Review.
If the Planning Board is unable to make the positive findings required by §
8.6 of these Regulations or if the Planning Board determines that a waiver
or modification of these Regulations is necessary, it may, in lieu of denial,
reassign a proposed Minor Subdivision to Major Subdivision Review.
4.3.3. Failure To Act.
Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall
constitute approval of the preliminary plan and a certificate of the
Administrative Officer as to the failure of the Planning Board to act within
the required time and the resulting approval shall be issued on request of
the applicant.
4.4. EXPIRATION OF APPROVAL.
Approval of a Minor Subdivision Plan shall expire ninety (90) days from the
date of final approval unless within such period a plat or plan, in conformity
with such approval, is submitted for signature and recording as specified in
§ 8.8 of these Regulations. Validity may be extended for a longer period, for
cause shown, if requested by the applicant in writing, and approved by the
Planning Board.
c. Vesting. The approved preliminary plan shall be vested for a period of
one (1) year and vesting may be extended for a longer period, for good
cause shown, if requested in writing by the applicant, and approved by
the Planning Board. The vesting for the preliminary plan approval shall
include all general and specific conditions as shown on the approved
preliminary plan drawings and supporting material.
d. Final Plan. The Final Plan shall meet all of the requirements as set forth
in Appendix B, Instructions and Checklist for Minor Subdivisions. The
Planning Board may delegate final plan review and approval to the
Administrative Officer, who shall then report his or her actions to the
Planning Board at its next regular meeting, to be made part of the
record.
4.3.1 LITTLE COMPTON CODE 4.4
AO:400
ARTICLE 5
APPLICATION PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS, MAJOR
SUBDIVISIONS
5.1. REVIEW STAGES.
Major subdivision plan review shall be required of all applications for
subdivision approval subject to these Regulations, unless classified as an
administrative subdivision or as a minor subdivision. Major subdivision plan
review shall consist of four (4) stages of review: (1) pre-application, (2)
master plan, (3) preliminary plan and (4) final plan. The Planning Board may
vote to combine review stages and to modify and/or waive requirements.
Review stages may be combined only after the Planning Board determines
that all necessary requirements have been met by the applicant. The
Planning Board is required to hold at least one public informational meeting
at the master plan stage and one public hearing at the preliminary plan
stage.
5.2. PRE-APPLICATION.
Any applicant requesting approval of a proposed major subdivision, as
defined in these Regulations, shall first contact the Administrative Officer
and follow the procedure and criteria provided below:
5.2.1. Purpose.
One or more pre-application meetings shall be held before the Planning
Board for all major subdivision applications. Pre-application meetings shall
allow the applicant to meet with the Planning Board for advice as to the
required steps in the subdivision approval process. Where appropriate,
town officials, boards and/or commission, may be notified of the preapplication
meetings and invited to provide comments on the proposed
subdivision plan.
5.2.2. Meeting(s).
An applicant wishing to obtain subdivision approval shall first contact the
Administrative Officer to arrange a meeting with the Planning Board at
a regularly scheduled Board meeting. The applicant shall submit all the
information required by Appendix C - Checklist for Major Subdivisions. The
Administrative Officer will review and comment on the checklist information
and, if determined to be complete, will schedule the application to appear
before the Planning Board. At the pre-application meeting, the applicant
may request the Planning Board for an informal concept plan review for
a development. The purpose of the concept plan review is to provide the
applicant with Planning Board input in the formative stages of subdivision
concept design. Pre-application meetings shall aim to encourage
information sharing and discussion of project concepts among the
participants. Pre-application meeting should include a review of the
physical character of the land, and any environmental or physical
5.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 5.2.2
AO:401
constraints to development. Meetings should include a discussion initiated
by the Planning Board regarding what form of land development may be
appropriate to meet the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan with
regard to preserving the character of the land, the natural environment
and the ability of the Town to provide essential services. Pre-application
discussions are intended for the guidance of the applicant and shall not be
considered approval of a project or of any of its elements. No formal action
need be taken by the Planning Board at the pre-application meeting. At the
conclusion of the pre-application meeting(s) the applicant may proceed to
prepare and file a master plan as required in § 5.3.
5.3. MASTER PLAN.
Any applicant requesting approval of a proposed major subdivision, as
defined in these Regulations, shall first submit to the Administrative Officer
the plans and supporting materials provided in Appendix C - Checklist for
Major Subdivisions.
5.3.1. Purpose.
The purpose of the master plan is to provide the applicant with the
opportunity to present an overall plan for a proposed project site outlining
general, rather than detailed, development intentions. The master plan
describes the basic parameters of a major development proposal, rather
than giving full engineering details.
5.3.2. Required Elements.
Requirements for the master plan and supporting material for this phase of
review shall include, but not be limited to: information on the natural and
built features of the surrounding neighborhood, existing natural and manmade
conditions of the development site, including topographic features,
the freshwater wetland and coastal zone boundaries, the floodplains, as
well as the proposed design concept, proposed public improvements and
dedications, tentative construction phasing, and potential neighborhood
impacts. (See Appendix C).
5.3.3. Comments.
Initial comments shall be solicited from (a) Town boards, commissions and
departments including, but not limited to, the Conservation Commission,
the Fire and Police departments, and others deemed necessary by the
Planning Board; (b) adjacent communities; (c) state agencies, as
appropriate, including the Departments of Environmental Management and
Transportation, and the Coastal Resources Management Council; and (d)
federal agencies, as appropriate. The Administrative Officer shall
coordinate review and comments by local officials, adjacent communities,
and state and federal agencies.
5.2.2 LITTLE COMPTON CODE 5.3.4
AO:402
5.3.4. Certification of Master Plan Application.
The application shall be certified complete or incomplete by the
Administrative Officer within ninety (90) days of its receipt.
5.3.5. Planning Board Review.
The Planning Board shall review the master plan in accordance with the
following procedure:
a. Informational Meeting. A public informational meeting shall be held
prior to the Planning Board decision on the master plan if the
preliminary plan approval as provided in § 5.4 will be acted upon
separately. The public informational meeting shall be optional if the
master plan and preliminary plan approvals are being combined. In the
latter case, review stages may be combined only after the Planning
Board determines that all necessary requirements for all stages so
combined have been met by the applicant.
Public notice for the informational meeting is required and shall be
given at least seven (7) days prior to the date of the meeting in a
newspaper of general circulation within the Town. Postcard notice shall
be mailed by the applicant to all property owners within two hundred
(200) feet of the subject site.
At the public informational meeting the applicant, or his or her
representative(s), shall present the proposed development project for
the benefit of the Planning Board and the public. The Planning Board
shall allow oral and written comments from the general public. All
public comments shall be made part of the public record of the project
application.
b. Decision. The Planning Board shall, within one hundred and twenty
(120) days of certification of completeness of the master plan
application, or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant, approve the master plan as submitted, approve with changes
and/or conditions, or deny the application. The Planning Board shall
notify the Town Council of its decision.
c. Failure to Act. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period
prescribed shall constitute approval of the master plan and a certificate
of the Administrative Officer as to the failure of the Planning Board to
act within the required time and the resulting approval shall be issued
on request of the applicant.
d. Expiration of Master Plan Approval. Approval of a major subdivision
master plan shall expire one (1) year from the date of final approval.
Vesting may be extended for a period of one (1) additional year for good
cause shown, if requested by the applicant in writing and approved by
the Planning Board. The applicant, or his or her representative(s) shall
appear before the Planning Board for the annual review. Vesting may be
extended for a period beyond one (1) year, for good cause shown, if
5.3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 5.3.5
AO:403
5.4. PRELIMINARY PLAN.
Any applicant requesting approval of a proposed major subdivision, as
defined in these Regulations, shall first submit to the Administrative Officer
the plans and supporting materials provided in Appendix C - Checklist for
Major Subdivisions.
5.4.1. Certification of Preliminary Plan Application.
The application shall be certified complete or incomplete by the
Administrative Officer within sixty (60) days of its receipt.
5.4.2. Public Hearing and Notice Requirements.
Prior to a Planning Board decision on the preliminary plan, a public hearing
shall be required, in accordance with Article 8, § 8.5, for a major
subdivision, or where a street extension or creation requires a public
hearing for a minor subdivision.
5.4.3. Public Improvement Guarantees.
Proposed arrangements for completion of the required public
improvements, including construction schedule and/or financial guarantees
shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Board at the time of
preliminary plan approval.
5.4.4. Decision.
The Planning Board shall, within one hundred and twenty (120) days of
certification of completeness of the preliminary plan application, or within
such further time as may be consented to by the applicant, approve of the
preliminary plan as submitted, approve with changes and/or conditions, or
deny the application. The Planning Board shall notify the Town Council of
its decision.
5.4.5. Failure to Act.
Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall
constitute approval of the preliminary plan and a certificate of the
Administrative Officer as to the failure of the Planning Board to act within
the required time and the resulting approval shall be issued on request of
the applicant.
requested by the applicant in writing and approved by the Planning
Board. Master plan vesting shall include any applicable provisions of
the Zoning Ordinance that were in place at the time of approval,
conceptual layout and all conditions shown on the approved master
plan drawings and supporting materials. The initial two (2) year vesting
for the approved master plan shall constitute the vested rights for the
development as required in the Zoning Ordinance.
5.3.5 LITTLE COMPTON CODE 5.4.6
AO:404
5.4.6. Expiration of Preliminary Approval.
The approved preliminary plan shall be vested for a period of one (1) year
and vesting may be extended for a longer period for good cause shown, if
requested in writing by the applicant and approved by the Planning Board.
The vesting for the preliminary plan approval shall include all general and
specific conditions as shown on the approved preliminary plan drawings and
supporting material.
5.5. FINAL PLAN.
Any applicant requesting final approval of a proposed major subdivision, as
defined in these Regulations, shall first submit to the Administrative Officer
the plans and supporting materials required Appendix C - Checklist for
Major Subdivisions, in addition to any material required by the Planning
Board when the application was given preliminary approval.
5.5.1. Certification of Final Plan.
The application for final plan approval shall be certified complete or
incomplete by the Administrative Officer within forty-five (45) days of its
receipt.
5.5.2. Planning Board Review.
The Planning Board shall determine whether or not an application for final
approval meets the conditions and requirements set forth by the Planning
Board in its approval of the preliminary plan of the subject site and by other
provisions of these Regulations. The Planning Board shall, within fortyfive
(45) days after the issuance of the Certificate of Completeness of the
application for final plan approval by the Administrative Officer, or within
such further time as may be consented to by the applicant, approve or deny
the final plan as submitted.
5.5.3. Failure to Act.
Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall
constitute approval of the final plan and a certificate of the Administrative
Officer as to the failure of the Planning Board to act within the required
time and the resulting approval shall be issued on request of the applicant.
5.5.4. Expiration of Final Approval.
The final plan of a major subdivision shall expire one (l) year from the date
of approval by the Planning Board unless, within that period, the plat or
plan shall have been submitted for signature and recording as specified
in Article 8. The Planning Board may, for good cause shown, extend the
period for recording for an additional period, if requested by the applicant
in writing.
5.4.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 5.5.4
AO:405

ARTICLE 6
POWERS OF THE PLANNING BOARD
6.1. DEDICATION OF LAND FOR PUBLIC PURPOSES.
6.1.1. Open Space and Public Recreation.
Where land within a proposed subdivision is deemed to be of unique natural
character, is in a ground water recharge area or is included in the Little
Compton Comprehensive Community Plan as a part of the Town open space
system, or where the proposed subdivision is of sufficient size so as to
warrant consideration of the provision of open space to serve residents of
the subdivisions, the Board may require the reservation of up to ten (10)
percent of the land area of the subdivision for such purposes. The Board
may negotiate with the subdivider for the reservation of additional area
for these purposes. Land so reserved shall not be considered for future
subdivision or general public use. The intended use of the land so reserved
shall be so stamped on the final plat plan.
6.1.2. Requirements.
Prior to the Board requiring the dedication of any land, the following
requirements shall be met and set forth as findings by the Board in its
approval.
6.2. INSPECTIONS AND REPORTS.
Prior to the commencement of each stage of excavation or construction of
the required improvements (as set forth in Appendix D, Subdivision Design
Standards), the subdivider shall notify the Administrative Officer who shall
conduct a detailed inspection of the completed work. Upon determining
that the improvements have been completed in a satisfactory manner, the
a. Character. All required public improvements must reflect the character
defined for that neighborhood or district by the Comprehensive Plan;
b. The need for all dedications of land to the public must be clearly
documented in the adopted plans of the Town, such as the
Comprehensive Plan or the Capital Budget;
c. Documentation. No dedications of land to the public may be required
until the need for such are identified and documented by the Town, and
the land proposed for dedication is determined to be appropriate for the
proposed use; and
d. Mitigation of Negative Impacts. All dedications of land or improvements
for mitigation of identified negative impacts of proposed projects must
meet the above standards. Furthermore, the significant negative
impacts of the proposed development on the existing conditions must
be clearly documented. The mitigation required as a condition of
approval must be related to the significance of the identified impact.
6.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 6.2
AO:407
Administrative Officer shall prepare a final written report, sealed with
his stamp, and shall transmit said report to the Board who shall initiate
appropriate action to release the surety.
6.3. PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES.
The subdivider may elect to complete all required infrastructure
improvements prior to Final Plan Approval, provided that the inspections
required by § 6.2 are conducted and the proper reports signed and filed. If
the subdivider elects not to complete such improvements prior to Final Plan
Approval, then, as a condition of such Final Plan Approval, the Board shall
require performance guarantees as set forth below:
6.3.1. Performance Bond With Surety.
As a condition precedent to the endorsement of approval of the final plan,
the subdivider shall file a certified check, bank book, or corporate surety in
an amount determined by the Plan Board to be sufficient to cover the cost
of all required improvements. In the cases of subdivisions which are being
approved and constructed in phases, the Board shall specify improvement
guarantee requirements related to each particular phase. Any performance
bond will be approved as to form and surety by the Board. The release of
said check, bank book, corporate surety, or land performance bond shall be
conditioned on the faithful completion of all required improvements within
the two (2) year period and the payment of all invoices issued by the Board
to cover the cost of the subdivision inspections.
6.3.2. Extension of Time.
If, due to circumstances beyond the control of the subdivider, the required
improvements are not completed within the prescribed two (2) calendar
year period, the Board may grant a time extension no more than six (6)
months. During such time extension, the guarantees shall remain in full
force. The Board may require the extension, the guarantees shall remain in
full force. The Board may require the extension of coverage of the surety
for a period of up to one (1) year after completion of improvements to
assure the proper performance of the improvements under all conditions of
weather and use.
6.3.3. Default.
The Planning Board shall hold the subdivider and surety in default of
guarantee should one or more of the following occur:
a. Failure to meet all specifications for construction of required
improvements to the land;
b. Failure to properly notify the Administrative Officer of the beginning
and completion of all phases of construction of required improvements
to the land;
6.2 LITTLE COMPTON CODE 6.3.3
AO:408
6.4. MAINTENANCE GUARANTEES.
The Board may also require maintenance guarantees to be provided for a
one (1) year period subsequent to completion, inspection and acceptance
of the improvement(s), unless there are extenuating circumstances that
require a longer period, such as a seasonal delay in planting or paving. The
procedures for setting, maintaining and releasing such guarantees shall be
the same as for Performance Guarantees.
6.5. ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS.
In accordance with R.I.G.L. 45-23-60(3), the Planning Board may require
that an environmental impact statement be prepared by the applicant of any
subdivision. However such Statement may not be required to be completed
prior to the Preliminary Plan review stage.
6.6. ACCEPTANCE OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
Approval of a plat by the Plan Board shall be deemed the acceptance by
the public of any street or other open space offered therein for dedication.
Notwithstanding the acceptance of any land, street, facility offered for
dedication, such acceptance shall not impose any duty or responsibility
upon the Town of Little Compton to maintain or improve any dedicated
streets, areas, or facilities until the Town Council shall have specifically
authorized maintenance or improvement under procedures established by
State Law, Town Ordinance, or other local provisions governing public
expenditures for such purposes. The above shall be stated on all approved
final plat plans.
6.7. WAIVERS AND MODIFICATIONS.
Pursuant to the procedures set forth in Article 8 of these Regulations, the
Board shall have the power to grant such waivers and/or modifications from
the requirements for subdivision approval as may be reasonable and within
the general purposes and intents of the provisions for these Regulations.
c. Failure to protect existing improvements and/or properly repair such
improvements should damage occur during construction of the
subdivision;
d. Failure to clean debris from the site and adjacent areas upon
completion of construction within the subdivision; or
e. Failure to complete required improvements to the land within the time
prescribed or within any extension granted by the Board.
Upon notification of default by the Administrative Officer, the Board shall take
appropriate action against that portion of the surety of the performance bond
necessary to correct the deficiencies for which the subdivider is deemed to
be in default and shall cause the required improvements to be completed in a
satisfactory manner.
6.3.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 6.7
AO:409
The only grounds for such waivers and/or modifications shall be where
the literal enforcement of one or more provisions of the Regulations is
impracticable and will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions
pertaining to the land in question or where such waiver and/or modification
is in the best interest of good planning practice and/or design as evidenced
by consistency with the Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Ordinance.
6.7 LITTLE COMPTON CODE 6.7
AO:410
ARTICLE 7
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF REGULATIONS
7.1. ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER.
Local administration of these Regulations shall be under the direction of the
Administrative Officer, who shall report to the Board.
7.1.1. Appointment and Qualifications.
The Administrative Officer shall be elected annually by the Planning Board
from its membership at the organized meeting of the Board each February.
The Administrative Officer may, but need not, hold other office of the
Board, including Chair or Secretary of the Board. The Administrative Officer
shall have at least one of the following qualifications: (a) be a licensed
engineer, (b) have a bachelor's or master's degree in planning, (c) be a
licensed attorney, or (d) have been a member of the Board for at least two
years. The Administrative Officer shall be required to attend any training
for administrative officers provided by or sponsored by the Rhode Island
Department of Administration, Division of Planning.
7.1.2. Acting Administrative Officer.
If the Administrative Officer is temporarily unable to perform his or her
duties, the Chair of the Board may appoint an Acting Administrative Officer
for up to thirty (30) days at a time, provided that such appointment shall
be in writing and a copy thereof delivered to the Town Clerk and posted
in Town Hall. In the event that the Administrative Officer is permanently
unable to perform his or her functions, then the Board shall select a new
Administrative Officer to serve for the remainder of the term.
7.1.3. Coordination of Reviews.
The Administrative Officer shall be responsible for coordinating reviews
of proposed land development projects and subdivisions with adjacent
municipalities as is necessary to be consistent with applicable federal, state
and local laws and as directed by the Board.
7.1.4. Enforcement.
Enforcement of these Regulations shall be under the direction of the
Administrative Officer. The officer shall be responsible for coordinating the
enforcement efforts of the Zoning Enforcement Officer, the Building Official,
and other local officials responsible for the enforcement or carrying out of
discrete elements of the regulations.
7.1.5. Technical Assistance.
With the approval of the Board, and within the funds allotted to the Board,
the Administrative Officer may hire such professional technical assistance
as is necessary to carry out the duties of his or her office. Such technical
7.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 7.1.5
AO:411
assistance may include, but is not limited to, the hiring of an engineer, land
surveyor, biologist or hydrologist.
7.2. CERTIFICATION AND TIME PERIODS.
7.2.1. Classification.
The Administrative Officer shall advise the applicant as to which approvals
are required and the appropriate board for hearing an application for a land
development or subdivision project.
7.2.2. Certification of Complete Application.
An application shall be complete for purposes of commencing the applicable
time period for action when so certified by the Administrative Officer. In
the event such certification of the application is not made within the time
specified in this chapter for the type of plan, the application shall be
deemed complete for purposes of commencing the review period unless
the application lacks information required for such applications as specified
in the local regulations and the Administrative Officer has notified the
applicant, in writing, of the deficiencies in the application.
7.2.3. Correction of Information.
Notwithstanding Subsection 7.2.2 above, the Board may subsequently
require correction of any information found to be in error and submission
of additional information specified in the regulations but not required by
the Administrative Officer prior to certification, as it necessary to make an
informed decision.
7.2.4. Postponement.
Where the review is postponed with the consent of the applicant, pending
further information or revision of information, the time period for review
shall be stayed and shall resume when the Board determines that the
required application information is complete.
7.3. PRE-APPLICATION MEETINGS AND CONCEPT REVIEW.
One or more pre-application meetings shall be held for all major subdivision
applications. Pre-application meetings may be held for administrative and
minor applications, upon request of either the Town or the applicant.
7.3.1. Purpose.
Pre-application meetings shall allow the applicant to meet with appropriate
officials, boards and/or commissions, staff, and, where appropriate, state
agencies, for advice as to the required steps in the approvals process, the
pertinent local plans, ordinances, regulations, rules and procedures and
standards which may bear upon the proposed development project.
7.1.5 LITTLE COMPTON CODE 7.3.2
AO:412
7.3.2. Informal Concept Plan Review.
At the pre-application stage the applicant may request the Board or the
technical review committee for an informal concept plan review for a
development. The purpose of the concept plan review is also to provide
Board Committee input in the formative stages of major subdivision concept
design.
7.3.3. Advance Materials Submission.
Applicants seeking a pre-application meeting or an informal concept review
shall submit materials in advance of the meeting (s) as requested by
municipal officials.
7.3.4. Non-Binding.
Pre-application meetings shall aim to encourage information sharing and
discussion of project concepts among the participants. Pre-application
discussions are intended for the guidance of the applicant and shall not be
considered approval of a project or its elements.
7.4. TECHNICAL REVIEW COMMITTEE.
There shall not be a Technical Review Committee. All reviews under these
Regulations shall be conducted either by the Administrative Office or the
Board, as set forth herein.
7.5. ADMINISTRATIVE FEES.
The following fees shall be paid by applicant for the following reviews:
7.5.1. Application Fees.
The applicant shall be required to pay a fee at the time of application,
for all subdivisions and development projects, to cover the cost of mailing,
advertising and recording of meetings. Such fees shall be reviewed annually
by the Board and revised as appropriate. The fees are as follows:
7.5.2. Inspection Fees.
The applicant will also be required to reimburse the Planning Board for the
cost of review and inspection by any engineer(s) retained by the Planning
Board for such purpose. Such cost shall be estimated by the engineer at
each stage of review, and shall be paid in advance to the Board by the
(1) Pre-application Meeting (any subdivision): $ 0.
(2) Subdivision Application: $ 50 or $10 per lot, whichever is higher.
(3) Extension of Time Request: $ 100.
(4) Reinstatement of Application: $ 200.
7.3.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 7.5.2
AO:413
applicant in order for that stage of application to be certified complete.
Such estimate shall not be exceeded without the consent of the Board,
which shall first notify the applicant and extend an opportunity to object.
The total fee shall be paid by the applicant before proceeding to the next
stage of approval.
7.5.3. Other Fees.
As set forth herein, the Board shall have the power to require various
information and studies from an applicant, provided that the proper findings
of fact have been made. Such items include, but are not limited to: an
environmental impact study, a market analysis, a traffic study, a soils
analysis or a drainage study. Any such item, whether conducted by the
applicant or by the Board, shall be paid for by the applicant, provided
that the Board shall first notify the applicant and extend an opportunity to
object. The total fee shall be paid by the applicant before proceeding to the
next stage of approval.
7.6. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
7.6.1. Violations.
The failure to comply with these Regulations or any of the terms or
conditions of an approval (whether Master Plan, Preliminary or Final)
issued by the Board, shall be a violation of these Regulations. The violation
of any terms or conditions of any action imposed by the Board or of any
other agency charged in these Regulations with enforcement of any of the
provisions shall also be a violation of these Regulations. Violation of the
regulations shall also include any action related to the transfer or sale of
land in unapproved subdivisions. Any owner, or agent of the owner, who
transfers, sells or negotiates to sell any land by reference to or exhibition of,
or by other use, a plat of the subdivision before the plat has been approved
by the Board and recorded in the municipal land evidence records, shall be
in violation of the local regulations and subject to the penalties described
below.
7.6.2. Penalties - Fine.
The Administrative Officer shall be empowered to levy a fine for any
violation as defined herein. The Administrative Officer shall ordinarily issue
a notice of violation and order the violator to correct the violation within
a reasonable time, with such time to be indicated on the notice. However,
in cases of willful violation or danger to public health, safety or welfare,
the Administrative Officer may levy a fine immediately. The penalty for
violation shall reasonably relate to the seriousness of the offense, and shall
not exceed five hundred dollars ($500) for each violation, and each day of
existence of any violation shall be deemed to be a separate offense. Any
such fine shall inure to the municipality. Any fine may be appealed to the
appropriate division of the Rhode Island District Court.
7.5.2 LITTLE COMPTON CODE 7.6.3
AO:414
7.6.3. Penalties - Injunction.
The Town, through its solicitor, may also cause suit to be brought in the
Supreme Court or Superior Court, in the name of the municipality, to
restrain the violation of, or to compel compliance with, the provisions
of these Regulations. The Town may consolidate an action for injunctive
relief and/or fines under these Regulations or other local ordinance in the
Superior Court for Newport County.
7.6.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 7.6.3
AO:415

ARTICLE 8
PROCEDURES OF THE PLANNING BOARD
8.1. COMPOSITION OF BOARD.
8.1.1. Appointment and Removal.
The Board shall be made up of nine (9) members appointed by the Town
Council, with the qualification and for the terms as set forth in § 701 of
the Little Compton Home Rule Charter. Any member of the Board may be
removed from office by the Town Council for due cause, following a public
hearing.
8.1.2. Organization.
The Board shall organize annually in February by electing from its
membership a chairman, a vice chairman, a secretary, and an
Administrative Officer who may also hold other office of the Board. The
Board may adopt any procedural rules deemed necessary to the discharge
of its duties.
8.1.3. Cooperative Agreements and Technical Assistance.
The Board may, subject to the limit of funds appropriated to it, enter into
cooperative agreements with any other city or town, state, regional, or
federal agencies or private organizations to undertake studies deemed to
be in the best interest of the locality, including cooperative agreements
with cities or towns in neighboring states where problems of common
interest are deemed to exist. The Board may accept or engage technical
or clerical assistance, including assistance from other public agencies or
private organizations, subject to the limit of funds appropriated to it.
8.2. PUBLICATION AND AVAILABILITY OF REGULATIONS.
[Amended 9-5-2019]
Printed copies of these Regulations shall be available to the general public
and shall be revised to include all amendments. Any appendices shall also
be available. A reasonable charge may be made for copies. Upon publication
of these Regulations and any amendments thereto, the Town shall send a
copy to the State Law Library.
8.3. RECORDS OF THE BOARD.
8.3.1. Public Availability.
All records of the Board proceedings and decisions shall be written and
kept permanently available for public review. Completed applications for
proposed subdivision projects under review by the Board, shall be available
for public review.
8.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 8.3.2
AO:417
8.3.2. Contents.
All final written comments to the Board from the Administrative Officer,
municipal departments, the technical review committee, state and federal
agencies, and local commissions shall be part of the permanent record of
the development application.
8.4. MEETINGS AND VOTES.
8.4.1. Qualified Immunity.
Participation in a Board meeting or other proceedings by any party shall
not be a cause for civil action or liability except for acts not in good faith,
intentional misconduct, knowing violation of law, transactions where there
is an improper personal benefit, or malicious, wanton, or willful misconduct.
8.4.2. Votes.
All votes of the Board shall be made part of the permanent record and
shall show the members present and their votes. A decision by the Board
to approve any land development or subdivision application shall require a
vote for approval by a majority of the current Board membership, regardless
of the size of the quorum. The decision shall be accompanied by appropriate
findings as required in § 8.6, unless such decision has been granted by
default, pursuant to failure of the Board to act within the time limits
provided herein.
8.5. PUBLIC HEARINGS AND PUBLIC INFORMATION MEETINGS.
8.5.1. Public Information Meeting.
For a major subdivision, a public informational meeting shall be held prior
to the Board decision on the master plan, unless the master plan and
preliminary plan approvals are being combined, in which case the public
informational meeting shall be optional (i.e. may be combined with the
public hearing), based upon Board determination.
a. Purpose. The purpose of an informational meeting is both to inform the
neighboring property owners and other interested parties as to the
nature of the proposed subdivision; and to inform the Board of issues of
concern to such parties, of which the Board may not be aware.
b. Notice. Public notice for the informational meeting is required and shall
be given at least seven (7) days prior to the date of the meeting in a
newspaper of general circulation within the Town. Postcard notice shall
be mailed to the applicant and to all property owners within a radius of
two hundred feet (200') of both the subject property and any adjacent
property owned in whole or in part by the applicant.
c. Part of the Record. At the public informational meeting the applicant
shall present the proposed development project. The Board shall allow
8.3.2 LITTLE COMPTON CODE 8.5.1
AO:418
8.5.2. Public Hearing.
A public hearing shall be required for a major subdivision or where a street
extension or creation requires a public hearing for a minor subdivision.
oral and written comments from the general public. All public
comments shall be made part of the public record of the project
application.
a. Notice Requirements. Public notice of the hearing shall be given at
least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing in a newspaper
of general circulation within the Town following the Town's usual and
customary practices for such advertising. Notice shall be sent to the
applicant and to each owner within the notice area, by certified mail,
return receipt requested, of the time and place of the hearing not less
than ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. Such notice shall
also include the street address of the subject property, or if no street
address is available, the distance from the nearest existing intersection
in tenths (1/10) of a mile.
b. Notice Area. Notice shall be given to the applicant and to all property
owners within a radius of two hundred feet (200') of both the subject
property and any adjacent property owned in whole or in part by the
applicant.
c. Watersheds. Notice of the public hearing, which may be a copy of the
newspaper notice, shall also be sent, at least two (2) weeks prior to the
hearing, by first class mail to:
1. The city or town Planning Board of any municipality where there is
a public or quasi-public water source, or private water source that
is used or is suitable for use as a public water source, located
within two thousand feet (2,000') of the Town's boundaries.
2. The governing body of any state or municipal water department or
agency, special water district, or private water company that has
riparian rights to a surface water resource and/or surface
watershed that is used or is suitable for use as a public water
source located within either the municipality or two thousand feet
(2,000') of the municipal boundaries, provided, however, that a map
survey has been filed with the building inspector as specified in
R.I.G.L. § 45-24-53(E).
d. Adjacent Municipalities. Notice of the public hearing shall be sent by
the Administrative Officer to the administrative officer of an adjacent
town if (1) the notice area extends into the adjacent town, or (2) the
development site extends into the adjacent town, or (3) the
Administrative Officer determines that there is a potential for
significant negative impact on the adjacent town.
e. Notice Cost. The cost of all such notice shall be borne by the applicant.
8.5.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 8.6
AO:419
8.6. REQUIRED FINDINGS.
For all subdivision applications, the approving authority, whether
Administrative Officer or Board, shall address each of the general purposes
stated in R.I.G.L. § 45-23-30, and shall make positive findings on the
following standard provisions, as part of the proposed project's record prior
to approval:
8.6.1. Consistency.
The proposed development is consistent with the Comprehensive
Community Plan and/or has satisfactorily addressed the issues where there
may be inconsistencies;
8.6.2. Compliance with Zoning Ordinance.
The proposed development is in compliance with the standards and
provisions of the Town's Zoning Ordinance;
8.6.3. Environmental Impact.
There will be no significant negative environmental impacts from the
proposed development as shown on the final plan, with all required
conditions for approval;
8.6.4. Buildable Lot.
Subdivision, as proposed will not result in the creation of individual lots
with such physical constraints to development that building on those lots
according to pertinent regulations and building standards would be
impracticable. (See definition of Buildable lot). Lots with such physical
constraints to development may be created only if identified as permanent
open space or permanently reserved for a public purpose on the approved,
recorded plans; and
8.6.5. Street Access.
All proposed land developments and all subdivision lots shall have adequate
and permanent physical access to a public street. Lot frontage on a public
street without physical access shall not be considered compliance with this
requirement.
8.7. WAIVERS, MODIFICATIONS AND REINSTATEMENTS.
8.7.1. Waiver and/or Modification of Requirements.
The Board shall have the power to grant such waivers and/or modifications
from the requirements for land development and subdivision approval as
may be reasonable and within the general purposes and intents of the
provisions for local regulations. The only grounds for such waivers and/
or modifications shall be where the literal enforcement of one (1) or more
8.6 LITTLE COMPTON CODE 8.7.1
AO:420
provisions of the regulations is impracticable and will exact undue hardship
because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question or where
such waiver and/or modification is in the best interest of good planning
practice and/or design as evidenced by consistency with the Town's
Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Ordinance.
8.7.2. Reinstatement.
When an applicant has exceeded a deadline set in these Regulations or in a
prior approval granted to the applicant, and the development application or
approval is therefore rendered invalid, the application may be reinstated by
the Planning Board if it meets all the following conditions:
8.7.3. Decision.
The Board shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the request for
either a waiver or modification according to the requirements of § 8.4. No
waiver or modification may be granted without first being heard as part of
a Public Hearing as set forth in § 8.5 herein.
8.8. SIGNING AND RECORDING OF PLATS AND PLANS.
8.8.1. Signing. [Ord. No. 3/7/17]
All approved final plans and plats for land development and subdivision
projects shall be signed by the Chairperson of the Planning Board.
8.8.2. Recording. [Ord. 3/7/17]
Upon signature, all plans and plats shall be submitted to the Administrative
Officer and the Chairperson prior to recording and filing in the appropriate
a. The subdivision is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, and the
Comprehensive Plan has not changed substantially since the original
application as it would apply to this subdivision.
b. The Subdivision Regulations, the Zoning Ordinance, and all applicable
state and federal regulations are substantially the same as they were at
the time of original application, as they would apply to this subdivision.
c. The Zoning Map designation for the subdivision has not changed
substantially since the time of original application.
d. There has been no substantial change to the physical conditions of the
subdivision or the neighboring property since the time of original
application.
The request for reinstatement shall be in writing, and the Board shall make
written findings of fact in approving or denying such request. It reinstated, the
applicant shall proceed from the stage previous to where expiration occurred.
For example, if preliminary approval had been granted and then expired, then
the applicant shall reapply for preliminary approval.
8.7.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 8.8.2
AO:421
municipal departments. The material to be recorded for all plans and plats
shall include all pertinent plans with notes thereon concerning all the
essential aspects of the approved project design, the implementation
schedule, special conditions placed on the development by the Town,
permits and agreements with state and federal reviewing agencies, and
other information as required by the Board.
8.8.3. Permanent Records.
Other parts of the applications record for subdivisions and land
development projects, including all meeting records, approved master plan
and preliminary plans, site analyses, impact analyses, all legal agreements,
records of the public hearing and the entire final approval set of drawings
shall be kept permanently by the municipal departments responsible for
implementation and enforcement.
8.8.4. Emergency Services Notification.
The Town Clerk shall forward a copy of the Plat to the Fire Chief who shall
number the lots and notify the statewide "911" emergency authority and the
Police Department.
8.9. CHANGES TO RECORDED PLATS AND PLANS.
8.9.1. Amendment Required For All Changes.
For all changes to the approved plans of land development projects or
subdivisions subject to this act, an amendment of the final development
plans is required prior to the issuance of any building permits. Any changes
approved in the final plan shall be recorded as amendments to the final
plan in accordance with the procedure established for recording of plats in
§ 8.8.2.
8.9.2. Minor Changes.
Minor changes, as defined in § 8.9.4 below, to a subdivision plan may
be approved administratively, by the Administrative Officer, whereupon a
permit may be issued. Such changes may be authorized without additional
public hearings, at the discretion of the Administrative Officer. All such
changes shall be made part of the permanent record of the project
application. This provision shall not prohibit the Administrative Officer
from requesting a recommendation from the Board. Denial of the proposed
change(s) shall be referred to the Board for review as a major change.
8.9.3. Major Changes.
Major changes, which are hereby defined as any changes other than minor
changes as defined in § 8.9.4 below, to a subdivision plan may be approved,
only by the Board and must follow the same review and public hearing
process required for approval of preliminary plans.
8.8.2 LITTLE COMPTON CODE 8.9.4
AO:422
8.9.4. Definition of Minor Changes.
Minor changes are hereby defined as any change which does not
substantially impact the proposed subdivision or any of the neighboring
properties, and which meets all of the following criteria:
8.10. PRECEDENCE OF APPROVALS WITH OTHER LOCAL
PERMITTING AUTHORITIES.
8.10.1. Zoning Board.
8.10.2. Town Council.
Where an applicant requires both Planning Board approval and Town
Council approval for a zoning ordinance or zoning map change, the
applicant shall first obtain an advisory recommendation on the zoning
change from the Planning Board, as well as conditional Planning Board
approval for the first approval stage for the proposed project, which may
be simultaneous, then obtain a conditional zoning change from the Town
Council, and then return to the Planning Board for subsequent required
approval(s).
8.11. APPEAL OF PLANNING BOARD ACTION.
8.11.1. The Board of Appeal.
As authorized by the Zoning Ordinance and pursuant to state law, the
Zoning Board shall be the Board of Appeal to hear appeals of decisions of
a. There is no increase in the number of lots or dwelling units.
b. There is no change to any dimension of the plan, including building
envelopes, exceeding twenty percent (20%).
c. There is no change to the type of street or driveway.
a. Variance. Where an applicant requires both a variance from the zoning
ordinance and Planning Board approval, the applicant shall first obtain
an advisory recommendation from the Planning Board, as well as
conditional Planning Board approval for the first approval stage for the
proposed project, which may be simultaneous, then obtain conditional
Zoning Board relief, and then return to the Planning Board for
subsequent required approval(s).
b. Special Use Permit. Where an applicant requires both a special use
permit under the local zoning ordinance and Planning Board approval,
the applicant shall first obtain an advisory recommendation from the
Planning Board, as well as conditional Planning Board approval for the
first approval stage for the proposed project, which may be
simultaneous, then obtain a conditional special use permit from the
Zoning Board, and then return to the Planning Board for subsequent
required approval(s).
8.9.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 8.11.1
AO:423
the Planning Board or the Administrative Officer on matters of review and
approval of subdivision projects.
8.11.2. Right of Appeal.
An appeal from any decision of the Board, or Administrative Officer charged
in the regulations with enforcement of any provisions, except as provided
herein, may be taken to the Board of Appeal by an aggrieved party.
8.11.3. Process of Appeal.
8.11.4. Stay of Proceedings.
An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action being
appealed.
8.11.5. Public Hearing.
a. Time Period and Standing. An appeal to the Board of Appeal from a
decision or action of the Board or Administrative Officer may be taken
by an aggrieved party. Such appeal must be taken within twenty (20)
days after the decision has been recorded and posted in the office of the
Town Clerk.
b. Form and Content of Appeal. The appeal shall be in writing and shall
state clearly and unambiguously the issue or decision which is being
appealed, the reason for the appeal, and the relief sought. The appeal
shall either be sent by certified mail, with a return receipt requested, or
shall be hand-delivered to the Board of Appeal. The Town Clerk shall
accept delivery of an appeal on behalf of the Board of Appeal. Two
copies of the appeal shall be filed, and the Town Clerk shall immediately
transmit one copy to the Zoning Enforcement Officer and the other copy
to the Administrative Officer.
c. Transmittal of Record. Upon receipt of an appeal, the Board of Appeal
shall require the Planning Board or Administrative Officer to transmit
forthwith to the Board of Appeal, all papers, documents and plans, or a
certified copy thereof, constituting the record of the action which is
being appealed.
a. Time Limits and Notice. The Board of Appeal shall hold a public hearing
on the appeal within forty-five (45) days of the receipt of the appeal,
give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties of
interest. At the hearing any party may appear in person, or may be
represented by an agent or attorney. The Board of Appeal shall render a
decision within ten (10) days of the close of the public hearing.
b. Cost. The cost of any notice required for the hearing shall be borne by
the appellant.
c. Special Meeting Required. The Board of Appeal shall only hear appeals
of the actions of the Planning Board or Administrative Officer at a
8.11.1 LITTLE COMPTON CODE 8.11.5
AO:424
8.11.6. Standards of Review.
8.11.7. Remand to Board.
In the instance where the Board of Appeal overturns a decision of the
Planning Board or Administrative Officer, the proposed project application
shall be remanded to the Planning Board or Administrative Officer, at
the stage of processing from which the appeal was taken, for further
proceedings before the Planning Board or Administrative Officer and/or for
the final disposition, which shall be consistent with the Board of Appeal's
decision.
8.12. APPEAL OF BOARD OF APPEALS TO SUPERIOR COURT.
An appeal from a decision of the Board of Appeal may be taken by an
aggrieved party to the Superior Court for Newport County.
8.12.1. Procedure For Appeal.
An aggrieved party may appeal a decision of the Board of Appeal, to the
Newport County Superior Court, by filing a complaint setting forth the
reasons of appeal within twenty (20) days after the decision has been
recorded and posted in the office of the city or town clerk. The Board of
Appeal shall file the original documents acted upon by it and constituting
the record of the case appealed from, or certified copies thereof, together
meeting called especially for the purpose of hearing such appeals and
which has been so advertised. The hearing, which may be held on the
same date and at the same place as a meeting of the Zoning Board of
Review, must be held as a separate meeting from any Zoning Board of
Review meeting. Separate minutes and records of votes as required by
§ 8.11.6 shall be maintained by the Board of Appeal.
a. Upon Findings and Record. In instances of a Board of Appeal's review of
a Planning Board or Administrative Officer's decision on matters
subject to this chapter, the Board of Appeal shall not substitute its own
judgment for that of the Planning Board or the Administrative Officer
but must consider the issue upon the findings and record of the
Planning Board or Administrative Officer. The Board of Appeal shall not
reverse a decision of the Planning Board or Administrative Officer
except on a finding of prejudicial procedural error, clear error, or lack of
support by the weight of the evidence in the record.
b. Required Vote. The concurring vote of three (3) of the five (5) members
of the Board of Appeal sitting at a hearing, shall be necessary to reverse
any decision of the Planning Board or Administrative Officer.
c. Required Records. The Board of Appeal shall keep complete records of
all proceedings including a record of all votes taken, and shall put all
decisions on appeals in writing. The Board of Appeal shall include in the
written record the reasons for each decision.
8.11.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 8.12.1
AO:425
with such other facts as may be pertinent, with the clerk of the court
within thirty (30) days after being served with a copy of the complaint.
When the complaint is filed by someone other than the original applicant
or appellant, such original applicant or appellant and the members of the
Board of Appeal shall be made parties to the proceedings. The appeal shall
not stay proceedings upon the decision appealed from, but the court may, in
its discretion, grant a stay on appropriate terms and make such other orders
as it deems necessary for an equitable disposition of the appeal.
8.12.2. Evidence Before the Court.
The review shall be conducted by the Superior Court without a jury. The
court shall consider the record of the hearing before the Board and, if
it shall appear to the court that additional evidence is necessary for the
proper disposition of the matter, it may allow any party to such appeal to
present such evidence in open court, which evidence, along with the report,
shall constitute the record upon which the determination of the court shall
be made.
8.12.3. Standard of Review.
The court shall not substitute its judgment for that of the Board as to
the weight of the evidence on questions of fact. The court may affirm the
decision of the Board of Appeal or remand the case for further proceedings,
or may reverse or modify the decision if substantial rights of the appellant
have been prejudiced because of findings, inferences, conclusions or
decisions which are:
a. In violation of constitutional, statutory, ordinance or Board regulations
provisions;
b. In excess of the authority granted to the Planning Board by statute or
ordinance;
c. Made upon unlawful procedure;
d. Affected by other error of law;
e. Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable, probative, and substantial
evidence of the whole record; or
f. Arbitrary or capricious or characterized by abuse of discretion or
clearly unwarranted exercise of discretion.
8.12.1 LITTLE COMPTON CODE 8.12.3
AO:426
ARTICLE 9
ADOPTION, AMENDMENT AND APPEAL OF REGULATIONS
9.1. AUTHORITY TO ADOPT.
The Planning Board is empowered by Ordinance 12/21/95 of the Town of
Little Compton, adopted December 21, 1995, to adopt, modify and amend
these regulations and rules governing land development and subdivision
projects within Little Compton and to control land development and
subdivision projects pursuant to these regulations and rules.
9.2. PROCEDURE FOR ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT.
The Planning Board shall consider any amendments to these Regulations.
Provisions of these Regulations and appendices shall be set forth in text
and may incorporate maps, and other technical and graphic material. These
Regulations, and all the amendments thereto, shall be consistent with all
provisions of the Rhode Island Development Review Act of 1992 (Chapter
23 of Title 45 of the General Laws of Rhode Island, as amended) as well as
the Little Compton Comprehensive Plan and the Zoning Ordinance.
9.2.1. Receiving Officer.
Other than for proposals originated by the Planning Board, the
Administrative Officer shall be the officer to receive a proposal for
amendment to these Regulations. Upon receipt of such proposal, the
Administrative Officer shall refer such proposal to the Planning Board for
study.
9.2.2. Referral to Town Council.
In addition to the notice and hearing requirements set forth in § 9.3, no
local regulations shall be adopted, repealed, or amended until after such
proposal has been referred to the Town Council. The Town Council shall
report to the Planning Board within forty-five (45) days after receipt of the
proposal, giving its findings and recommendations, which shall be advisory
to the Planning Board.
9.3. PUBLIC HEARING AND NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
9.3.1. Public Hearing.
No local regulations shall be adopted, repealed, or amended until after a
public hearing has been held upon the question before the Planning Board.
At this hearing opportunity shall be given to all person interested to be
heard upon the matter of the proposed regulations. The proposal may be
altered or amended prior to the close of the public hearing without further
advertising, as a result of further study or because of the views expressed
at the public hearing. However, any such alteration or amendment must be
presented for comment in the course of said hearing.
9.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 9.3.2
AO:427
9.3.2. Newspaper Notice.
The Planning Board shall first give notice of the public hearing by
publication of notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the Town
at least once each week for three (3) successive weeks prior to the date of
the hearing, which may include the week in which the hearing is to be held,
but shall not include the day of the hearing. The newspaper notice shall be
published as a display advertisement, using a type size at least as large as
the normal type size used by the newspaper in its news articles.
9.3.3. Notice Contents.
All notices, whether newspaper, posted, or mailed, shall:
9.3.4. Mail Notice.
Notice of the public hearing, which may be a copy of the newspaper notice,
shall also be sent, at least two (2) weeks prior to the hearing, by first class
mail to:27
a. Specify the place of said hearing and the date and time of its
commencement;
b. Indicate that adoption, amendment or repeal of local regulations is
under consideration;
c. Contain a statement of the proposed amendments to the regulations
that may be printed once in its entirety, or may summarize or describe
the matter under consideration;
d. Advise those interested where and when a copy of the matter under
consideration may be obtained or examined and copied; and
e. State that the proposals shown thereon may be altered or amended
prior to the close of the public hearing without further advertising, as a
result of further study or because of the views expressed at the public
hearing. Any such alteration or amendment must be presented for
comment in the course of said hearing.
a. The city or town Planning Board of any municipality where there is a
public or quasi-public water source, or private water source that is used
or is suitable for use as a public water source, located within two
thousand feet (2,000') of the Town's boundaries.
b. The governing body of any state or municipal water department or
agency, special water district, or private water company that has
riparian rights to a surface water resource and/or surface watershed
that is used or is suitable for use as a public water source located within
27.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, naming the Associate Director of the Division of
Planning of the Rhode Island Department of Administration as a recipient of the notice,
was repealed 9-5-2019. Former Subsections b and c were redesignated as Subsections a
and b.
9.3.2 LITTLE COMPTON CODE 9.3.4
AO:428
9.3.5. Defects.
No defect in the form of any notice under this section shall render any
regulations invalid, unless such defect is found to be intentional or
misleading.
9.4. APPEALS TO SUPERIOR COURT.
9.4.1. Time Period, Standing and Stay.
An appeal of an enactment of or an amendment to these Regulations may be
taken to the Superior Court for Newport County by filing a complaint, as set
forth herein, within thirty (30) days after such enactment, or amendment
has become effective. The appeal may be taken by any legal resident or
landowner of the Town or by any association of residents or landowners of
the Town. The appeal shall not stay the enforcement of these Regulations,
as enacted or amended, but the court may, in its discretion, grant a stay
on appropriate terms, which may include the filing of a bond, and make
such other orders as it deems necessary for an equitable disposition of
the appeal. Pursuant to R.I.G.L. 45-23-73, the court shall, at the request
of either party, advance the case, so that the matter shall be afforded
precedence on the calendar and shall thereupon be heard and determined
with as little delay as possible.
9.4.2. Grounds for Appeal.
The complaint shall set forth with specificity the area in which the
enactment or amendment is not consistent with the Comprehensive
Planning Act, R.I.G.L. 45-22.2-1 et seq.; the Zoning Enabling Act of 1991,
R.I.G.L. 45-24-27 et seq., the Little Compton Comprehensive Plan; or the
Little Compton Zoning Ordinance.
9.4.3. Review by Court.
The review shall be conducted by the court without a jury. The court shall
consider whether the enactment or amendment of the local regulations
is consistent with the Comprehensive Planning Act, the Zoning Enabling
Act of 1991, the Comprehensive Plan, or the Zoning Ordinance. If the
enactment or amendment is not consistent, then the court shall invalidate
the enactment or the amendment, or those parts of such enactment or
amendment which are not consistent. The court shall not revise the local
regulations to be consistent, but may suggest appropriate language as part
of the court decision.
either the municipality or two thousand feet (2,000') of the municipal
boundaries, provided, however, that a map survey has been filed with
the building inspector as specified in R.I.G.L. § 45-24-53(E).
9.3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 9.4.4
AO:429
9.4.4. Attorneys Fees.
The court may in its discretion, upon motion of the parties or on its own
motion, award reasonable attorney's fees to any party to an appeal, as set
forth herein, including a municipality.
9.5. SEVERABILITY.
If any provision of these Regulations or of any rule, decision or
determination made thereunder, or the application thereof to any person,
agency or circumstances, is held invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of the Regulation, rule, decision, or
determination and the application of such provisions to other persons,
agencies, or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. The invalidity of
any section or sections of these Regulations shall not affect the validity of
the remainder of these Regulations.
9.6. EFFECTIVE DATE.
These Regulations shall be effective upon passage, as of December 27,
1995.
9.4.4 LITTLE COMPTON CODE 9.6
AO:430
ARTICLE 10
DEFINITIONS
The following words and terms are hereby defined relative to their use in
these Regulations:
10.1 Administrative Officer. In accordance with § 7.1.1, the
Administrative Officer is a member of the Planning Board who shall be
elected by the Planning Board and is designated to administer these land
development and subdivision regulations and to coordinate with other Town
Boards and Commissions, municipal staff, and state agencies.
10.2 Administrative Subdivision. The re-subdivision of existing lots that
yields no additional lots for development, and involves no creation or
extension of streets. Such re-subdivision shall only involve divisions,
mergers, mergers and division or adjustments of boundaries of existing lots.
10.3 Agricultural Land. Land suitable for agriculture by reason of
suitability of soil or other natural characteristics or past use for agricultural
purposes. Agricultural land includes that defined as prime farm land or
additional farm land of statewide importance for Rhode Island by the soil
conservation service of the United States Department of Agriculture.
10.4 Applicant. Any person who applies to the Planning Board for
subdivision approval.
10.5 Board of Appeal. The Little Compton Zoning Board of Review, which
shall be constituted as the Board of Appeal for appeals of actions of the
Administrative Officer or Planning Board on matters relating to land
development for subdivisions.
10.6 Bond. Any type of improvement guarantee.
10.7 Buildable Lot. A lot where construction for the use(s) permitted
on the site under the Zoning Ordinance is considered practicable by the
Planning Board, considering the physical constraints to development of
the site as well as the requirements of pertinent federal, state and local
regulations.
10.8 Certificate of Completeness. A notice issued by the Administrative
Officer informing the applicant that the application is complete and meets
the requirements of these regulations, and that the applicant may proceed
with the approval process.
10.9 Coastal Feature. Coastal beaches, dunes, wetlands, cliffs, bluffs,
embankments, rocky shores, and man-made shorelines as defined in
Chapter 23 of Title 46, General Laws of Rhode Island, as amended.
10.10 Concept Plan. A drawing with accompanying information showing
the basic elements of a proposed subdivision, as used for pre-application
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 9.6
AO:431
meetings and early discussions, and classification of the project within the
approval process.
10.11 Cul-de-sac. The terminus of a street that has only one outlet, laid out
to provide a circular or other type of turn-around for vehicles at the closed
end.
10.12 Development Regulation. Zoning, subdivision, land development
plan, development plan review, floodplain regulation, soil erosion control or
any other governmental regulation of the use and development of land.
10.13 Division of Land. Any subdivision.
10.14 Easement. The right of a party to use all or part of the property of
another for a specific purpose.
10.15 Endorsement. The signature of the Administrative Officer or
Planning Board Chairperson on an approved plat, permitting recording of
the plat.
10.16 Environmental Constraints. Natural features, resources, or land
characteristics that are sensitive to change and may require conservation
measures or the application of special development techniques to prevent
degradation of the site, or may require limited development, or in certain
instances, may preclude development. See also physical constraints to
development.
10.17 Final Plan. The final stage of subdivision.
10.18 Final Plat. Final drawing(s) of all or portion of a subdivision, and
any accompanying materials, to be recorded in the Land Evidence Records
after approval by the Planning Board.
10.19 Floodplain or Flood Hazard Area. An area that has one percent
(1%) or greater chance of inundation in any given year, as delineated by the
federal emergency agency pursuant to the National Flood Insurance Act of
1968, as amended (P.L. 90-448) [42 U.S.C. 4011 et seq.].
10.20 Improvement. Any natural or built site, that becomes part of, is
placed upon, or is affixed to real estate.
10.21 Improvement Guarantee. A security instrument accepted by the
Planning Board and held by Town Treasurer to ensure that all
improvements, facilities, or work required by these regulations, or as a
condition of approval, will be completed in compliance with the approved
plans and specifications.
10.22 Lot Not for Development. A parcel of land recorded in the Land
Evidence Records that is created or reserved for open space and
conservation has or will be deeded to the Little Compton Agricultural
Conservancy Trust, the Town of Little Compton, or the Rhode Island
Department of Environmental Management, with appropriate deed and plat
9.6 LITTLE COMPTON CODE 9.6
AO:432
restrictions forbidding any development thereon, in accordance with state
law.
10.23 Major Subdivision. Any subdivision not classified as either an
administrative subdivision or a minor subdivision.
10.24 Master Plan. An overall plan for a major subdivision outlining
general, rather than detailed, development intentions. It describes the basic
parameters of a major subdivision, rather than giving full engineering
details. It is required for review of major subdivisions.
10.25 Minor Subdivision. A plan for residential development that requires
the subdivision of land consisting of five (5) or fewer lots, and does not
require any waivers or modifications as specified in these Rules and
Regulations. All nonresidential subdivisions shall be considered as major
subdivisions.
10.26 Parcel. A lot, or contiguous group of lots in single ownership or
under single control, and usually considered a unit for purposes of
development.
10.27 Phased Development. Development where construction of public
and/or private improvements proceeds by section(s) subsequent to approval
of a master plan for the entire site.
10.28 Physical Constraints to Development. Characteristics of a site
or area, either natural or man-made, which present significant difficulties
to construction of the uses permitted on that site, or would require
extraordinary construction methods. See also environmental constraints.
10.29 Planning Board. The official planning agency of the Little Compton.
10.30 Plat. A drawing or drawings of a subdivision plan showing the
location, boundaries, and lot lines of individual properties, as well as other
necessary information as specified in these Regulations.
10.31 Pre-application Conference. An initial meeting between
developers and Planning Board and/or its representatives that affords
developers the opportunity to present their proposals informally and to
receive comments and directions from the Planning Board and others.
10.32 Preliminary Plan. The stage of subdivision review that requires
detailed engineered drawings and all required state and federal permits.
10.33 Prime Farmlands. Those lands which meet the applicable criteria,
as established by the U.S.D.A., Soil Conservation Service.
10.34 Private Way. A road providing legal frontage for no more than two
(2) lots. The subdivider shall record documents assuring that the Town of
Little Compton shall not be required to accept or maintain a private way
and providing for private maintenance of such private way. Driveways are
excluded from this definition.
9.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 9.6
AO:433
10.35 Public Improvement. Any street or other roadway, sidewalk,
pedestrian way, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, drainage feature, or
other facility for which the Town of Little Compton or other governmental
entity is presently responsible, or will ultimately assume responsibility for
maintenance and operation upon the Town's acceptance.
10.36 Public Informational Meeting. A meeting of the Planning Board,
preceded by notice, open to the public and at which the public shall be
heard.
10.37 Re-subdivision. Any change of an approved or recorded subdivision
plat or in a lot recorded in the Land Evidence Records, or that affects the
lot lines of any areas reserved for public use, or that affects any map or plan
legally recorded prior to the adoption of these Rules and Regulations.
10.38 Storm Water Detention. A provision for storage of storm water
runoff and the controlled release of such runoff during and after a flood or
storm.
10.39 Storm Water Retention. A provision for storage of storm water
runoff.
10.40 Street. A public or private thoroughfare used, or intended to be
used, for passage or travel by motor vehicles.
10.41 Street, Access To. An adequate and permanent way of entering a
lot. All lots of record shall have access to a public street for all vehicles
normally associated with the uses permitted for that lot.
10.42 Street, Cul-de-sac. A local street with only one outlet and having
an appropriate vehicular turnaround, either temporary or permanent, at the
closed end.
10.43 Street, Public. All public property reserved or dedicated for street
traffic.
10.44 Street, Stub. A portion of a street reserved to provide access to
future development, which may provide for utility connections.
10.45 Street Classification. A method of roadway organization which
identifies a street hierarchy according to function within a road system,
that is, types of vehicles served and anticipated volumes, for the purposes
of promoting safety, efficient land use and the design character of
neighborhoods and districts. The following are major categories:
a. Arterial - A major street that serves as an avenue for the circulation of
traffic into, out of, or around the Town.
b. Collector - A street whose principal function is to carry traffic between
local streets and arterial streets but that may also provide direct access to
abutting properties.
9.6 LITTLE COMPTON CODE 9.6
AO:434
c. Local - A street whose primary function is to provide access to abutting
properties.
10.46 Subdivider. A person who (1) having an interest in land, causes it,
directly or indirectly, to be divided into a subdivision, or who (2) directly
or indirectly, sells, leases or develops or offers to sell, lease or develop, or
advertises to sell, lease or develop any interest, lot, parcel, site, unit, or
plat in a subdivision, or who (3) engages directly or through an agent in
the business of selling, leasing, developing, or offering for sale, lease, or
development a subdivision of any interest, lot parcel, site, unit, or plat in a
subdivision.
10.47 Subdivision. The division or re-division of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land into two (2) or more lots, tracts or parcels. Any adjustments to existing
lot lines of a recorded lot by any means shall be considered a subdivision.
All resubdivision activity shall be considered a subdivision. The division of
property for purposes of financing constitutes a subdivision.
10.48 Travel Way. That portion of a street right-of-way that is used for
vehicular travel.
10.49 Vested Rights. The right to initiate or continue the development of
an approved project for a specified period of time, under the regulations
that were in effect at the time of approval, even if, after the approval, the
regulations change prior to completion of the project.
9.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 9.6
AO:435
Appendix D
HOME RULE CHARTER
9.6 LITTLE COMPTON CODE 9.6
AO:436
ARTICLE I
Incorporation And Powers Of The Town
Section 101. Incorporation.
The inhabitants of the Town of Little Compton in the State of Rhode Island,
within the corporate limits as now established or as hereafter established
in the manner provided by law, shall continue to be a municipal body politic
and corporate, under the name of the Town of Little Compton in perpetuity,
to be governed under the provisions of this Home Rule Charter as adopted
and as it may be amended.
Section 102. Powers of the Town.
The Town shall have all powers possible for a town to have under the
Constitution and laws of this State, now or as amended in the future, as fully
and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Charter.
All powers which the Town may exercise shall be construed liberally in favor
of the Town, and the specific mention of particular powers in this Charter
shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general power stated in
this article.
Section 103. Town Property.
The Town may acquire property within or without its corporate limits for
any municipal purpose, in fee simple or any lesser interest or estate, by
purchase, gift, devise or lease, and within its limits by condemnation as such
takings may be authorized by law, and may sell, mortgage, exchange, hold,
manage and control such property as its interests may require, provided
that any such acquisition, or any sale, mortgage, exchange, or lease of real
property shall, exclusive of acquisitions by the Little Compton Agricultural
Conservancy Trust as hereinafter set forth, be approved by the Financial
Town Meeting.
Section 104. Intergovernmental Relations.
The Town may exercise any of its powers or perform any of its functions,
and may participate in the financing thereof, jointly or in cooperation, by
contract or otherwise, with any one or more towns or civil divisions or
agencies thereof, or any other State, or the United States or any agency
thereof, provided that any such contract or agreement is in accord with
applicable State law and Constitutional provisions and is approved by the
Financial Town Meeting upon recommendation of the Town Council.
Section 101 ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section 104
AO:437

ARTICLE II
Elections
Section 201. Election Laws and Conduct of Elections.
The provisions of the Constitution and General Laws of the State, now or
hereafter in effect, pertaining to elections, special, general and primary, and
also any special acts pertaining to elections in the Town of Little Compton,
now or hereafter in effect, shall govern all Town elections, special, general
and primary, so far as they may be applicable, excepting those provisions
which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter affecting the form
of government.
Section 202. Canvassing Authority.
There shall be a bipartisan canvassing authority, to be called the Board
of Canvassers, of three members who are qualified electors of the Town,
not more than two (2) of whom shall belong to the same political party.
The President of the Town Council shall nominate the members of the
canvassing authority to the Council from lists of party voters submitted by
the respective chairmen of the Town political committees. If the Council
shall refuse to approve the nomination of any person so nominated, the
President shall submit another person named on one of the lists until a
person shall be appointed. If the chairman of the Town committee of a
political party entitled to an appointment shall fail or refuse to submit a list
as aforesaid, the President shall nominate any party voter of that political
party. The Council may appoint, in the same manner as aforesaid, two (2)
alternate members, not more than one (1) of whom shall belong to the same
political party, to serve in the absence of a member. An alternate so serving
shall be of the same political party as the absent member. In the event of a
vacancy in the membership of the Authority, the Council shall appoint the
alternate member who is of the same political party as the member to be
replaced and appoint a new alternate member, or if no alternate member is
available for appointment, the Council shall appoint a member following the
procedure provided in this Section. All such appointees shall serve for the
balance of the unexpired term.
A. Each member of the Board of Canvassers shall be appointed to serve for
a term of six (6) years beginning on the first Monday of March
succeeding the date of his or her appointment and until his or her
successor is appointed and qualified. No person may serve on the Board
who is an officer or employee of the United States or of the State or of
any City or Town of the State, or is a candidate for any public office.
B. The Board of Canvassers shall be vested with all of the powers and
duties now or hereafter vested by law in the canvassing authority of the
Town. All members of the Board of Canvassers shall continue in office
as members thereof until the expiration of the terms for which they
were respectively appointed.
Section 201 ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section 203
AO:439
Section 203. Initiative and Referendum.
A. The electors of the Town shall have the right to participate directly in
the making of policy decisions by petition and direct vote, in the
following ways:
(1) Initiative.
The electors of the Town may propose ordinances to the Council
and, if the Council fails to adopt an ordinance so proposed without
any change in substance, to have the authority to adopt said
ordinance at a special or general election, provided however, that
such power shall not extend to the comprehensive plan or to
zoning;
(2) Referendum.
The electors of the Town shall have power to request
reconsideration by the Council of any adopted ordinance and, if the
Council fails to repeal the ordinance upon such request, to repeal it
at a special or general election, provided however, that such power
shall not extend to the comprehensive plan or to zoning.
B. Any five (5) qualified electors of the Town may commence action
pursuant to one of the procedures outlined in Subsection A hereof by
filing with the Town Clerk an affidavit stating that they will constitute
the petitioners' committee and be responsible for circulating the
petition and filing it in proper form. The affidavit shall state the names
and the addresses of said electors, specify the address to which all
notices to the committee are to be sent, and set out in full the proposed
initiative, or referendum that is the subject of their petition. Promptly
after the affidavit is filed, the Town Clerk shall issue the appropriate
petition blanks to petitioners' committee.
C. The petitions shall be signed and filed and Council action taken thereon
in the following manner:
(1) All such petitions must be signed by ten percent (10%) of the
electors registered to vote on the date on which the petition blanks
are issued to the petitioners' committee by the Town Clerk. The
petitioners shall have thirty (30) days from date of issue to collect
the necessary signatures and file the completed petition with the
Town Clerk, who shall transmit it immediately to the Board of
Canvassers for signature verification. If the petition is determined
to have sufficient valid signatures, the Board shall so certify to the
Town Clerk.
(2) When an initiative or referendum petition has been certified as
having sufficient signatures, the Council shall promptly consider
the proposed initiative ordinance or reconsider the referred
ordinance, in the same manner as provided for adoption of an
ordinance proposed by a member of the Council. If the Council fails
Section 203 LITTLE COMPTON CODE Section 203
AO:440
Section 204. Elections to Office at Town Meeting. [Reso. 7/11/02;
approved at election of 11/5/02; Reso. 7/6/06; approved at election
11/7/06]
In instances in which this Charter provides that there be elections to Town
offices conducted at the annual Financial Town Meeting, such elections
shall be conducted as herein provided. All such elections shall be by paper
ballot and all candidate names listed on such ballots shall carry no other
identification besides their addresses. Electors wishing to become
candidates for offices to be filled at the Financial Town Meeting shall
declare their intent in writing to the Town Clerk no later than twenty-one
(21) days prior to the date of the election. The Town Clerk shall publish at
least twice the names of all such candidates prior to the date of the Town
Meeting. The Board of Canvassers shall prepare an appropriate ballot to be
to adopt a proposed initiative ordinance without any change in
substance, or fails to repeal the referred ordinance, as the case
may be, within forty-five (45) days after the date the petition is
certified, the Council shall cause the proposed or referred
ordinance to be placed before the electors of the Town for a vote as
provided in Subsection D below.
D. Any petition to initiate an ordinance or to repeal an ordinance upon
which the Council has not acted favorably shall be placed before the
electors for a vote at the next general election if one is scheduled to be
held ninety (90) days or less following Council action thereon, or at a
special election called for the purpose. Any such special election shall
be scheduled to take place no less than forty-five (45) nor more than
sixty (60) days following Council action. All petitions provided for under
the terms of this Section for which sufficient signatures have not been
gathered shall be null and void.
E. The results of the vote of the electors on any petition placed before
them under the terms of this Section shall be as follows:
(1) If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a proposed initiative
ordinance vote in its favor, it shall be considered adopted upon
certification of the election results, and it shall be treated in all
respects in the same manner as ordinances of the same kind
adopted by the Council, provided however, that any ordinance
enacted pursuant to the initiative procedure shall not be repealed,
or amended as to substance, less than one (1) year following its
adoption. If conflicting ordinances are approved at the same
election, the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes
shall prevail to the extent of such conflict.
(2) If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a petition to repeal
an ordinance vote for repeal, it shall be considered repealed upon
certification of the results of the election. No ordinance so repealed
shall be re-enacted by the Council less than one (1) year following
its repeal.
Section 203 ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section 204
AO:441
provided to electors upon their entrance into the voting area at the Town
Meeting. The elector shall vote the ballot before leaving the voting area.
The elector may vote by entering the voting area, at their convenience, at
any time following the opening of the meeting place for the transaction
of the Town Meeting and for one-half hour after the adjournment of the
Town Meeting. Vacancies occurring in any such office following election
as provided herein shall be filled for the remainder of the term by the
unelected candidate for the vacated position with the highest number of
votes from the most recent election to that position for Budget Committee
or Beach Commission as appropriate, or if that person is unavailable or
unwilling to serve, shall be filled by the Town Council.
Section 204 LITTLE COMPTON CODE Section 204
AO:442
ARTICLE III
Financial Town Meeting
Section 301. Date and Purpose of Financial Town Meeting.
Section 302. Recessed and Special Town Meetings. [Reso. 7/6/06;
approved at election 11/7/06]
The annual Financial Town Meeting may be recessed to a subsequent date
by vote of the electors present. Any such recessed Financial Town Meeting
shall be reconvened one week after the date of the original Financial Town
Meeting, and, as may be necessary, at one week intervals thereafter. Special
Town meetings may be called by the Town Council or by petition of ten
percent (10%) of the electors of the Town and shall be warned and limited
as to subjects to be considered as provided in State law, pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter 3, Title 45, Sections 6 and 7 of the General Laws.
Section 303. Town Moderator. [Reso. 7/6/06; approved at election
11/7/06]
There shall be a Town Moderator, who shall be elected at the general
election in each even numbered year, to serve for a term of two years and
A. The electors of the Town of Little Compton shall assemble annually in
Financial Town Meeting at a date, time and place to be established by
the Town Council, said date and time to be set by the Council no later
than February 1st of each year, with the meeting to take place during
the third full week in May. The purpose of the annual Financial Town
Meeting shall be for the imposing of a tax, for providing for the
expenditure of such sums of money as may be necessary to pay the
Town's debts and interest thereon, for the support of Town services for
the ensuing fiscal year, for the expenditure of funds from any source for
all other lawful purposes, and for transacting such other business as
may lawfully come before such meeting.
B. No money shall be drawn from the general fund, nor from moneys in
any other Town fund, during the fiscal year, except pursuant to
appropriations made at the annual or at a special Financial Town
Meeting, subject to the exception provided for emergency
appropriations in Section 508 below. Funds received by and under the
control of the Agricultural Conservancy Trust shall not be subject to
this requirement for annual appropriation or reappropriation. This
subsection shall not be interpreted to restrict the Town Treasurer from
making transfers of funds for investment purposes. The general fund is
hereby defined as the general Town account into which all receipts are
deposited and from which moneys are withdrawn pursuant to Town
meeting appropriations, as distinguished from any and all specially
designated funds established by or with the approval of the Town
meeting as the depository for moneys received and to be expended for
specifically designated purposes.
Section 301 ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section 303
AO:443
until his or her successor is elected and qualified. By the last day of January
of the year following each general election the Town Council shall appoint
with the approval of the Moderator an Assistant Town Moderator to serve
for a term concurrent with that of the Moderator, who shall perform the
duties of Moderator at any time that the Town Moderator is unable to serve
or upon the request of the Town Moderator. The Assistant Town Moderator
shall be an elector of the Town. The Town Moderator, or the Assistant
Town Moderator as aforesaid, shall preside at all regular and special Town
meetings. If both Moderator and Assistant Moderator are unable to preside,
the Town Council shall appoint an interim Moderator who shall serve until
either the elected Moderator or Assistant Moderator are able to resume
their position during their term of office.
Section 304. Notice and Agenda for Meetings.
The warrant for any Town meeting shall be prepared and the meeting shall
be warned as provided by law. Warrant items may be grouped to be moved
and voted on as a unit, provided however, that the Town meeting may
amend or vote separately on individual items in such grouping. The order of
items to be considered at the meeting may be changed by a two-thirds vote
of the electors present and voting. The listing and text of the warrant items
to be voted on shall be posted with the warrant. The format of the Budget
Committee report as supplied to the electors shall conform to the listing of
warrant items which shall have been determined as aforesaid.
Section 305. Conduct of Meetings. [Approved at election 11/4/14]
The Town Moderator shall have all of the authority conferred upon
moderators by State law in conducting and managing the business of Town
meetings. The quorum for any Town meeting shall be five (5%) percent
of the electors of the Town of Little Compton. The Moderator shall grant
permission for the admission of persons who are not electors of the Town,
provided however, that all such persons may be seated in an assigned area
apart from the seating for electors, and shall have no right to vote, and no
right to speak except with the specific permission of the Moderator.
Section 306. Proposals for Expenditure Outside of Budget. [Reso. 7/
20/00; approved at election 11/7/00; approved at election 11/4/14]
No proposal for the expenditure of money, other than those contained in the
budget as compiled from the Town officer's and departmental requests shall
be acted upon by the Town Meeting unless it shall have been presented
to the Town Clerk in a petition signed by no less than fifty (50) electors
of the Town no later than the sixth day of March, except to include no
fewer than five (5) business days from the March 1st deadline established in
Section 503 of this Charter. All such petitions and proposals for expenditure
shall indicate the agency or organization for which the appropriation is
requested and the specific purposes, in the form of a line item breakdown
where appropriate, for which the request for appropriation is being made.
The petitions and proposals shall be reviewed by the Budget Committee
Section 303 LITTLE COMPTON CODE Section 306
AO:444
and recommendations thereon shall be included in the Budget Committee
report, and shall appear in the posted list of warrant items, and identified
as a citizen stroke.
Section 306 ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section 306
AO:445

ARTICLE IV
Town Council
Section 401. Composition, Election and Terms.
There shall be a Town Council of five members, elected at large by the
qualified electors of the Town, each to serve for a term of two years, and
until his or her successor is elected and qualified.
Section 402. Manner of Election; Qualifications.
The election of members of the Council shall be held on the first Tuesday
after the first Monday in November in each even numbered year, in the
manner provided for in the election laws of the State. All candidates for
Council member must be qualified electors of the Town, and residents
thereof, and must remain qualified electors and residents throughout their
term of office. The terms of members of the Council shall begin upon the
issuance of their certificates of election. The five candidates receiving the
greatest numbers of votes shall be elected. Outgoing Council members shall
offer full cooperation to their successors and shall observe the principle
that all files, records and documents defined as public records in the open
records legislation of the State, which they used during their tenure, are
the property of the Town and are to be conveyed in good order to their
successors.
Section 403. Compensation and Expenses.
The members of the Council shall receive such compensation as shall be
fixed by the Financial Town Meeting and such benefits as the Town meeting
may provide pursuant to the provisions of this Charter. Council members
shall be entitled to receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred
in the performance of their duties of office as requested upon vouchers
approved by vote of the Council.
Section 404. President and Vice President. [Reso. 7/6/06; approved
at election 11/7/06; approved at election 11/4/14]
The Council shall elect from among its members a President and a Vice
President, each of whom shall serve at the pleasure of the Council. The
President shall preside at all meetings of the Council and shall be
recognized as the head of the Town government. The Vice President shall
act as President during the absence of the President.
Section 405. Eligibility of Council Members; Town Employment.
No person, with the exception of members running for reelection, shall be
eligible for election to the Council if he or she holds any paid public office
or employment in the Town as of the certification of his or her election. A
Council member shall not be eligible for appointment to any paid office or
employment in the Town during the term for which he or she was elected
Section 401 ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section 405
AO:447
to the Council nor for one (1) year thereafter. A Council member may hold
elective Town office immediately succeeding his or her term on the Council.
Section 406. Council Vacancies. [Reso. 7/11/02; approved at
election 11/5/02; Reso. 7/6/06; approved at election 11/7/06]
In the event that the office of a Council member shall become vacant
following election as provided herein, such vacancy shall be filled for the
remainder of the term by the unelected candidate for the vacated position
with the highest number of votes from the most recent election for such
office, or, if that person is unavailable or unwilling to serve, shall be filled
by the Town Council.
Section 407. Forfeiture of Office.
The grounds and procedures for forfeiture of Council office shall be as
follows:
Section 408. Meetings and Procedures.
The first meeting of a newly elected Council shall be held on the first
Thursday following the certification of the election of a majority of its
members by the canvassing authority. The Town Clerk shall preside until
the selection of a Town Council President. The Council shall determine
and give notice of the time, place and dates of its regular meetings for
the ensuing calendar year, which shall be held at least once each month.
The posting of notice of all meetings, including special meetings, shall be
in accordance with State law. The Town Clerk shall serve as clerk of the
Council. The Council President shall at all times have the same right to
vote on matters before the Council as any other member, and may make
and second motions. The Council shall adopt and may amend its own rules,
and shall make reasonable provision to allow persons in attendance at
A. A Council member shall be required to forfeit his or her office if he or
she: (1) ceases at any time to fulfill any of the qualifications for the
office prescribed by this Charter or by State law, (2) is disqualified from
holding office under the terms of Section 1007 B. of this Charter, or (3)
attends no regularly scheduled Council meeting for a period of three (3)
consecutive months without being excused by vote of the Council. The
remaining members of the Council shall fill any vacancy caused by such
forfeiture or disqualification from office in the manner set forth in
Section 406 above.
B. The Council shall be the judge of the qualifications of its members, or as
to whether grounds for forfeiture of the office of any member exist, and
for that purpose shall have power to subpoena witnesses, administer
oaths and require the production of evidence. A member whose
qualification for office or forfeiture of office is at issue, shall be entitled
to demand a public hearing, and notice of such hearing shall be
published at least one week in advance. Decisions made by the Council
under this section shall be subject to review by the courts.
Section 405 LITTLE COMPTON CODE Section 408
AO:448
its meetings opportunity to speak. A quorum for Council meetings shall
consist of three members; and a minimum of three affirmative votes shall
be required for the adoption of any ordinance. The Council may adopt a
designated parliamentary manual for use to supplement its own rules.
Section 409. Legislative Powers; Ordinances.
The Council shall have the power to enact, amend or repeal ordinances for
the preservation of the public peace, health, safety, comfort and welfare,
and for the protection of persons and property, to provide reasonable
penalties as allowed under State law for the violation of any ordinance; and
to exercise all additional powers, consistent with the Charter and the laws
and constitution of the State. All the legislative powers vested in the Town
by State law and the Constitution shall be exercised by the Town Council
except those reserved to the Financial Town Meeting and to the people
through the initiative and referendum procedures.
Section 410. Procedure for adopting Ordinances. [Reso. 7/6/06;
approved at election 11/7/06]
Ordinances of the Town and amendments thereto shall be adopted by the
Council in accordance with the following procedure and any additional
procedures required by State law:
A. Special meetings of the Council may be called by the President, and
shall be called by the President upon receipt of written requests for a
special meeting from two Council members. All Council members shall
be notified of any special meeting and of the business to be conducted
thereat by letter delivered by registered mail or by messenger at their
places of residence at least forty-eight (48) hours in advance, unless an
emergency requires the more rapid convening of a meeting.
A. A proposed ordinance or amendment to an existing ordinance may be
introduced by any member of the Council at any regular or special
meeting. Upon introduction, and if seconded, any proposed ordinance
shall be distributed to the members, a copy filed in the office of the
Town Clerk, and the text published. In the case of amendments to
ordinances, if seconded upon introduction, the Town Clerk shall
distribute copies as aforesaid, and shall either post or publish the text
as the Council may direct in each instance.
B. At the meeting at which a proposed ordinance or amendment to an
existing ordinance is introduced, the Council shall cause a copy to be
provided to the Town Solicitor for his or her review as to form and
legality, and shall make provision for holding a hearing thereon as the
first item of business at its next scheduled meeting, provided that such
hearing shall occur at least five (5) business days following publication
of the text thereof.
C. The Council may adopt any ordinance or amendment to an existing
ordinance following the hearing thereon at the same meeting, or at a
Section 408 ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section 410
AO:449
Section 411. Emergency Ordinances.
The following ordinance procedure may be used in times of public
emergency:
Section 412. Investigations.
The Council may in the interest of the Town make investigations into the
affairs of the Town and the conduct of any Town department, office or
agency, with the exception of the School Committee and school department,
and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take
testimony and require the production of evidence.
Section 413. Additional Council Responsibilities.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Council to:
subsequent meeting, provided however, if the proposed ordinance or
amendment is substantially altered following the hearing thereon, the
altered portion of the ordinance or amendment must be published, and
subjected to a hearing as provided above before final adoption by the
Council.
A. The Council may adopt one or more emergency ordinances when
necessary to protect life, health, property and the public peace. An
emergency shall be defined as a situation wherein the public health,
safety and/or general welfare of the Town are imminently imperiled by
an unusual or unforeseen circumstance. In such a case the Council may
suspend the provisions of Section 410 above in whole or in part to deal
with the emergency by ordinance. Any such ordinance shall define
clearly and specifically in its text the nature of the emergency at which
it is directed and the necessity for the action provided for. Only
emergency ordinances clearly essential to deal with the situation shall
be enacted under suspension of Section 410.
B. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form and manner
prescribed for ordinances generally and may be adopted with or
without amendment or may be rejected at the meeting at which it is
introduced. Adoption shall require the vote of at least three (3)
members of the Council.
C. All emergency ordinances shall become effective upon adoption or at
such later time as may be specified therein and shall automatically
stand repealed as of the sixty-first (61st) day following the date on
which they took effect but may be reenacted in the manner specified in
this Section for a period of no more than sixty (60) additional days if the
emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed
by a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this Section
for adoption of emergency ordinances.
Section 410 LITTLE COMPTON CODE Section 413
AO:450
A. Make all necessary arrangements, by contracting with an appropriate
firm specializing in said work, or otherwise, to keep the codified
ordinances of the Town up to date through a system which shall provide
the texts of new or revised ordinances for insertion therein no later
than one year following passage.
B. Approve every proposal for borrowing moneys for which the credit of
the Town will be pledged, including any and all proposals which call for
the issuance of bonds or notes, or the entering into of any lease
purchase or similar agreements which extend beyond a single fiscal
year, and shall arrange for approval thereof by the electors of the Town
either at a regular or special Town meeting or at a Town-wide
referendum held at a general or special election, as may be appropriate
or required by State law. The credit of the Town shall not be pledged
unless a majority of the electors present and voting at such Town
meeting or voting at such referendum shall have approved thereof;
provided however, that the Council may, as permitted by State law,
authorize borrowing in anticipation of taxes or of Federal or State
grants, subject to any limit for such borrowing set by a regular or
special Town meeting.
C. Provide for an independent annual audit by a certified public
accountant of all Town accounts, such audit to conform with the
requirements of State law for such annual audits, with generally
accepted auditing standards, and shall require the inclusion by the
auditors of their informed opinion of the financial practices and
accounts of the Town. Such annual audit shall be completed and filed
with the Town Council no later than six (6) months after the close of the
fiscal year, and a copy be filed with the Director of Administration and
with the Auditor General of the State. The Council may provide for such
additional audits as it may deem appropriate and for which the Town
meeting may have made appropriation.
D. Serve as licensing authority of the Town and as such to exercise all
authority conferred upon towns, or which may be exercised by towns,
under State law, to issue licenses and permits for the conduct of
businesses or professions, or for all other purposes as authorized by
law, and to make necessary rules and regulations pertaining thereto.
E. Ensure compliance with the Charter by all Town officials, departments
and agencies and to establish a process for review of complaints of noncompliance
from qualified electors of the Town.
Section 413 ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section 413
AO:451

ARTICLE V
Financial Procedures
Section 501. Fiscal Year.
The fiscal year of the Town shall begin on the first day of July and end on the
last day of the following June, provided however, that the Financial Town
Meeting, upon recommendation of the Town Council, may change the dates
of the fiscal year.
Section 502. Budget Committee. [Reso. 7/20/00; approved at
election 11/7/00; Reso. 7/11/02; approved at election 11/5/02; Reso.
7/6/06; approved at election 11/7/06; approved at election 11/4/14]
A. There shall be a Budget Committee of five (5) members, elected at the
Financial Town Meeting for two (2) year terms. However, their terms
shall be staggered, such that two (2) members shall be elected in each
even numbered year and, three (3) members shall be elected in each
odd numbered year. Members of the Town Council and members of the
School Committee shall be ineligible to serve as members of the Budget
Committee. When elected and qualified the members of the Committee
shall elect one of their number as chairman and another as clerk.
B. The Budget Committee shall have primary responsibility for the
evaluation of all requests for appropriation by the Financial Town
Meeting or by any special Town Meeting, and for presenting a proposed
budget to the Annual Financial Town Meeting. The Committee shall
have the authority to recommend the increase, decrease or elimination
of any request for appropriation or line item therein, including those
requests contained in citizen petitions pursuant to Section 306 above,
provided however, that all requests shall be placed in the Budget
Committee Report with indication of the Committee's recommendation.
Regarding the request for appropriation from the School Committee,
the Budget Committee shall have the authority to recommend increase
or decrease of the total request only. The Budget Committee shall also
have the authority to:
1. Demand, subject to State and federal laws concerning privacy and
access to public records, any and all books, records, and
correspondence relative to the expenditure of Town monies in the
custody of any department of the Town which in its opinion are
necessary to properly prepare a budget for the expenditure of Town
funds;
2. Recommend changes in compensation for any elected officials of
the Town to that official by February 1st. The Budget Committee
shall seek a recommendation of the Town Council on compensation
for the Town Clerk and Town Treasurer/Tax Collector;
3. Prepare a capital expenditure program for the Town, pursuant to
the provisions of Section 505 of the Charter.
Section 501 ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section 503
AO:453
Section 503. Preparation of the Budget. [Reso. 7/6/06; approved at
election 11/7/06]
All budget requests shall be submitted to the Budget Committee not later
than March 1st through the Town Clerk, provided however, that all such
requests from appointed Town officials, departments, boards, committees,
and agencies under the jurisdiction of the Town Council shall first be
submitted to the Council upon such date prior to March 1 as the Council
shall determine. Each such request shall be accompanied by a breakdown
of its proposed expenditures with appropriate supporting information and,
if applicable, estimates of revenues during the fiscal year. The budget
prepared by the Committee shall show its proposed appropriations for each
official, department and agency by line item, and the total revenue that will
be required to fund the budget. During its deliberations the Committee shall
invite the sponsor of each request for appropriation to explain and justify
such requests. At an appropriate point or points in the process the Budget
Committee shall invite the Council to meet with it to consider the overall
budget, revenue prospects, and such detailed questions as either body may
care to raise.
Section 504. Public Hearings on Budget. [Approved at election 11/
2/04; approved at election 11/4/14; approved at election 11/6/18]
The Budget Committee, with the Council in attendance, shall hold a public
hearing on its preliminary recommended budget prior to final adoption
for presentation to the Financial Town Meeting, which hearing shall take
place no more than twenty-five (25) nor less than nineteen (19) days prior
to the date for said meeting. At least ten (10) days prior to the date for
the Financial Town Meeting the Council shall cause to be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Town a summary of the proposed
budget as adopted for presentation to the Financial Town Meeting, as
prescribed in the State Property Tax and Fiscal Disclosure Law. The Council
shall insure that all other provisions of said Law, and the provisions of State
law pertaining to the maximum tax which towns may levy, as the said laws
may be amended from time to time, are complied with. Copies of the Budget
Committee report as it is to be presented to the Financial Town Meeting
shall be mailed to the electors of the Town and posted on the website of the
Town no later than ten (10) days prior to the date of said meeting.
Section 505. Capital Program. [Reso. 7/6/06; approved at election
11/7/06]
The Council shall provide by ordinance for the orderly review and
preparation by the Budget Committee of a multi-year program for capital
expenditure by the Town. Such ordinance shall provide for projections and
planning by Town departments, offices, boards, commissions and other
agencies, and adoption by the Council after public hearing.
Section 503 LITTLE COMPTON CODE Section 506
AO:454
Section 506. Purchases and Accounting Control.
The Council shall appoint a purchasing agent for the Town, and may do
so by designating a present Town official to assume this additional
responsibility. The Council shall also provide by ordinance policies and
procedures to govern the making of purchases by and on behalf of the Town,
in conformity with Title 45, Chapter 55 of the General Laws relating to the
award of municipal contracts, and other applicable provisions of State law.
Such policies and procedures shall be designed to insure that Town funds
are expended in the most efficient and economical manner possible, and to
provide maximum value per dollar expended in all purchases of goods and
services.
Section 507. Budget Administration; Lapse of Appropriations.
Every appropriation, except those for capital expenditure, or those
authorized from specially dedicated funds, shall lapse at the close of a fiscal
year and any unexpended or unencumbered balance revert to the general
fund. An appropriation for a capital expenditure shall continue in force until
the purpose for which it was made has been accomplished or abandoned.
Section 508. Emergency Appropriations.
To meet a public emergency as defined in Section 411 A above, the Council
may make emergency appropriations using the emergency ordinance
procedure set forth in Section 411. To the extent that there are not available
unappropriated revenues to meet such appropriations, the Council may by
emergency ordinance authorize the issuance of emergency notes, which
A. The purchasing procedures shall require that all purchases and
contracts executed on behalf of the Town in excess of one thousand
dollars ($1,000) be made pursuant to a written requisition from the
head of the office, department or agency whose appropriation will be
charged and no contract or order shall be issued until the Treasurer
shall have certified that there is sufficient appropriation balance as of
last posting to the credit of such office, department or agency to pay for
the supplies, material, equipment or contractual services for which the
contract or order is to be issued. The Council shall not authorize final
payment in any such instance until it is satisfied that proper procedures
have been followed and payment is in order.
B. All applicable requirements of State law, specifically Title 45, Chapter
55 shall be observed by the Town and shall be incorporated into its
formal purchasing procedures, provided however, that all purchases for
a single item or order in an amount exceeding five thousand dollars
($5,000), or for a single construction project to cost an amount
exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000), shall be made or the contract
let through the sealed bid process or one of the alternative procedures
provided in the chapter cited above. Purchases in amounts of less than
five thousand dollars ($5,000) may be made pursuant to such small
purchases regulations as the Council shall adopt.
Section 506 ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section 508
AO:455
may be renewed from time to time, but shall be liquidated not later than
the end of the fiscal year next succeeding that in which the emergency
appropriation was made.
Section 509. Fees Paid to the Town.
All fees received by any office or employee of the Town shall belong to the
Town and shall be recorded, receipted for and conveyed at such intervals
as the Council may require to the Town Treasurer for deposit in the general
fund or in such specifically designated funds as may have been established
by the Financial Town Meeting, except as otherwise provided in this
Charter.
Section 510. Budget Adjustments. [Reso. 7/20/00; approved at
election 11/7/00]
Upon the request of any department head, office, commission or other unit
of Town government, other than a unit not under the jurisdiction of the
Town Council, the Town Council may, during the last quarter, move no more
than ten (10) percent of any line item to another line item within said
department's budget to cover a shortage of funds. Any such transfers will be
reported in the yearly reports of both the Town Treasurer and Town Auditor.
Section 511. Council Discretionary Fund. [Reso. 7/20/00; approved
at election 11/7/00]
There shall be included by the Budget Committee in the budget to be
proposed to the Financial Town Meeting a line item to provide a
discretionary fund to be used by the Council to meet unanticipated expenses
for which there is no provision or insufficient provision in the budget as
adopted, or to meet emergency needs for expenditure which might arise
during the fiscal year.
Section 512. Reserve Fund. [Reso. 7/20/00; approved at election 11/
7/00]
There shall be established by the Financial Town Meeting a fund to be
designated the Reserve Fund into which there may be transferred from time
to time by vote of the Town meeting the whole or any portion of the surplus
funds which the Town may have at the end of any fiscal year, or to which
direct appropriations may be made. The purpose of the Reserve Fund shall
be to make moneys available for temporary borrowings in anticipation of
taxes, or to meet a budget shortfall caused by emergency or unforeseen
circumstances, or for capital expenditures, but for no other purpose. The
Council may authorize borrowing from the Reserve Fund in anticipation of
taxes or to cover a departmental shortfall within such limits as the Financial
Town Meeting shall have set, provided however, that such borrowings shall
be repaid to the Fund at the latest by appropriation at the next Financial
Town Meeting. Moneys from the Reserve Fund may be used for capital
expenditures only with the specific authorization of the Financial Town
Section 508 LITTLE COMPTON CODE Section 512
AO:456
Meeting. The Town Treasurer shall have the authority, with the approval of
the Council, to make such prudent investments of the moneys in the Fund
as may seem appropriate.
Section 512 ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section 512
AO:457

ARTICLE VI
Town Officials
Section 601. Town Administrator. [Approved at election 11/4/14]
The Council may appoint a Town Administrator to serve during the Council's
pleasure, to assist it in the discharge of its executive and administrative
responsibilities. Such appointment shall be made from among persons with
appropriate academic training in management and administration and/or
at least five (5) years management experience preferably in part in local
or State government. Expert knowledge and/or experience in one or more
of the following required: personnel administration, labor negotiation,
budgeting, financial administration, accounting, land use planning, public
works or municipal law.
Section 602. Town Clerk. [Reso. 7/11/02; approved at election 11/5/
02]
There shall be a Town Clerk who shall be elected at the general election
each even numbered year to serve for a two (2) year term or until his or
her successor is elected and qualified. The Town Clerk shall have all the
duties and responsibilities of Town Clerks as provided by State law, shall be
Clerk of the Council, of the Board of Canvassers, and of the Probate Court,
and shall perform such other duties and responsibilities not in conflict with
State law. The Town Clerk shall have the authority to employ a Deputy Town
Clerk with the approval of the Council, and such Deputy Town Clerk shall
in the absence or inability of the Town Clerk, discharge all of the duties and
responsibilities of that office. The Town Clerk shall be responsible for the
good conduct of the Deputy, and may revoke the appointment at the Clerk's
discretion. In the event that the Town Clerk and the Deputy Town Clerk
are both unable to complete the term of office, the Council shall appoint an
interim Clerk to fill the balance of the term of office.
Section 603. Town Treasurer/Tax Collector. [Reso. 7/11/02;
approved at election 11/5/02; approved at election 11/6/18]
There shall be a Town Treasurer who shall also hold and exercise the office
of Town Tax Collector, who shall be elected at the general election each
even numbered year to serve for a two (2) year term or until his or her
successor is elected and qualified. The Town Treasurer shall have all of the
duties and responsibilities conferred upon Town Treasurers by State law,
and all of the duties and responsibilities conferred upon Town Tax Collectors
A. The Council shall by ordinance define the responsibilities of the office of
Town Administrator, his or her relationship to the officials,
departments, boards and commissions which compose the Town
government, whether the Town Administrator shall devote part time or
full time to the duties of the office, and other terms of employment.
B. Compensation and benefits for the Town Administrator shall be as set
by the Financial Town Meeting.
Section 601 ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section 603
AO:459
by State law, and shall give bond for each or both offices before assuming
his or her duties, as provided in State law. The Town Treasurer may appoint
a Deputy Town Treasurer with the approval of the Council, and any such
Deputy Treasurer shall, in the absence or inability of the Town Treasurer,
have all the powers and responsibilities of the Town Treasurer and of the
Tax Collector, provided however, that in no case shall the Deputy have
the power to sign the bonds, notes, or other evidences of indebtedness of
the Town except with the approval of the Council. The Deputy Treasurer
shall also be bonded by the Town. The Town Treasurer shall be responsible
for any misconduct, neglect, or default of the Deputy, and may revoke the
appointment at his or her discretion. In the event that the Treasurer/Tax
Collector and the Deputy Treasurer are both unable to complete the term of
office, the Council shall appoint an Interim Treasurer to fill the balance of
the term of office.
The Town Council may, by ordinance make provision for the replacement of
the elected Town Treasurer/Tax Collector with an appointed Town Finance
Director employed by the Town Council from among persons having had
prior professional training and/or experience in financial management,
financial services and accounting. Such provision may be invoked at any
time in the future agreeable to both the Town Council and the Treasurer/
Tax Collector, but shall be invoked no later than November 2020. The duties
of the appointed Town Finance Director shall include those specified in this
section for the now current position of Treasurer/Tax Collector and any
other additional duties set by the Town Council by ordinance.
Section 604. Town Solicitor. [Approved at election 11/6/18]
There shall be a Town Solicitor appointed by the Council within sixty (60)
days following its election, to serve for a term of two (2) years or until his
or her successor is appointed. The Solicitor shall be appointed from among
persons admitted to the bar in Rhode Island who have had significant
experience in the various aspects of municipal law, and who has practiced
before the various Courts of the State. The Solicitor need not devote full
time to his or her office. The Council in its discretion may retain the services
of a law firm to provide the legal services of Town Solicitor and may retain
or authorize the retention of special counsel for the Town or for a board or
commission, department or officer for extra or unusual services. The Town
Solicitor shall be the legal advisor of, and attorney and counsel for, the Town
and for all boards, commissions, departments and officers thereof.
Section 605. Tax Assessors. [Reso. 7/21/16; approved at election 11/
8/16]
There shall be a Board of Tax Assessors of three (3) members elected for
six (6) year staggered terms, with the term of one member expiring and the
election of one member at the general election in each even numbered year.
The Board of Tax Assessors shall have and perform all of the duties and
discharge the responsibilities of Tax Assessors as set forth in State Law. The
Section 603 LITTLE COMPTON CODE Section 605
AO:460
Town Council shall serve as the Tax Assessment Board of Review unless and
until provision is made for the performance of those duties by another body.
The Town Council may, by ordinance, make provision for the replacement of
the Board of Tax Assessors with a single Tax Assessor employed by the Town
Council from among persons having had prior professional training and/or
experience in assessment, property appraisal and related matters.
Section 606. Tax Assessment Board of Review. [Reso. 7/11/02;
approved at election 11/5/02]
Upon the appointment of a single Tax Assessor there shall be a Tax
Assessment Board of Review consisting of three (3) members, appointed
by the Town Council, each to serve for a term of six (6) years with terms
staggered such that the office of one (1) board member shall become
vacant every two (2) years. When this provision takes effect, the former
Board of Assessors then in office shall relinquish their duties to the Tax
Assessor appointed and shall serve thereafter as the Tax Assessment Board
of Review. As the term of each of the former assessors expires, a member
of the Tax Assessment Board of Review as heretofore provided for, shall
be appointed. The procedure for filing of requests for review of tax
assessments, for the review process to be conducted by the Tax Assessment
Board of Review, and the authority for the making of any adjustment in
an assessment for which the Board finds an adjustment appropriate, and
other matters pertaining to the duties of the Board, shall be determined by
ordinance. Appeals resulting from decisions of the Tax Assessment Board of
Review may be taken as provided by State law.
Section 607. Town Sergeant. [Reso. 7/11/02; approved at election
11/5/02]
There shall be a Town Sergeant, who shall be appointed by the Town
Council in each even numbered year to serve for a two (2) year term, or
until his or her successor is appointed. The Town Sergeant shall have such
powers and duties as are prescribed by State law and such compensation as
may be fixed by the Town Meeting.
Section 608. Inspections and Inspectors. [Reso. 7/11/02; approved
at election 11/5/02]
The Town Council shall make provision for the conduct of all inspections
which are required, or shall in the future be required of towns to make,
including but not limited to zoning inspections, building, electrical,
plumbing and related inspections, minimum housing inspections, and the
like, and shall appoint a person or persons to conduct such inspections who
are qualified by training, experience and/or license where applicable, in the
various professions and specialties involved. Where appropriate the same
individual may be appointed with responsibilities of conducting two or more
types of inspections.
Section 605 ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section 609
AO:461
Section 609. Probate Judge and Probate Court. [Reso. 7/11/02;
approved at election 11/5/02]
There shall be a Probate Court for the Town with the powers and
responsibilities prescribed by State law, and the Town Council shall appoint
a judge for said Court from among attorneys who have been admitted to
the bar in Rhode Island, and who shall have had at least five (5) years
experience in active practice of law in the courts of this State, to serve for a
term of two (2) years commencing on the first of July and ending June 30th
of the second year following, or until a successor is appointed and qualified.
The Council may make provision for a deputy or alternate to serve as judge
in the absence or inability of the Probate Judge.
Section 610. Local Director of Emergency Management. [Reso. 7/
11/02; approved at election 11/5/02]
There shall be a Local Emergency Management Agency in the Town headed
by a Local Emergency Management Director, who shall be appointed by the
Council and may be the Council President. The Little Compton Agency shall
have powers and responsibilities similar to those of the State agency of the
same name, as set forth in State law.
Section 611. Director of Social Services. [Reso. 7/20/00; approved
at election 11/7/00; Reso. 7/11/02; approved at election 11/5/02]
There shall be a Director of Social Services, who shall be appointed by the
Town Council in each even numbered year to serve for a two (2) year term
or until his or her successor is appointed. The Social Services Director shall
have such duties and responsibilities as are assigned to the office by State
law and such compensation as may be fixed by the Financial Town Meeting.
Section 609 LITTLE COMPTON CODE Section 611
AO:462
ARTICLE VII
Boards and Commissions
Section 701. Planning Board.
There shall be a Planning Board for the Town made up of nine (9) members
appointed by the Town Council each to serve for a term of four (4) years
or until his or her successor is appointed. All members shall be qualified
electors of the Town. The terms of the members of the Board shall be
so arranged that the terms of no more than one-third shall expire each
year. The Council shall, during the months of January of each year, make
appointments to fill prospective vacancies. The terms of members shall
expire on the last day of January, and of newly appointed members shall
begin on the first day of February. Vacancies on the Board shall be filled by
the Council for the unexpired term.
Section 702. Zoning Board of Review. [Reso. 7/20/00; approved at
election 11/7/00]
There shall be a Zoning Board of Review of five (5) members appointed
by the Town Council each to hold office for a term of five (5) years with
their terms so arranged that the term of one member shall expire and
one appointment be made each year. The Council shall determine when
appointments are to be made and the date upon which terms shall expire.
The Board shall also include three (3) alternates to be designated as the
first, second and third alternate members each to be appointed by the
Council for a term of five (5) years in such manner that their terms shall
not both expire in the same year. These alternate members shall sit and
may actively participate in hearings. The first alternate shall vote if one
member of the Board is unable to serve at a hearing, and the second shall
A. The Board shall advise the Council on all matters concerning the
growth and development of the Town and the effects thereof on the
health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants. The Board shall have the
duties and responsibilities provided by State law for such Boards, and
in particular those conferred on Planning Boards under the Rhode
Island Comprehensive Planning and Land Use Regulation Act and
related legislation as amended from time to time.
B. The Board shall play such role in long range capital planning and the
preparation of the Town capital budget as the Council may direct; shall
submit recommendations on all matters referred to it relating to the
Town zoning ordinance, land subdivision and proposals for
development in the Town as requested by the Council; shall after
consulting with the Town Council, convene meetings of selected Town
officials, departments and agencies and community groups for the
purpose of facilitating unified Town policies related to land use for
recreation, conservation and open space; and shall conduct such
studies and other activities related to its general area of responsibility
as the Council may direct.
Section 701 ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section 702
AO:463
vote if two members of the Board are unable to serve at a hearing and
the third alternate shall vote if three members of the Board are unable
to serve at a hearing. In the absence of any alternate member the next
alternate shall serve in that position by rank, i.e. second taking place of
first, etc. No member or alternate may vote on any matter before the Board
unless they have attended all hearings concerning that matter. The Council
shall fill vacancies on the Board for the unexpired term, and may remove
members for due cause. The Board shall have all the powers and duties now
or hereafter vested by law in Zoning Boards of Review.
Section 703. Conservation Commission. [Approved at election 11/4/
14]
There shall be a Conservation Commission for the Town consisting of five (5)
members, four (4) appointed by the Town Council for three year terms, with
said terms so arranged that the term of one member shall expire in one year,
the term of the second in the second year, and the terms of the third and
fourth members in the third year. Duly incorporated and existing wildlife,
conservation, sportsmen's, horticultural, or like organizations may present
to the appointing authority a list of qualified citizens from which lists
the appointing authority may select the four Commission members. Terms
of members shall end on the last day of January. The Commission shall
also include ex officio the chairperson of the Little Compton Agricultural
Conservancy Trust or his or her member designee.
Section 704. Beach Commission.
There shall be a Beach Commission of five (5) members elected at the
Financial Town Meeting for terms of four (4) years, with the terms so
arranged that three shall expire and the election of three members shall
take place in one year, and two shall expire and the election of two members
shall take place two years thereafter.
A. The purpose of the Commission shall be to promote and develop the
natural resources, to protect the watershed resources, and to preserve
the natural esthetic areas within the Town. To these ends the
Commission shall conduct researches into its local land areas and seek
to coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar
purposes, and shall keep an index of all open spaces within the Town,
publicly or privately owned. It may recommend to the Council and other
Town bodies a program for the better use of the Town's land and natural
resources.
B. The Commission shall provide at least annually a report on the
conservation and open space priorities of the Town and recommend
such changes as it feels appropriate in writing to the Council.
A. The Commission shall have the authority to manage, regulate and
control all public beaches owned by the Town. Any acquisition of beach
property by the Town or sale or lease thereof, or any granting of an
easement or right of way over any such property, shall, exclusive of
Section 702 LITTLE COMPTON CODE Section 704
AO:464
Section 705. Agricultural Conservancy Trust. [Reso. 7/20/00;
approved at election 11/7/00]
There is established pursuant to Chapter 16 of the Public Laws of 1985 The
Little Compton Agricultural Conservancy Trust for the purpose of acquiring
development rights to agricultural property within the Town, the acquisition
of agricultural property or interest therein, to preserve open spaces, fresh
and saltwater marshes, estuaries and adjoining uplands, groundwater
recharging areas, land providing access to the ocean, land for bicycle paths
and land for future public recreational facilities and use.
acquisitions by the Little Compton Agricultural Conservancy Trust as
hereinafter set forth, require consultation with the Beach Commission
and approval by the Town Meeting. The Town Council shall have the
power to enact such ordinances as the Commission shall request or as
the Council may deem necessary for the policing of said public beaches,
in aid of the management, maintenance and improvement of the same,
and for the regulation of all travel by the public to, from and over such
beaches, and to prescribe penalties for violation of such ordinances.
B. The Commission shall have the authority to make suitable provisions for
the care, management, maintenance, protection and improvement of
the beaches under its control, and for the safety of the persons using
them, and to cause to be erected, repaired or replaced such
bathhouses, fences and other buildings and structures as it may deem
necessary for the convenience and well-being of the public or as may be
required by State law or regulations.
C. The Commission shall have the authority to charge reasonable fees for
admission, parking of vehicles, and the use of facilities for defraying the
costs of maintenance and operation, provided however, that it may
exempt residents of the Town from such fees. All moneys received from
such fees shall be deposited in the General Fund by the Town Treasurer,
and shall be appropriated therefrom to the Commission at the
discretion of the Financial Town Meeting, and expended by and under
the direction of the Commission. The accounts of the Commission shall
be audited at the time of the annual audit of Town accounts.
A. The Trust shall be administered by seven (7) trustees, five (5) of whom
shall be appointed by the Town Council with at least one being an active
farmer, to serve for five (5) year staggered terms, with their terms so
arranged that one shall expire, and one appointment be made each
year. Vacancies among the trustees shall be filled by the Council for the
unexpired term. The sixth and seventh Trustees shall be the current
chairpersons of the Town Conservation Commission and Planning
Board or their member designees.
B. The powers, responsibilities and procedures to be exercised and
implemented by the Trust are as the same as set forth in Chapter 16 of
the Public laws cited above.
Section 704 ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section 706
AO:465
Section 706. Pension Committee.
There shall be a Pension Committee whose responsibility it shall be to
administer the pension plan for Town officials and employees as the same
is authorized by Chapter 84 of the Public Laws of 1971 and as it may
be amended, and subject to such ordinances and/or votes of the Town
Meeting as may have been or may be enacted setting forth the provisions
and operation of the pension plan. The Committee shall be made up of
three members appointed by the Town Council and one Council Member
designated by the Council, each to serve for a term of one year, and one
member chosen by each of the following: the union representing Town
policemen, the union representing Town firefighters, and the other Town
employees, to serve at the pleasure of the appointing organization, for a
total of seven (7) members.
Section 707. Harbor Commission. [Reso. 7/11/02; approved at
election 11/5/02; approved at election 11/4/14]
There shall be a Harbor Commission consisting of seven (7) members
appointed by the Town Council for three (3) year staggered terms with
their terms so arranged that the terms of two members will expire in one
year, the terms of two more members in the next year, and the terms of
three members in the third year. The appointees shall be selected by the
Council so that one is the owner of a recreational boat kept on a mooring,
or one who is on a waiting list for a mooring; one joint representative of the
Sakonnet Point Marina Association, Inc. and the Sakonnet Point Club; one
represents the Sakonnet Yacht Club; one is a commercial trip fisherman;
one is a commercial day fisherman; one officer of the local fishermen's
association; and one is a member of a Town conservation organization.
Vacancies shall be filled in accordance with the initial appointment to the
vacant position for the unexpired term. It shall be the responsibility of
the Commission to make recommendations to the Council concerning the
appointment of the Harbor Master and Assistant Harbor Master(s), the
rules and regulations regarding the assignment and use of moorings, the
use of Town docks and facilities, other rules and regulations governing
the use of the harbor including but not limited to the setting of fees and
penalties, the preparation and revision of the harbor plan, and such other
functions as may be assigned to it by the Council.
Section 708. Little Compton Free Public Library.
The Little Compton Free Public Library shall be governed by a Board
consisting of five (5) Trustees appointed by the Town Council for terms of
three (3) years, with their terms so arranged that the terms of no more than
two Trustees shall expire in any one year. All terms shall expire on October
15th; the Council shall fill any vacancy for the unexpired term.
Section 706 LITTLE COMPTON CODE Section 709
AO:466
Section 709. Recreation Committee. [Approved at election 11/4/14
28]
There shall be a Recreation Committee of seven (7) members four (4)
of whom shall be appointed by the Town Council for staggered three (3)
year terms, with the terms so arranged that one expires each year. The
Committee shall also include ex officio the chairperson of each of the
following Town bodies or his or her member designee: Planning Board,
Beach Commission, and School Committee. It shall be the responsibility
of the Committee to update, maintain and implement the Town's plan for
the interrelated development of recreation areas. The Committee shall
also have responsibility for the scheduling and the conduct of appropriate
activities in the Auditorium-Gymnasium of the School during the periods of
time when the facility is not being used for school purposes.
Section 710. Little Compton Housing Trust. [Reso. 7/6/06; approved
at election 11/7/06; Reso. 7/21/16; approved at election of 11/8/1629]
There shall be a Little Compton Housing Trust, authorized by ordinance of
the Town Council and organized as a non-profit corporation, the purpose of
which is to serve as an advocacy group for any person or group desiring
to address the problem of housing affordability or housing for the elderly,
those with special needs and families of low and moderate income. It
shall oversee the implementation of the Affordable Housing Plan of the
community. The Little Compton Housing Trust shall be subject to the
provisions of Section 103 of the Charter.
28.Editor's Note: The Recreation Committee replaced the Auditorium-Gymnasium Committee
as approved at election 11/4/14.
29.Editor's Note: Former Section 710, Recreation, Conservation and Open Space Committee
was deleted in entirety by Reso. 7/21/16 which was approved at election of November 8,
2016.
Section 709 ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section 710
AO:467

ARTICLE VIII
School Department
Section 801. School Committee.
The School Department of the Town shall be under the jurisdiction and
control of a School Committee of five (5) members elected at large at
the general election each even numbered year, to serve for four (4) year
staggered terms or until their respective successors are elected and
qualified, said terms to be so arranged that two members of the Committee
shall be elected at one general election and three members at the next
general election.
Section 802. Qualifications.
School Committee members shall hold no other paid employment in the
School Department of the Town and shall be qualified electors and residents
of the Town. If a Committee member shall cease to possess any of these
qualifications or shall be disqualified from continuing in office under
provisions of the State Constitution or State law, his or her office shall be
deemed to have become vacant.
Section 803. Vacancies. [Reso. 7/6/06; approved at election 11/7/06]
Any vacancy in the membership of the School Committee shall be filled by
the unelected candidate with the highest number of votes from the most
recent election for the position of School Committee, or, if that person is
unavailable or unwilling to serve, shall be filled by the Town Council for the
remainder of the vacated term.
Section 804. Organization and Rules. [Approved at election 11/4/
14]
The School Committee shall determine its own organization, rules of
procedure and the time of its meetings.
Section 805. Powers and Duties.
The School Committee shall have responsibility for the general care and
management of the school(s) of the Town, the selection of the
superintendent, and shall have all other responsibilities, powers and duties
as are currently provided by State law, or as may be provided for School
Committees in the future. In particular it shall be the duty of the Committee
to make such provision as it may deem appropriate for the high school
education of the children of the Town by entering into a contractual
arrangement for that purpose with the School Committee of a neighboring
Town or by such other means or combination of means as it sees fit. The
Committee shall prepare and submit its budget requests to the Budget
Committee in accordance with the provisions of Section 503 and other
applicable provisions of this Charter.
Section 801 ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section 806
AO:469
Section 806. Buildings and Grounds, Purchasing. [Approved at
election 11/4/14]
In consultation with and subject to the agreement of the Town Council,
the School Committee may contract with the Town Department of Public
Works for that Department to assume responsibility for the maintenance of
all school property; and the Committee may in the same manner arrange
to have the Town Purchasing Agent assume responsibility for purchases of
supplies and equipment for the School Department.
Section 806 LITTLE COMPTON CODE Section 806
AO:470
ARTICLE IX
Other Town Departments
Section 901. Police Department.
There shall be a Police Department, the head of which shall be the Chief
of Police, who shall be appointed by the Town Council from among persons
with at least three (3) years experience above the rank of patrolman in
any organized police department. The appointee shall be given a contract
for no less than three (3) nor more than five (5) years which shall be
renewable, and shall contain the proviso that the Chief may be dismissed
by the Council during any such contract period following notice and the
granting of a public hearing if requested. The Chief of Police shall be the
chief administrative officer of the Department and the final departmental
authority in all matters of policy, operations, and discipline, subject to
applicable provisions of State law. He or she shall exercise all lawful powers
of the office and issue such lawful orders as are necessary to assure the
effective performance of the Department and shall be responsible for the
care and custody of all property used by the Department.
Section 902. Entire Department.
There shall be a Fire Department, the head of which shall be the Fire
Chief, who shall be appointed by the Town Council from among persons
with at least three (3) years experience above the rank of firefighter in any
organized fire department. The appointee shall be given a contract for no
less than three (3) nor more than five (5) years which shall be renewable,
and shall contain the proviso that the Chief may be dismissed by the Council
during any such contract period following notice and the granting of a
public hearing if requested. The Fire Chief shall, subject to the approval of
the Town Council, make rules and regulations concerning the operation of
the Department and the conduct of all members thereof. There shall be such
other subordinate officers as the Council may provide with the advice of
the Chief, and such firefighters, full time and part time, as the Council shall
appoint. The Chief shall assign all subordinates to their respective posts,
shifts, details, duties, and shall be responsible for their efficiency, discipline,
and good conduct, and for the care and custody of all property used by the
Department. The Chief shall perform such duties as may be required by law
A. There shall be such other subordinate officers, patrolmen, special
police officers and employees as shall be determined from time to time,
and such organization of the Department into divisions or offices or
grades, as the Council determines upon recommendation of the Chief of
Police.
B. The Police Department shall be responsible for the preservation of the
public peace, prevention of crime, protection of the rights of persons
and property, regulation of traffic, and the enforcement of the laws of
the State and the ordinances of the Town.
Section 901 ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section 902
AO:471
and ordinance and shall have control and management of the Department
at fires and all other emergencies.
Section 903. Director of Public Works.
There shall be a Director of Public Works, who shall be appointed by
the Council from among persons with administrative or management
experience. The Director may be appointed to serve full time or part time
as the Council shall determine, and may hold another position in the service
of the Town, provided however, that he or she shall not receive more
than one salary. The Director shall be responsible for the functions and
services of the Town relating to highways and snow removal, the trimming
of brush along streets and roads and on Town property, and such other
responsibilities as shall be assigned to the Director by the Council by
ordinance.
A. The Town Council shall make such provision for ambulance/rescue
service for the Town as it may deem most appropriate, such service to
be under the supervision of the Chief of the Fire Department.
A. The Director of Public Works shall hold the office and perform the
duties of the Highway Supervisor of the Town. There shall be a Tree
Warden for the Town appointed by the Council who shall perform the
duties incumbent upon Tree Wardens under the general supervision of
the Director of Public Works.
Section 902 LITTLE COMPTON CODE Section 903
AO:472
ARTICLE X
General Provisions
Section 1001. Open Records.
The public shall be entitled to access to all records and proceedings of
all agencies of the Town government of Little Compton, including but
not limited to those of the Town Council, all boards and commissions,
departments and offices, as the same are defined and set forth in State
law pertaining to open records. The types of records to which the public is
entitled to access, and the times, places and conditions under which such
access shall be made available shall be as provided in said Title 38, Chapter
2 of the General Laws as the same may be amended from time to time.
Section 1002. Open Meetings.
The public has a right to have the public business performed in an open
and public manner and to be advised of and aware of the performance of
public officials and the deliberations and decisions that go into the making
of public policy. To these ends the Town Council, the School Committee
and all Town departments, agencies, commissions, committees, boards and
councils, and all subdivisions thereof, shall conduct all business in
accordance with the provisions of the open meetings legislation of the State,
Title 42, Chapter 46 of the General Laws, and as the same may be amended
from time to time. Pursuant to said legislation the public shall have the
right to attend all meetings of such Town public bodies, subject only to the
limitations specifically allowed by law.
Section 1003. Ethics.
All public officials and employees of the Town of Little Compton must
adhere to the highest standards of ethical conduct, respect the public trust
and the rights of all persons, be open, accountable, and responsive, avoid
the appearance of impropriety, and not use their position for private gain
or advantage. Accordingly all elected and appointed officials of the Town,
and all Town employees, shall be subject to and comply with the Code of
Ethics legislation of the State as set forth in Title 36, Chapter 14 of the
General Laws, and all rules, regulations and opinions promulgated by the
Rhode Island Ethics Commission from time to time.
Section 1004. Amendments of Charter. [Reso. 7/20/00; approved at
election 11/7/00]
The Town Council may propose amendments to this Charter at any time,
to be put to referendum of the electors of the Town at a general or special
election pursuant to the provisions in Article XIII of the Constitution of the
State. Any such amendment or amendments in full text shall be published
by the Town Clerk no less than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the
referendum, and the Council shall schedule a public hearing thereon no less
than ten (10) days prior such date. Notice of any such hearing or hearings
Section 1001 ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section 1004
AO:473
shall be given no less than one week prior to the date they are scheduled to
be held.
Section 1005. Charter Construction and Severability
The powers of the Town under this Charter shall be construed liberally in
favor of the Town. If any article, section or provision of this Charter shall
be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder thereof
shall not be affected thereby.
Section 1006. Appointments, Qualifications and Vacancies.
All appointments to Town boards and commissions shall be made from
among persons who are electors and residents of the Town, and all such
appointees shall remain electors and residents throughout their terms of
service in the positions to which they were appointed. Appointments to
Town offices may be made from among persons who are not at the time
electors and residents of the Town, but any person so appointed while a
non-resident shall within a reasonable time following appointment become
an elector and resident of the Town, provided however, that the Council by
an affirmative vote of four (4) of its members may grant an exception to
this residence requirement to a particular appointee on the ground that no
appropriately qualified Town resident could be found for such appointment,
and the residence requirement would work a special hardship on the person
appointed. Any vacancy on a board or commission shall be filled by the
Council for the balance of the unexpired term.
Section 1007. Suspension and Disqualification from Office.
A. The Council shall appoint a Charter Review Commission of seven (7)
members, during the month of January in the year 2001, and every four
(4) years thereafter, whose members shall serve for a term of two (2)
years, and whose duty it shall be to review the Charter and recommend
to the Council any amendments or revisions which it feels the Council
should consider for presentation to the electors of the Town. Any
vacancy occurring on the Commission shall be filled immediately by the
Town Council. Subject to Sections 502 and 503 of the Home Rule
Charter the Charter Review Commission shall be provided an
appropriation for its expenses as shall be fixed by the Financial Town
Meeting.
A. Any person holding elective or appointive office in the Town, or member
of any Town board or commission, who is indicted for any offense which
is a felony under Federal or State law, while holding any such office,
shall be deemed to have been suspended from his or her office and shall
cease to exercise the powers or perform the duties thereof, until
completion of all legal procedures resulting from that indictment. No
suspension from office under the provisions of this Section shall be
deemed to have created a vacancy in such office. In the event that one
or more suspensions makes it impossible for the duties of an office to be
Section 1004 LITTLE COMPTON CODE Section 1007
AO:474
Section 1008. Meaning of Publication.
When in this Charter the Town Clerk or other official is required to publish
the text of a proposal, document or public notice, publication shall mean to
cause the same to be printed in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Town, to post it in the Clerk's office and in two other prominent places in the
Town, and to have copies available for distribution to interested citizens.
carried on, or deprives the School Committee or any Town board or
commission of a quorum to transact business, the Council shall make
temporary appointment(s) for the conduct of the office or the
restoration of a quorum for the period of the suspension. In the event
that the suspension of Council members deprives the Council of a
quorum, the Town Clerk shall forthwith schedule a special election
to fill the positions of the suspended Council members with interim
Council members, who shall serve until the suspensions end or the
terms of the suspended members shall have expired.
B. Any elector shall be disqualified as a candidate for elective or
appointive office in the Town, or from holding such office, if such elector
has been convicted of or plead nolo contendere to a felony or if such
elector has been convicted of or plead nolo contendere to a
misdemeanor resulting in a jail sentence of six months or more, either
suspended or to be served. Such elector shall not, once so convicted,
attain or return to any office until three years after the date of
completion of such sentence and of probation or parole.
Section 1007 ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section 1008
AO:475

ARTICLE XI
Transitional Provisions
Section 1101. Effective Date of Charter.
This Charter shall take effect on the first Monday in January, 1995, if the
Board of Canvassers shall have certified that it was approved by the electors
of the Town voting thereon, or upon the date of such certification if the same
shall be made later than the first Monday in January, 1995.
Section 1102. Transitional Elections and Appointment.
This Charter shall be placed before the electors of the Town of Little
Compton at the general election to be held on the first Tuesday after the
first Monday in November, 1994, for their approval or rejection. At said
election, all Town offices which had been filled by vote of the electors of the
Town heretofore, shall be filled in the same manner as previously, and all
persons so elected shall serve the terms set for their offices regardless of
whether or not this Charter is approved. In the event of such approval, those
so elected whose offices have been made appointive under this Charter,
shall upon completion of their terms, have their offices filled by appointment
as provided herein.
A. Offices heretofore filled by Council appointment shall continue to be so
appointed as provided in this Charter. Offices previously filled at the
general election or by election at the Financial Town Meeting, and
which under the terms of this Charter are to be filled by Council
appointment, shall be so appointed upon the expiration of the terms
they were serving as of the general election of November 1994 or the
terms to which they were elected at said general election, as the case
may be.
B. Offices currently filled by election at the Financial Town Meeting which
are to be filled by ballot under the provisions of Section 204 of this
Charter shall be filled as follows:
The five members of the Budget Committee elected at the Financial
Town Meeting held in May 1995 shall hold their offices for terms of
two (2) years or until their successors are elected at the Financial
Town Meeting in May 1997. Thereafter the Budget Committee shall be
elected at the Financial Town Meeting in each odd numbered year for
terms of two years.
The membership of the Beach Commission, under the terms of this
Charter shall be reduced from six to five, each elected for a term of
four (4) years, with their terms so arranged that the terms of two
members shall expire in one odd numbered year, and the terms of three
members shall expire the next odd numbered year. The offices of the
two Commission members whose terms expire in 1995 shall be filled for
terms of four years which shall expire in 1999; only one of the offices
of the two Commission members whose terms expire in 1996 shall be
Section 1101 ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section 1102
AO:477
Section 1103. Transfer of Appropriations.
In the event that it proves necessary to make any changes or transfers
of funds appropriated in the budget for the fiscal year during which this
Charter takes effect, to facilitate the operation of the Town government
under the provisions of the Charter, the Council shall have the power to
make such changes or transfers.
Section 1104. Continuation of Laws and Ordinances.
As of the effective date of this Charter, all special acts of the General
Assembly applicable to the Town of Little Compton shall continue in effect
except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter or
any ordinance of the Town enacted pursuant to the powers conferred by this
Charter. All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the Town in
force as of the effective date of this Charter and not inconsistent herewith,
shall continue in force until amended or repealed.
Section 1105. Continuation of Obligations.
All taxes levied or assessed by the Town prior to the effective date of this
Charter which have not been collected by the Town shall be collected with
any interest or penalties thereon by the Town acting under this Charter in
accordance with law. All licenses and permits issued by the Town, or any
agency thereof, prior to the effective date of this Charter, shall continue in
full force and effect until the termination date thereof, unless superseded
or revoked for cause. All contracts, leases, franchises and other obligations,
entered into by the Town, or for its benefit, prior to the effective date of this
Charter, shall continue in full force and effect.
Section 1106. Pending Actions and Proceedings.
No actions or proceedings, civil or criminal, in law or in equity, pending
at the time when this Charter shall take effect, brought by or against the
Town, or any office, department, agency or officer thereof, shall be affected
or abated by the adoption of this Charter or by anything contained in this
Charter.
Section 1107. Continuation of Agencies.
All commissions, boards, departments, or offices, whether elective or
appointed, shall continue in the performance of their powers, duties and
functions as heretofore, subject to the provisions of this Charter.
filled, for a term of three years which shall expire in 1999; and the
offices of the two Commission members whose terms expire in 1997
shall be filled for terms of four years which shall expire in 2001. All
subsequent elections to the Commission shall be held at the Financial
Town Meetings in odd numbered years for terms of four years.
Section 1102 LITTLE COMPTON CODE Section 1108
AO:478
Section 1108. Continuation of Present Personnel.
All persons employed in the service of the Town on the effective date of
this Charter, shall continue in such employment until promoted, demoted
or removed in accordance with the provisions of this Charter or ordinances
enacted pursuant thereto.
Section 1108 ADOPTING ORDINANCE Section 1108
AO:479
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. DISPOSITION OF LEGISLATION.
Date Details Supp. No.
Approved by
the
electorate
on 11-4-14
Amends Code: Town Administrator, 2-2.4;
Conservation Commission membership, 2-4.2;
Harbor Commission, 9-1.3 and amends Home
Rule Charter: conduct of meetings, 305;
proposals for expenditure outside of budget,
306; President and Vice President (Town
Council), 404; Budget Committee, 502; public
hearings on budget, 504; change position of
Business Manager to Town Administrator, 601;
Conservation Commission, 703; Harbor
Commission, 707; delete Auditorium-
Gymnasium Committee, replace with
Recreation Committee, 709; School Committee
Organization and Rules, 804; Buildings,
Grounds and Purchasing, 806
56
4-23-15 Amends Ch. 6, General Licensing, 6-5.3,
number of Limited Retail Beverage licenses
permitted
57
5-21-15 Amends Ch. 8, Streets and sanitation, 8-1.6,
Fee schedule; dump stickers/coupons/seasonal
passes
57
6-18-15 Amends Ch. 15, Taxation, 15-1, exemption for
real property held by conservation
organizations
57
7-23-15 Amends Ch. 8, Streets and Sanitation, 8-1.5,
rules and regulations for Town Transfer
Station
57
1-7-16 Amends Ch. 3, Police Regulations; 3-1,
Disturbing the peace
58
1-7-16 Amends Ch. 6, General Licensing; 6-7,
Entertainment License
58
Section 1108 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § DL-1
AO:480
Date Details Supp. No.
Eff. date
7-1-12
The Town Pension Committee meeting of 8/15/
16 acknowledged that the following was
passed:
Amends Appendix B, Town of Little Compton
Pension Plan; 4.1, cost of living adjustment for
employees hired after July 1, 2012; 7.2
employee contribution to pensions for
employees hired after 7-1-12
59
6-23-16 Amends Ch. 2, Administration; 2-2.4, Town
Administrator
59
6-23-16 Amends Ch. 8, Streets and Sanitation;
8-1.6, fee schedule; transfer station stickers/
coupons/seasonal passes
59
9-22-16 Amends Ch. 3 Police Regulations; 3-1.1
Disturbing the Peace, Statement of Public
Policy; 3-1.2 Loudness of Sound Producing
Equipment
60
9-22-16 Amends Ch. 9 Beaches, Harbors and
Recreational Areas; 9-1.11 Mooring
Regulations
60
9-22-16 Amends Ch. 6 General Licensing; 6-7
Entertainment License
60
Reso.
7-21-16
Approved by
electorate
11-8-16
Amends Appendix D Home Rule Charter;
Deletes 710 Recreation, Conservation and
Open Space Committee; renumbers 711 Little
Compton Housing Trust to be Section 710;
Amends Section 605 Tax Assessors
61
2-23-17 Amends Ch. 14 Zoning; Section 14-10
Definitions to add 100A Tent
61
2-23-17 Amends Ch. 18 Plat Plans; 18-1 Deeds Filed for
Recording
61
2-23-17 Amends Ch. 2 Administration; 2-1.2b Town
Council President; 2-1.3 Exercise of Powers;
2-2.5 Town Tax Assessor
61
3-7-17 Amends Appendix C Subdivision Regulations;
8.8 Signing and Recording of Plats and Plans
8-8.1, 8-8.2
61
11-2-17 Amends Ch. 18 Plat Plans; 18-1 Deeds Filed for
Recording
62
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:481
Date Details Supp. No.
12-21-17 Amends Appendix A Special Acts, Little
Compton Agricultural Conservancy Trust Act:
Section 8 to increase exemption to
$300,000.00 for land transfer; Standing Rules
and Regulations, Section II Meetings; Land
Transfer Tax Form
62
8-23-18 Amends Chapter 2 Administration; 2-2.4 Town
Administrator
63
9-20-18 Amends Chapter 7 Building and Housing,
Schedule I, Permit fees
63
Approved by
electorate
11-6-18
Amends Home Rule Charter, 504 Public
Hearings on Budget; 603 Town Treasurer/ Tax
Collector Council to appoint Town Finance
Director; 604 Town Solicitor amended to allow
for appointment within 60 days after election
63
12-6-18 Amends Chapter 2 Administration; 2-2.4 Town
Administrator
63
Adoption Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
9-26-2019 Administration
Amendment
Ch. 2 64
7-11-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 14 64
9-5-2019 General Licensing
Amendment; Zoning
Amendment; Subdivision
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 6; Ch. 14; C 64
10-10-2019 General Licensing
Amendment
Ch. 6 64
12-19-2019 Beaches, Harbors, and
Recreational Areas
Amendment
Ch. 9 64
§ DL-1 LITTLE COMPTON CODE § DL-1
AO:482